
[REPORT PAGE 727]
727
OCTOBER TERM, 1995
Syllabus
DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL TELECOMMUNICA-
TIONS CONSORTIUM, INC., et al. v. FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION et al.
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the district of columbia circuit
No. 95–124.
Argued February 21, 1996—Decided June 28, 1996*
These cases involve three sections of the Cable Television Consumer Pro-
tection and Competition Act of 1992 (Act), as implemented by Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) regulations.
Both §10(a) of the
Act—which applies to “leased access channels” reserved under federal
law for commercial lease by parties unafﬁliated with the cable television
system operator—and §10(c)—which regulates “public access channels”
required by local governments for public, educational, and governmental
programming—essentially permit the operator to allow or prohibit “pro-
gramming” that it “reasonably believes . . . depicts sexual . . . activities
or organs in a patently offensive manner.”
Under §10(b), which applies
only to leased access channels, operators are required to segregate
“patently offensive” programming on a single channel, to block that
channel from viewer access, and to unblock it (or later to reblock it)
within 30 days of a subscriber’s written request.
Between 1984, when
Congress authorized municipalities to require operators to create public
access channels, and the Act’s passage, federal law prohibited operators
from exercising any editorial control over the content of programs
broadcast over either type of access channel.
Petitioners sought judi-
cial review of §§10(a), (b), and (c), and the en banc Court of Appeals
held that all three sections (as implemented) were consistent with the
First Amendment.
Held: The judgment is afﬁrmed in part and reversed in part.
56 F. 3d 105, afﬁrmed in part and reversed in part.
Justice Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to
Part III, concluding that §10(b) violates the First Amendment.
That
section’s “segregate and block” requirements have obvious speech-
restrictive effects for viewers, who cannot watch programs segregated
on the “patently offensive” channel without considerable advance plan-
ning or receive just an occasional few such programs, and who may
*Together with No. 95–227, Alliance for Community Media et al. v.
Federal Communications Commission et al., also on certiorari to the
same court.


[REPORT PAGE 728]
728
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Syllabus
judge a program’s value through the company it keeps or refrain from
subscribing to the segregated channel out of fear that the operator will
disclose its subscriber list.
Moreover, §10(b) is not appropriately
tailored to achieve its basic, legitimate objective of protecting chil-
dren from exposure to “patently offensive” materials.
Less restrictive
means utilized by Congress elsewhere to protect children from “patently
offensive” sexual material broadcast on cable channels indicate that
§10(b) is overly restrictive while its beneﬁts are speculative.
These
include some provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which
utilizes blocking without written request, “V-chips,” and other signiﬁ-
cantly less restrictive means, and the “lockbox” requirement that has
been in place since the Cable Act of 1984.
Pp. 753–760.
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Stevens, Justice O’Connor,
and Justice Souter, concluded in Parts I and II that §10(a) is consist-
ent with the First Amendment.
Pp. 737–753.
(a) Close scrutiny demonstrates that §10(a) properly addresses a seri-
ous problem without imposing, in light of the relevant competing inter-
ests, an unnecessarily great restriction on speech.
First, the section
comes accompanied with the extremely important child-protection justi-
ﬁcation that this Court has often found compelling.
See, e. g., Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 126.
Second,
§10(a) arises in a very particular context—congressional permission for
cable operators to regulate programming that, but for a previous Act of
Congress, would have had no path of access to cable channels free of an
operator’s control.
The First Amendment interests involved are there-
fore complex, and require a balance between those interests served by
the access requirements themselves (increasing the availability of ave-
nues of expression to programmers who otherwise would not have
them), see H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, pp. 31–36, and the disadvantage to
the First Amendment interests of cable operators and other program-
mers (those to whom the operator would have assigned the channels
devoted to access).
See Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512
U. S. 622, 635–637.
Third, the problem §10(a) addresses is analogous
to the “indecent” radio broadcasts at issue in FCC v. Paciﬁca Founda-
tion, 438 U. S. 726, and the balance Congress struck here is commensu-
rate with the balance the Court approved in that case.
Fourth, §10(a)’s
permissive nature means that it likely restricts speech less than, not
more than, the ban at issue in Paciﬁca.
The importance of the interest
at stake here—protecting children from exposure to patently offensive
depictions of sex; the accommodation of the interests of programmers
in maintaining access channels and of cable operators in editing the con-
tents of their channels; the similarity of the problem and its solution to
those at issue in Paciﬁca; and the ﬂexibility inherent in an approach


[REPORT PAGE 729]
729
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Syllabus
that permits private cable operators to make editorial decisions, persua-
sively establishes that §10(a) is a sufﬁciently tailored response to an
extraordinarily important problem involving a complex balance of in-
terests.
Sable, supra, at 128, and Turner, supra, at 637–641, distin-
guished.
Pp. 737–748.
(b) Petitioners’ reliance on this Court’s “public forum” cases is un-
availing.
It is unnecessary and unwise to decide whether or how to
apply the public forum doctrine to leased access channels.
First, it is
not clear whether that doctrine should be imported wholesale into com-
mon carriage regulation of such a new and changing area.
Second, al-
though limited public forums are permissible, the Court has not yet
determined whether the decision to limit a forum is necessarily subject
to the highest level of scrutiny, and these cases do not require that it do
so now.
Finally, and most important, the features that make §10(a) an
acceptable constraint on speech also make it an acceptable limitation on
access to the claimed public forum.
Pp. 749–750.
(c) Section 10(a)’s deﬁnition of the materials it regulates is not imper-
missibly vague.
Because the language used is similar to that adopted
in Miller v. California, 413 U. S. 15, 24, as a “guidelin[e]” for state
obscenity laws, it would appear to narrow cable operators’ program-
screening authority to materials that involve the same kind of sexually
explicit materials that would be obscene under Miller, but that might
have “serious literary, artistic, political or scientiﬁc value” or nonpruri-
ent purposes, ibid.
That the deﬁnition is not overly broad is further
indicated by this Court’s construction of the phrase “patently offensive,”
see Paciﬁca, supra, at 748, 750, which would narrow the category late
at night when the audience is basically adult, and by the fact that §10(a)
permits operators to screen programs only pursuant to a “written
and published policy.”
The deﬁnition’s “reasonabl[e] belie[f]” qualiﬁer
seems designed to provide a legal excuse for the operator’s honest mis-
take, and it constrains the operator’s discretion as much as it protects
it.
Pp. 750–753.
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Stevens and Justice Souter,
concluded in Part IV that §10(c) violates the First Amendment.
Sec-
tion 10(c), although like §10(a) a permissive provision, is different from
§10(a) for four reasons.
First, cable operators have not historically ex-
ercised editorial control over public access channels, such that §10(c)’s
restriction on programmers’ capacity to speak does not effect a counter-
vailing removal of a restriction on cable operators’ speech.
Second,
programming on those channels is normally subject to complex supervi-
sory systems composed of both public and private elements, and §10(c)
is therefore likely less necessary to protect children.
Third, the exist-
ence of a system that encourages and secures programming that the


[REPORT PAGE 730]
730
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Syllabus
community considers valuable strongly suggests that a “cable operator’s
veto” is more likely to erroneously exclude borderline programs that
should be broadcast, than to achieve the statute’s basic objective of
protecting children.
Fourth, the Government has not shown that there
is a signiﬁcant enough problem of patently offensive broadcasts to
children, over public access channels, that justiﬁes the restriction im-
posed by §10(c).
Consequently, §10(c) violates the First Amendment.
Pp. 760–766.
Justice Kennedy, joined by Justice Ginsburg, concurred in the
judgment that §10(c) is invalid, but for different reasons.
Because the
public access channels regulated by §10(c) are required by local cable
franchise authorities, those channels are “designated public forums,”
i. e., property that the government has opened for expressive activity
by the public.
International Soc. for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v.
Lee, 505 U. S. 672, 678.
Section 10(c) vests the cable operator with a
power under federal law, deﬁned by reference to the content of speech,
to override the franchise agreement and undercut the public forum the
agreement creates.
Where the government thus excludes speech from
a public forum on the basis of its content, the Constitution requires
that the regulation be given the most exacting scrutiny.
See, e. g., ibid.
Section 10(c) cannot survive strict scrutiny.
Although Congress has a
compelling interest in protecting children from indecent speech, see,
e. g., Sable Communications of Colo., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 126,
§10(c) is not narrowly tailored to serve that interest, since, among other
things, there is no basis in the record establishing that §10(c) is the
least restrictive means to accomplish that purpose.
See, e. g., id., at
128–130.
The Government’s argument for not applying strict scrutiny
here, that indecent cablecasts are subject to the lower standard of re-
view applied in FCC v. Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, 748, is not
persuasive, since that lower standard does not even apply to infringe-
ments on the liberties of cable operators, Turner Broadcasting System,
Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 637–641.
There is less cause for a lower
standard when the rights of cable programmers and viewers are at
stake.
Pp. 781–783, 791–794, 803–812.
Justice Thomas, joined by The Chief Justice and Justice Scalia,
agreed that §10(a) is constitutionally permissible.
Cable operators are
generally entitled to much the same First Amendment protection as the
print media.
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622,
637, 639.
Because Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S.
241, and Paciﬁc Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util. Comm’n of Cal., 475
U. S. 1, are therefore applicable, see Turner, supra, at 681–682 (O’Con-
nor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part), the cable operator’s
editorial rights have general primacy under the First Amendment over


[REPORT PAGE 731]
731
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Syllabus
the rights of programmers to transmit and of viewers to watch.
None
of the petitioners are cable operators; they are all cable viewers or ac-
cess programmers or their representative organizations.
Because the
cable access provisions are part of a scheme that restricts operators’
free speech rights and expands the speaking opportunities of program-
mers who have no underlying constitutional right to speak through the
cable medium, the programmers cannot challenge the scheme, or a par-
ticular part of it, as an abridgment of their “freedom of speech.”
Sec-
tions 10(a) and (c) merely restore part of the editorial discretion an oper-
ator would have absent Government regulation.
Pp. 812–826.
Breyer, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the
opinion of the Court with respect to Part III, in which Stevens, O’Con-
nor, Kennedy, Souter, and Ginsburg, JJ., joined, an opinion with re-
spect to Parts I, II, and V, in which Stevens, O’Connor, and Souter,
JJ., joined, and an opinion with respect to Parts IV and VI, in which Ste-
vens and Souter, JJ., joined.
Stevens, J., post, p. 768, and Souter,
J., post, p. 774, ﬁled concurring opinions.
O’Connor, J., ﬁled an opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part, post, p. 779.
Kennedy, J., ﬁled
an opinion concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and
dissenting in part, in which Ginsburg, J., joined, post, p. 780.
Thomas,
J., ﬁled an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in
part, in which Rehnquist, C. J., and Scalia, J., joined, post, p. 812.
I. Michael Greenberger argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the brief for the Alliance for Community Media
et al., petitioners in No. 95–227, were James N. Horwood,
Andrew Jay Schwartzman, Gigi Sohn, Elliot Mincberg,
Lawrence Ottinger, Thomas J. Mikula, and Mark S. Raff-
man.
Robert T. Perry and Brian D. Graifman ﬁled briefs
for the New York Citizens Committee for Responsible Media
et al., petitioners in No. 95–227.
Charles S. Sims, Steven R.
Shapiro, and Marjorie Heins ﬁled briefs for the American
Civil Liberties Union et al., petitioners in No. 95–124.
Deputy Solicitor General Wallace argued the cause for
respondents in both cases.
With him on the briefs for the
federal respondents were Solicitor General Days, Assistant
Attorney General Hunger, James A. Feldman, Barbara L.
Herwig, Jacob M. Lewis, William E. Kennard, and Christo-
pher J. Wright.
Daniel L. Brenner, Neal M. Goldberg, and


[REPORT PAGE 732]
732
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Diane B. Burstein ﬁled a brief for the National Cable Televi-
sion Association, Inc., respondent in both cases.†
Justice Breyer announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Part
III, an opinion with respect to Parts I, II, and V, in which
Justice Stevens, Justice O’Connor, and Justice Sou-
ter join, and an opinion with respect to Parts IV and VI, in
which Justice Stevens and Justice Souter join.
These cases present First Amendment challenges to three
statutory provisions that seek to regulate the broadcasting
of “patently offensive” sex-related material on cable televi-
sion.
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competi-
tion Act of 1992 (1992 Act or Act), 106 Stat. 1486, §§10(a),
10(b), and 10(c), 47 U. S. C. §§532(h), 532(j), and note follow-
ing §531.
The provisions apply to programs broadcast over
cable on what are known as “leased access channels” and
“public, educational, or governmental channels.”
Two of the
provisions essentially permit a cable system operator to pro-
hibit the broadcasting of “programming” that the “operator
reasonably believes describes or depicts sexual or excretory
activities or organs in a patently offensive manner.”
1992
†Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the American
Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression et al. by Michael A. Bam-
berger and Margaret Jacobs; and for the Association of American Publish-
ers, Inc., by R. Bruce Rich and Jonathan Bloom.
Briefs of amici curiae urging afﬁrmance were ﬁled for the State of New
York by Dennis C. Vacco, Attorney General, Victoria A. Graffeo, Solicitor
General, Barbara Billet, Deputy Solicitor General, and Stephen D. Houch
and Theodore Zang, Jr., Assistant Attorneys General; for the Family Life
Project of the American Center for Law and Justice by Jay Alan Sekulow,
James M. Henderson, Sr., Colby M. May, Keith A. Fournier, and Thomas
P. Monaghan; for the Family Research Council et al. by Cathleen A.
Cleaver and Bruce A. Taylor; for Morality in Media, Inc., by Paul J. Mc-
Geady and Robert W. Peters; and for Time Warner Cable by Stuart W.
Gold and Rebeca L. Cutler.
Len L. Munsil ﬁled a brief for the National Family Legal Foundation
as amicus curiae.


[REPORT PAGE 733]
733
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Act, §10(a); see §10(c).
See also In re Implementation of
Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Protection and Competi-
tion Act of 1992: Indecent Programming and Other Types
of Materials on Cable Access Channels, First Report and
Order, 8 FCC Rcd 998 (1993) (First Report and Order); In
re Implementation of Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Pro-
tection and Competition Act of 1992, Indecent Programming
and Other Types of Materials on Cable Access Channels,
Second Report and Order, 8 FCC Rcd 2638 (1993) (Second
Report and Order).
The remaining provision requires cable
system operators to segregate certain “patently offensive”
programming, to place it on a single channel, and to block
that channel from viewer access unless the viewer requests
access in advance and in writing.
1992 Act, §10(b); 47 CFR
§76.701(g) (1995).
We conclude that the ﬁrst provision—which permits the
operator to decide whether or not to broadcast such pro-
grams on leased access channels—is consistent with the First
Amendment.
The second provision, which requires leased
channel operators to segregate and to block that program-
ming, and the third provision, applicable to public, educa-
tional, and governmental channels, violate the First Amend-
ment, for they are not appropriately tailored to achieve the
basic, legitimate objective of protecting children from expo-
sure to “patently offensive” material.
I
Cable operators typically own a physical cable network
used to convey programming over several dozen cable chan-
nels into subscribers’ houses.
Program sources vary from
channel to channel.
Most channels carry programming
produced by independent ﬁrms, including “many national
and regional cable programming networks that have
emerged in recent years,” Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.
v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 629 (1994), as well as some program-
ming that the system operator itself (or an operator afﬁli-


[REPORT PAGE 734]
734
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
ate) may provide.
Other channels may simply retransmit
through cable the signals of over-the-air broadcast stations.
Ibid.
Certain special channels here at issue, called “leased
channels” and “public, educational, or governmental chan-
nels,” carry programs provided by those to whom the law
gives special cable system access rights.
A “leased channel” is a channel that federal law requires
a cable system operator to reserve for commercial lease by
unafﬁliated third parties.
About 10 to 15 percent of a cable
system’s channels would typically fall into this category.
See 47 U. S. C. §532(b).
“[P]ublic, educational, or govern-
mental channels” (which we shall call “public access” chan-
nels) are channels that, over the years, local governments
have required cable system operators to set aside for public,
educational, or governmental purposes as part of the consid-
eration an operator gives in return for permission to install
cables under city streets and to use public rights-of-way.
See §531; see also H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, p. 30 (1984) (author-
izing local authorities to require creation of public access
channels).
Between 1984 and 1992, federal law (as had much
pre-1984 state law, in respect to public access channels) pro-
hibited cable system operators from exercising any editorial
control over the content of any program broadcast over
either leased or public access channels. See 47 U. S. C.
§§531(e) (public access), 532(c)(2) (leased access).
In 1992, in an effort to control sexually explicit program-
ming conveyed over access channels, Congress enacted the
three provisions before us.
The ﬁrst two provisions relate
to leased channels.
The ﬁrst says:
“This subsection shall permit a cable operator to enforce
prospectively a written and published policy of prohibit-
ing programming that the cable operator reasonably be-
lieves describes or depicts sexual or excretory activities
or organs in a patently offensive manner as measured
by contemporary community standards.”
1992 Act,
§10(a)(2), 106 Stat. 1486.


[REPORT PAGE 735]
735
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
The second provision, applicable only to leased channels,
requires cable operators to segregate and to block similar
programming if they decide to permit, rather than to pro-
hibit, its broadcast.
The provision tells the Federal Com-
munications Commission (FCC or Commission) to promul-
gate regulations that will (a) require “programmers to
inform cable operators if the program[ming] would be inde-
cent as deﬁned by Commission regulations”; (b) require
“cable operators to place” such material “on a single chan-
nel”; and (c) require “cable operators to block such single
channel unless the subscriber requests access to such channel
in writing.”
1992 Act, §10(b)(1).
The Commission issued
regulations deﬁning the material at issue in terms virtually
identical to those we have already set forth, namely, as de-
scriptions or depictions of “sexual or excretory activities or
organs in a patently offensive manner” as measured by the
cable viewing community.
First Report and Order ¶¶33–
38, at 1003–1004.
The regulations require the cable opera-
tors to place this material on a single channel and to block it
(say, by scrambling).
They also require the system operator
to provide access to the blocked channel “within 30 days” of
a subscriber’s written request for access and to reblock it
within 30 days of a subscriber’s request to do so.
47 CFR
§76.701(c) (1995).
The third provision is similar to the ﬁrst provision, but
applies only to public access channels.
The relevant statu-
tory section instructs the FCC to promulgate regulations
that will
“enable a cable operator of a cable system to prohibit
the use, on such system, of any channel capacity of any
public, educational, or governmental access facility for
any programming which contains obscene material,
sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or pro-
moting unlawful conduct.”
1992 Act, §10(c), 106 Stat.
1486.


[REPORT PAGE 736]
736
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
The FCC, carrying out this statutory instruction, promul-
gated regulations deﬁning “sexually explicit” in language
almost identical to that in the statute’s leased channel
provision, namely, as descriptions or depictions of “sexual
or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive
manner” as measured by the cable viewing community.
See
47
CFR
§76.702
(1995)
(incorporating
deﬁnition
from
§76.701(g)).
The upshot is, as we said at the beginning, that the federal
law before us (the statute as implemented through regu-
lations) now permits cable operators either to allow or to
forbid the transmission of “patently offensive” sex-related
materials over both leased and public access channels, and
requires those operators, at a minimum, to segregate and to
block transmission of that same material on leased channels.
Petitioners, claiming that the three statutory provisions,
as implemented by the Commission regulations, violate the
First Amendment, sought judicial review of the Commis-
sion’s First Report and Order and its Second Report and
Order in the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit.
A panel of that Circuit agreed with
petitioners that the provisions violated the First Amend-
ment.
Alliance for Community Media v. FCC, 10 F. 3d 812
(1993).
The entire Court of Appeals, however, heard the
case en banc and reached the opposite conclusion.
It held
that all three statutory provisions (as implemented) were
consistent with the First Amendment.
Alliance for Com-
munity Media v. FCC, 56 F. 3d 105 (1995).
Four of the
eleven en banc appeals court judges dissented.
Two of the
dissenting judges concluded that all three provisions violated
the First Amendment.
Two others thought that either one,
or two, but not all three of the provisions, violated the First
Amendment.
We granted certiorari to review the en banc
court’s First Amendment determinations.


[REPORT PAGE 737]
737
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
II
We turn initially to the provision that permits cable sys-
tem operators to prohibit “patently offensive” (or “indecent”)
programming transmitted over leased access channels.
1992
Act, §10(a).
The Court of Appeals held that this provision
did not violate the First Amendment because the First
Amendment prohibits only “Congress” (and, through the
Fourteenth Amendment, a “State”), not private individuals,
from “abridging the freedom of speech.”
Although the
court said that it found no “state action,” 56 F. 3d, at 113,
it could not have meant that phrase literally, for, of course,
petitioners attack (as “abridg[ing] . . . speech”) a congres-
sional statute—which, by deﬁnition, is an Act of “Congress.”
More likely, the court viewed this statute’s “permissive” pro-
visions as not themselves restricting speech, but, rather, as
simply reafﬁrming the authority to pick and choose program-
ming that a private entity, say, a private broadcaster, would
have had in the absence of intervention by any federal, or
local, governmental entity.
We recognize that the First Amendment, the terms of
which apply to governmental action, ordinarily does not it-
self throw into constitutional doubt the decisions of private
citizens to permit, or to restrict, speech—and this is so ordi-
narily even where those decisions take place within the
framework of a regulatory regime such as broadcasting.
Were that not so, courts might have to face the difﬁcult, and
potentially restrictive, practical task of deciding which,
among any number of private parties involved in providing
a program (for example, networks, station owners, program
editors, and program producers), is the “speaker” whose
rights may not be abridged, and who is the speech-
restricting “censor.”
Furthermore, as this Court has held,
the editorial function itself is an aspect of “speech,” see
Turner, 512 U. S., at 636, and a court’s decision that a private
party, say, the station owner, is a “censor,” could itself inter-


[REPORT PAGE 738]
738
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
fere with that private “censor’s” freedom to speak as an edi-
tor.
Thus, not surprisingly, this Court’s First Amendment
broadcasting cases have dealt with governmental efforts to
restrict, not governmental efforts to provide or to maintain,
a broadcaster’s freedom to pick and to choose programming.
Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Democratic Na-
tional Committee, 412 U. S. 94 (1973) (striking restrictions
on broadcaster’s ability to refuse to carry political advertis-
ing); Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367 (1969)
(upholding restrictions on editorial authority); FCC v.
League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U. S. 364 (1984) (strik-
ing restrictions); cf. Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y. v. Pub-
lic Serv. Comm’n of N. Y., 447 U. S. 530 (1980) (striking ban
on political speech by public utility using its billing envelopes
as a broadcast medium); Central Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp.
v. Public Serv. Comm’n of N. Y., 447 U. S. 557 (1980) (striking
restriction on public utility advertising).
Nonetheless, petitioners, while conceding that this is ordi-
narily so, point to circumstances that, in their view, make the
analogy with private broadcasters inapposite and make these
cases special ones, warranting a different constitutional re-
sult.
As a practical matter, they say, cable system operators
have considerably more power to “censor” program viewing
than do broadcasters, for individual communities typically
have only one cable system, linking broadcasters and other
program providers with each community’s many subscribers.
See Turner, supra, at 633 (only one cable system in most
communities; nationally more than 60% of homes subscribe
to cable, which then becomes the primary or sole source of
video programming in the overwhelming majority of these
homes).
Moreover, concern about system operators’ exer-
cise of this considerable power originally led government—
local and federal—to insist that operators provide leased and
public access channels free of operator editorial control.
H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, at 30–31.
To permit system opera-
tors to supervise programming on leased access channels will


[REPORT PAGE 739]
739
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
create the very private-censorship risk that this anticensor-
ship effort sought to avoid.
At the same time, petitioners
add, cable systems have two relevant special characteristics.
They are unusually involved with government, for they de-
pend upon government permission and government facilities
(streets, rights-of-way) to string the cable necessary for their
services.
And in respect to leased channels, their speech
interests are relatively weak because they act less like edi-
tors, such as newspapers or television broadcasters, than like
common carriers, such as telephone companies.
Under these circumstances, petitioners conclude, Con-
gress’ “permissive” law, in actuality, will “abridge” their
free speech.
And this Court should treat that law as a con-
gressionally imposed, content-based, restriction unredeemed
as a properly tailored effort to serve a “compelling interest.”
See Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State Crime
Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 118 (1991); Sable Communica-
tions of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 126 (1989).
They
further analogize the provisions to constitutionally forbidden
content-based restrictions upon speech taking place in “pub-
lic forums” such as public streets, parks, or buildings dedi-
cated to open speech and communication.
See Cornelius v.
NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 802
(1985); Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators’ Assn., 460
U. S. 37, 45 (1983); see also H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, supra, at
30 (identifying public access channels as the electronic equiv-
alent of a “speaker’s soap box”).
And, ﬁnally, petitioners
say that the legal standard the law contains (the “patently
offensive” standard) is unconstitutionally vague.
See, e. g.,
Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. Dallas, 390 U. S. 676 (1968) (reject-
ing censorship ordinance as vague, even though it was in-
tended to protect children).
Like petitioners, Justices Kennedy and Thomas would
have us decide these cases simply by transferring and apply-
ing literally categorical standards this Court has developed
in other contexts.
For Justice Kennedy, leased access


[REPORT PAGE 740]
740
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
channels are like a common carrier, cablecast is a protected
medium, strict scrutiny applies, §10(a) fails this test, and,
therefore, §10(a) is invalid.
Post, at 796–801, 805–807.
For
Justice Thomas, the case is simple because the cable opera-
tor who owns the system over which access channels are
broadcast, like a bookstore owner with respect to what it
displays on the shelves, has a predominant First Amendment
interest.
Post, at 816–817, 822–824.
Both categorical ap-
proaches suffer from the same ﬂaws: They import law devel-
oped in very different contexts into a new and changing en-
vironment, and they lack the ﬂexibility necessary to allow
government to respond to very serious practical problems
without sacriﬁcing the free exchange of ideas the First
Amendment is designed to protect.
The history of this Court’s First Amendment jurispru-
dence, however, is one of continual development, as the Con-
stitution’s general command that “Congress shall make no
law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press,”
has been applied to new circumstances requiring different
adaptations of prior principles and precedents.
The essence
of that protection is that Congress may not regulate speech
except in cases of extraordinary need and with the exercise
of a degree of care that we have not elsewhere required.
See, e. g., Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47, 51–52 (1919);
Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S. 616, 627–628 (1919)
(Holmes, J., dissenting); West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette,
319 U. S. 624, 639 (1943); Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397,
418–420 (1989).
At the same time, our cases have not left
Congress or the States powerless to address the most seri-
ous problems.
See, e. g., Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315
U. S. 568 (1942); Young v. American Mini Theatres, Inc., 427
U. S. 50 (1976); FCC v. Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726
(1978).
Over the years, this Court has restated and reﬁned these
basic First Amendment principles, adopting them more par-
ticularly to the balance of competing interests and the special


[REPORT PAGE 741]
741
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
circumstances of each ﬁeld of application.
See, e. g., New
York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254 (1964) (allowing
criticism of public ofﬁcials to be regulated by civil libel only
if the plaintiff shows actual malice); Gertz v. Robert Welch,
Inc., 418 U. S. 323 (1974) (allowing greater regulation of
speech harming individuals who are not public ofﬁcials, but
still requiring a negligence standard); Red Lion Broadcast-
ing Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367 (1969) (employing highly ﬂexible
standard in response to the scarcity problem unique to over-
the-air broadcast); Arkansas Writers’ Project, Inc. v. Rag-
land, 481 U. S. 221, 231–232 (1987) (requiring “compelling
state interest” and a “narrowly drawn” means in context of
differential taxation of media); Sable, supra, at 126, 131
(applying “compelling interest,” “least restrictive means,”
and “narrowly tailored” requirements to indecent telephone
communications); Turner, 512 U. S., at 641 (using “height-
ened scrutiny” to address content-neutral regulations of
cable system broadcasts); Central Hudson Gas & Elec.
Corp., 447 U. S., at 566 (restriction on commercial speech
cannot be “more extensive than is necessary” to serve a
“substantial” government interest).
This tradition teaches that the First Amendment embodies
an overarching commitment to protect speech from govern-
ment regulation through close judicial scrutiny, thereby en-
forcing the Constitution’s constraints, but without imposing
judicial formulas so rigid that they become a straitjacket
that disables government from responding to serious prob-
lems.
This Court, in different contexts, has consistently
held that government may directly regulate speech to ad-
dress extraordinary problems, where its regulations are
appropriately tailored to resolve those problems without
imposing an unnecessarily great restriction on speech.
Justices Kennedy and Thomas would have us further de-
clare which, among the many applications of the general ap-
proach that this Court has developed over the years, we are
applying here.
But no deﬁnitive choice among competing


[REPORT PAGE 742]
742
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
analogies (broadcast, common carrier, bookstore) allows us
to declare a rigid single standard, good for now and for all
future media and purposes.
That is not to say that we re-
ject all the more speciﬁc formulations of the standard—they
appropriately cover the vast majority of cases involving gov-
ernment regulation of speech.
Rather, aware as we are of
the changes taking place in the law, the technology, and the
industrial structure related to telecommunications, see, e. g.,
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 56; S. Rep. No.
104–23 (1995); H. R. Rep. No. 104–204 (1995), we believe it
unwise and unnecessary deﬁnitively to pick one analogy or
one speciﬁc set of words now.
See Columbia Broadcasting,
412 U. S., at 102 (“The problems of regulation are rendered
more difﬁcult because the broadcast industry is dynamic in
terms of technological change; solutions adequate a decade
ago are not necessarily so now, and those acceptable today
may well be outmoded 10 years hence”); Paciﬁca, supra, at
748 (“We have long recognized that each medium of expres-
sion presents special First Amendment problems”).
We
therefore think it premature to answer the broad questions
that Justices Kennedy and Thomas raise in their efforts
to ﬁnd a deﬁnitive analogy, deciding, for example, the extent
to which private property can be designated a public forum,
compare post, at 791–793, 794 (Kennedy, J., concurring in
part, concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part),
with post, at 826–829 (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment in
part and dissenting in part); whether public access channels
are a public forum, post, at 791–792 (opinion of Kennedy, J.);
whether the Government’s viewpoint neutral decision to
limit a public forum is subject to the same scrutiny as a selec-
tive exclusion from a pre-existing public forum, post, at 799–
803 (opinion of Kennedy, J.); whether exclusion from com-
mon carriage must for all purposes be treated like exclusion
from a public forum, post, at 797–798 (opinion of Kennedy,
J.); and whether the interests of the owners of communica-


[REPORT PAGE 743]
743
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
tions media always subordinate the interests of all other
users of a medium, post, at 816–817 (opinion of Thomas, J.).
Rather than decide these issues, we can decide these cases
more narrowly, by closely scrutinizing §10(a) to assure that
it properly addresses an extremely important problem, with-
out imposing, in light of the relevant interests, an unneces-
sarily great restriction on speech.
The importance of the
interest at stake here—protecting children from exposure to
patently offensive depictions of sex; the accommodation of
the interests of programmers in maintaining access channels
and of cable operators in editing the contents of their chan-
nels; the similarity of the problem and its solution to those
at issue in Paciﬁca; and the ﬂexibility inherent in an ap-
proach that permits private cable operators to make edito-
rial decisions, lead us to conclude that §10(a) is a sufﬁciently
tailored response to an extraordinarily important problem.
First, the provision before us comes accompanied with an
extremely important justiﬁcation, one that this Court has
often found compelling—the need to protect children from
exposure to patently offensive sex-related material.
Sable
Communications, 492 U. S., at 126; Ginsberg v. New York,
390 U. S. 629, 639–640 (1968); New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S.
747, 756–757 (1982).
Second, the provision arises in a very particular context—
congressional permission for cable operators to regulate pro-
gramming that, but for a previous Act of Congress, would
have had no path of access to cable channels free of an opera-
tor’s control.
The First Amendment interests involved are
therefore complex, and require a balance between those
interests served by the access requirements themselves (in-
creasing the availability of avenues of expression to pro-
grammers who otherwise would not have them), H. R. Rep.
No. 98–934, at 31–36, and the disadvantage to the First
Amendment interests of cable operators and other program-
mers (those to whom the cable operator would have assigned


[REPORT PAGE 744]
744
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
the channels devoted to access).
See Turner, 512 U. S., at
635–637.
Third, the problem Congress addressed here is remarkably
similar to the problem addressed by the FCC in Paciﬁca,
and the balance Congress struck is commensurate with the
balance we approved there.
In Paciﬁca this Court consid-
ered a governmental ban of a radio broadcast of “indecent”
materials, deﬁned in part, like the provisions before us, to
include
“ ‘language that describes, in terms patently offensive as
measured by contemporary community standards for the
broadcast medium, sexual or excretory activities and or-
gans, at times of the day when there is a reasonable risk
that children may be in the audience.’ ”
438 U. S., at
732 (quoting 56 F. C. C. 2d 94, 98 (1975)).
The Court found this ban constitutionally permissible pri-
marily because “broadcasting is uniquely accessible to chil-
dren” and children were likely listeners to the program there
at issue—an afternoon radio broadcast.
438 U. S., at 749–
750.
In addition, the Court wrote, “the broadcast media
have established a uniquely pervasive presence in the lives
of all Americans,” id., at 748, “[p]atently offensive, indecent
material . . . confronts the citizen, not only in public, but also
in the privacy of the home,” generally without sufﬁcient
prior warning to allow the recipient to avert his or her eyes
or ears, ibid.; and “[a]dults who feel the need may purchase
tapes and records or go to theaters and nightclubs” to hear
similar performances, id., at 750, n. 28.
All these factors are present here.
Cable television
broadcasting, including access channel broadcasting, is as
“accessible to children” as over-the-air broadcasting, if not
more so.
See Heeter, Greenberg, Baldwin, Paugh, Srig-
ley, & Atkin, Parental Inﬂuences on Viewing Style, in Cable-
viewing 140 (C. Heeter & B. Greenberg eds. 1988) (children
spend more time watching television and view more channels


[REPORT PAGE 745]
745
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
than do their parents, whether their household subscribes to
cable or receives television over the air).
Cable television
systems, including access channels, “have established a
uniquely pervasive presence in the lives of all Americans.”
Paciﬁca, supra, at 748.
See Jost, The Future of Television,
4 The CQ Researcher 1131, 1146 (Dec. 23, 1994) (63% of
American homes subscribe to cable); Greenberg, Heeter,
D’Alessio, & Sipes, Cable and Noncable Viewing Style Com-
parisons, in Cableviewing, supra, at 207 (cable households
spend more of their day, on average, watching television, and
will watch more channels, than households without cable
service).
“Patently offensive” material from these stations
can “confron[t] the citizen” in the “privacy of the home,” Pa-
ciﬁca, supra, at 748, with little or no prior warning.
Cable-
viewing, supra, at 217–218 (while cable subscribers tend to
use guides more than do broadcast viewers, there was no
difference among these groups in the amount of viewing that
was planned, and, in fact, cable subscribers tended to sample
more channels before settling on a program, thereby making
them more, not less, susceptible to random exposure to un-
wanted materials).
There is nothing to stop “adults who
feel the need” from ﬁnding similar programming elsewhere,
say, on tape or in theaters.
In fact, the power of cable sys-
tems to control home program viewing is not absolute.
Over-the-air broadcasting and direct broadcast satellites al-
ready provide alternative ways for programmers to reach
the home and are likely to do so to a greater extent in the
near future.
See generally Telecommunications Act of 1996,
§201, 110 Stat. 107 (advanced television services), §205 (di-
rect broadcast satellite), §302 (video programming by tele-
phone companies), and §304 (availability of navigation de-
vices to enhance multichannel programming); L. Johnson,
Toward Competition in Cable Television (1994).
Fourth, the permissive nature of §10(a) means that it
likely restricts speech less than, not more than, the ban at
issue in Paciﬁca.
The provision removes a restriction as to


[REPORT PAGE 746]
746
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
some speakers—namely, cable operators.
See supra, at 743.
Moreover, although the provision does create a risk that a
program will not appear, that risk is not the same as the
certainty that accompanies a governmental ban.
In fact, a
glance at the programming that cable operators allow on
their own (nonaccess) channels suggests that this distinction
is not theoretical, but real.
See App. 393 (regular channel
broadcast of Playboy and “Real Sex” programming).
Fi-
nally, the provision’s permissive nature brings with it a ﬂex-
ibility that allows cable operators, for example, not to ban
broadcasts, but, say, to rearrange broadcast times, better to
ﬁt the desires of adult audiences while lessening the risks of
harm to children.
See First Report and Order ¶31, at 1003
(interpreting the Act’s provisions to allow cable operators
broad discretion over what to do with offensive materials).
In all these respects, the permissive nature of the approach
taken by Congress renders this measure appropriate as a
means of achieving the underlying purpose of protecting
children.
Of
course,
cable
system
operators
may
not
always
rearrange or reschedule patently offensive programming.
Sometimes, as petitioners fear, they may ban the program-
ming instead.
But the same may be said of Paciﬁca’s ban.
In practice, the FCC’s daytime broadcast ban could have be-
come a total ban, depending upon how private operators
(programmers, station owners, networks) responded to it.
They would have had to decide whether to reschedule the
daytime show for nighttime broadcast in light of comparative
audience demand and a host of other practical factors that
similarly would determine the practical outcomes of the pro-
visions before us.
The upshot, in both cases, must be uncer-
tainty as to practical consequences—of the governmental
ban in the one case and of the permission in the other.
That
common uncertainty makes it difﬁcult to say the provision
here is, in any respect, more restrictive than the order in


[REPORT PAGE 747]
747
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Paciﬁca.
At the same time, in the respects we discussed,
the provision is signiﬁcantly less restrictive.
The existence of this complex balance of interests per-
suades us that the permissive nature of the provision, cou-
pled with its viewpoint-neutral application, is a constitution-
ally permissible way to protect children from the type of
sexual material that concerned Congress, while accommodat-
ing both the First Amendment interests served by the access
requirements and those served in restoring to cable opera-
tors a degree of the editorial control that Congress removed
in 1984.
Our basic disagreement with Justice Kennedy is narrow.
Like him, we believe that we must scrutinize §10(a) with the
greatest care.
Like Justices Kennedy and Thomas, we
believe that the interest of protecting children that §10(a)
purports to serve is compelling.
But we part company with
Justice Kennedy on two issues.
First, Justice Ken-
nedy’s focus on categorical analysis forces him to disregard
the cable system operators’ interests.
Post, at 805–806.
We, on the other hand, recognize that in the context of cable
broadcast that involves an access requirement (here, its par-
tial removal), and unlike in most cases where we have explic-
itly required “narrow tailoring,” the expressive interests of
cable operators do play a legitimate role.
Cf. Turner, 512
U. S., at 636–637.
While we cannot agree with Justice
Thomas that everything turns on the rights of the cable
owner, see post, at 823–824, we also cannot agree with Jus-
tice Kennedy that we must ignore the expressive interests
of cable operators altogether.
Second, Justice Kennedy’s
application of a very strict “narrow tailoring” test depends
upon an analogy with a category (“the public forum cases”),
which has been distilled over time from the similarities of
many cases.
Rather than seeking an analogy to a category
of cases, however, we have looked to the cases themselves.
And, as we have said, we found that Paciﬁca provides the


[REPORT PAGE 748]
748
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
closest analogy and lends considerable support to our
conclusion.
Petitioners and Justice Kennedy, see post, at 797–798,
803–804, argue that the opposite result is required by two
other cases: Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492
U. S. 115 (1989), a case in which this Court found unconstitu-
tional a statute that banned “indecent” telephone messages,
and Turner, in which this Court stated that cable broadcast
receives full First Amendment protection.
See 512 U. S., at
637–641.
The ban at issue in Sable, however, was not only
a total governmentally imposed ban on a category of commu-
nications, but also involved a communications medium, tele-
phone service, that was signiﬁcantly less likely to expose
children to the banned material, was less intrusive, and al-
lowed for signiﬁcantly more control over what comes into
the home than either broadcasting or the cable transmission
system before us.
See 492 U. S., at 128.
The Court’s dis-
tinction in Turner, furthermore, between cable and broad-
cast television, relied on the inapplicability of the spectrum
scarcity problem to cable.
See 512 U. S., at 637–641.
While
that distinction was relevant in Turner to the justiﬁcation
for structural regulations at issue there (the “must carry”
rules), it has little to do with a case that involves the effects
of television viewing on children.
Those effects are the re-
sult of how parents and children view television program-
ming, and how pervasive and intrusive that programming is.
In that respect, cable and broadcast television differ little, if
at all.
See supra, at 744–745.
Justice Kennedy would
have us decide that all common carriage exclusions are sub-
ject to the highest scrutiny, see post, at 796–799, and then
decide these cases on the basis of categories that provide
imprecise analogies rather than on the basis of a more con-
textual assessment, consistent with our First Amendment
tradition, of assessing whether Congress carefully and ap-
propriately addressed a serious problem.


[REPORT PAGE 749]
749
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Petitioners also rely on this Court’s “public forum” cases.
They point to Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators’
Assn., 460 U. S., at 45, a case in which this Court said that
“public forums” are “places” that the government “has
opened for use by the public as a place for expressive ac-
tivity,” or which “by long tradition . . . have been devoted
to assembly and debate.”
Ibid.
See also Cornelius v.
NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S., at 801
(assuming public forums may include “private property
dedicated to public use”).
They add that the Government
cannot “enforce a content-based exclusion” from a public
forum unless “necessary to serve a compelling state interest”
and “narrowly drawn.”
Perry, supra, at 45.
They further
argue that the statute’s permissive provisions unjustiﬁably
exclude material, on the basis of content, from the “public
forum” that the Government has created in the form of ac-
cess channels.
Justice Kennedy adds by analogy that the
decision to exclude certain content from common carriage is
similarly subject to strict scrutiny, and here does not satisfy
that standard of review.
See post, at 796–799, 805–807.
For three reasons, however, it is unnecessary, indeed, un-
wise, for us deﬁnitively to decide whether or how to apply
the public forum doctrine to leased access channels.
First,
while it may be that content-based exclusions from the right
to use common carriers could violate the First Amendment,
see post, at 796–800 (opinion of Kennedy, J.), it is not at
all clear that the public forum doctrine should be imported
wholesale into the area of common carriage regulation.
As
discussed above, we are wary of the notion that a partial
analogy in one context, for which we have developed doc-
trines, can compel a full range of decisions in such a new and
changing area.
See supra, at 739–743.
Second, it is plain
from this Court’s cases that a public forum “may be created
for a limited purpose.”
Perry, supra, at 46, n. 7; see also
Cornelius, supra, at 802 (“[T]he government ‘is not required
to indeﬁnitely retain the open character of the facility’ ”)


[REPORT PAGE 750]
750
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
(quoting Perry, supra, at 46).
Our cases have not yet deter-
mined, however, that government’s decision to dedicate a
public forum to one type of content or another is necessarily
subject to the highest level of scrutiny.
Must a local govern-
ment, for example, show a compelling state interest if it
builds a band shell in the park and dedicates it solely to clas-
sical music (but not to jazz)?
The answer is not obvious.
Cf. Perry, supra, at 46, n. 7.
But, at a minimum, these cases
do not require us to answer it.
Finally, and most important,
the effects of Congress’ decision on the interests of program-
mers, viewers, cable operators, and children are the same,
whether we characterize Congress’ decision as one that
limits access to a public forum, discriminates in common
carriage, or constrains speech because of its content.
If we
consider this particular limitation of indecent television
programming acceptable as a constraint on speech, we must
no less accept the limitation it places on access to the claimed
public forum or on use of a common carrier.
Consequently, if one wishes to view the permissive provi-
sions before us through a “public forum” lens, one should
view those provisions as limiting the otherwise totally open
nature of the forum that leased access channels provide for
communication of other than patently offensive sexual mate-
rial—taking account of the fact that the limitation was im-
posed in light of experience gained from maintaining a to-
tally open “forum.”
One must still ask whether the First
Amendment forbids the limitation.
But unless a label alone
were to make a critical First Amendment difference (and we
think here it does not), the features of these cases that we
have already discussed—the Government’s interest in pro-
tecting children, the “permissive” aspect of the statute, and
the nature of the medium—sufﬁciently justify the “limita-
tion” on the availability of this forum.
Finally, petitioners argue that the deﬁnition of the materi-
als subject to the challenged provisions is too vague, thereby
granting cable system operators too broad a program-


[REPORT PAGE 751]
751
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
screening authority.
Cf. Hoffman Estates v. Flipside, Hoff-
man Estates, Inc., 455 U. S. 489, 498 (1982) (citing Grayned
v. City of Rockford, 408 U. S. 104, 108–109 (1972)) (vague
laws may lead to arbitrary enforcement); Dombrowski v.
Pﬁster, 380 U. S. 479, 486–487 (1965) (uncertainty may perni-
ciously chill speech).
That deﬁnition, however, uses lan-
guage similar to language previously used by this Court for
roughly similar purposes.
The provisions, as augmented by FCC regulations, permit
cable system operators to prohibit
“programming that the cable operator reasonably be-
lieves describes or depicts sexual or excretory activities
or organs in a patently offensive manner as measured by
contemporary community standards.”
1992 Act, §10(a),
106 Stat. 1486.
See also 47 CFR §76.702 (1995) (reading approximately the
same deﬁnition into §10(c)).
This language is similar to lan-
guage adopted by this Court in Miller v. California, 413
U. S. 15, 24 (1973), as a “guidelin[e]” for identifying materials
that States may constitutionally regulate as obscene.
In
Miller, the Court deﬁned obscene sexual material (material
that lacks First Amendment protection) in terms of
“(a) whether the average person, applying contemporary
community standards would ﬁnd that the work, taken as
a whole, appeals to the prurient interest . . . ; (b)
whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently of-
fensive way, sexual conduct speciﬁcally deﬁned by the
applicable state law; and (c) whether the work, taken
as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientiﬁc value.”
Ibid. (emphasis added; internal quota-
tion marks omitted).
The language, while vague, attempts to identify the category
of materials that Justice Stewart thought could be described
only in terms of “I know it when I see it.”
Jacobellis v.
Ohio, 378 U. S. 184, 197 (1964) (concurring opinion).
In


[REPORT PAGE 752]
752
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
§10(a) and the FCC regulations, without Miller’s qualiﬁers,
the language would seem to refer to material that would be
offensive enough to fall within that category but for the fact
that the material also has “serious literary, artistic, political
or scientiﬁc value” or nonprurient purposes.
This history suggests that the statute’s language aims at
the kind of programming to which its sponsors referred—
pictures of oral sex, bestiality, and rape, see 138 Cong. Rec.
981, 985 (1992) (statement of Sen. Helms)—and not at scien-
tiﬁc or educational programs (at least unless done with a
highly unusual lack of concern for viewer reaction).
More-
over, as this Court pointed out in Paciﬁca, what is “patently
offensive” depends on context (the kind of program on which
it appears), degree (not “an occasional expletive”), and time
of broadcast (a “pig” is offensive in “the parlor” but not the
“barnyard”).
438 U. S., at 748, 750.
Programming at 2
o’clock in the morning is seen by a basically adult audience
and the “patently offensive” must be deﬁned with that fact
in mind.
Further, the statute protects against overly broad applica-
tion of its standards insofar as it permits cable system opera-
tors to screen programs only pursuant to a “written and pub-
lished policy.”
1992 Act, §10(a), 106 Stat. 1486.
A cable
system operator would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to show that a leased
access program prohibition reﬂects a rational “policy” if the
operator permits similarly “offensive” programming to run
elsewhere on its system at comparable times or in compara-
ble ways.
We concede that the statute’s protection against
overly broad application is somewhat diminished by the fact
that it permits a cable operator to ban programming that the
operator “reasonably believes” is patently offensive.
Ibid.
(emphasis added).
But the “reasonabl[e] belie[f]” qualiﬁer
here, as elsewhere in the law, seems designed not to expand
the category at which the law aims, but, rather, to provide a
legal excuse, for (at least) one honest mistake, from liability
that might otherwise attach.
Cf. Waters v. Churchill, 511


[REPORT PAGE 753]
753
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of the Court
U. S. 661, 682 (1994) (Souter, J., concurring) (public employ-
er’s reasonable belief that employee engaged in unprotected
speech excuses liability); United States v. United States Gyp-
sum Co., 438 U. S. 422, 453–455, and n. 29 (1978) (“ ‘meeting
competition’ ” defense in antitrust based on reasonable belief
in the necessity to meet competition); Pierson v. Ray, 386
U. S. 547, 555–557 (1967) (police ofﬁcer has defense to consti-
tutional claim, as did ofﬁcers of the peace at common law in
actions for false arrest, when the ofﬁcer reasonably believed
the statute whose violation precipitated the arrest was
valid).
And the contours of the shield—reasonableness—
constrain the discretion of the cable operator as much as they
protect it.
If, for example, a court had already found sub-
stantially similar programming to be beyond the pale of “pat-
ently offensive” material, or if a local authority overseeing
the local public, governmental, or educational channels had
indicated that materials of the type that the cable operator
decides to ban were not “patently offensive” in that commu-
nity, then the cable operator would be hard pressed to claim
that the exclusion of the material was “reasonable.”
We
conclude that the statute is not impermissibly vague.
For the reasons discussed, we conclude that §10(a) is con-
sistent with the First Amendment.
III
The statute’s second provision signiﬁcantly differs from
the ﬁrst, for it does not simply permit, but rather requires,
cable system operators to restrict speech—by segregating
and blocking “patently offensive” sex-related material ap-
pearing on leased channels (but not on other channels).
1992 Act, §10(b).
In particular, as previously mentioned,
see supra, at 735, this provision and its implementing regula-
tions require cable system operators to place “patently
offensive” leased channel programming on a separate chan-
nel; to block that channel; to unblock the channel within
30 days of a subscriber’s written request for access; and to


[REPORT PAGE 754]
754
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of the Court
reblock the channel within 30 days of a subscriber’s request
for reblocking.
1992 Act, §10(b); 47 CFR §§76.701(b), (c),
(g) (1995).
Also, leased channel programmers must notify
cable operators of an intended “patently offensive” broad-
cast up to 30 days before its scheduled broadcast date.
§§76.701(d), (g).
These requirements have obvious restrictive effects.
The
several up-to-30-day delays, along with single channel seg-
regation, mean that a subscriber cannot decide to watch a
single
program
without
considerable
advance
planning
and without letting the “patently offensive” channel in its
entirety invade his household for days, perhaps weeks, at
a time.
These restrictions will prevent programmers from
broadcasting to viewers who select programs day by day (or,
through “surﬁng,” minute by minute); to viewers who would
like occasionally to watch a few, but not many, of the pro-
grams on the “patently offensive” channel; and to viewers
who simply tend to judge a program’s value through channel
reputation, i. e., by the company it keeps.
Moreover, the
“written notice” requirement will further restrict viewing
by subscribers who fear for their reputations should the op-
erator, advertently or inadvertently, disclose the list of those
who wish to watch the “patently offensive” channel.
Cf. La-
mont v. Postmaster General, 381 U. S. 301, 307 (1965) (ﬁnd-
ing unconstitutional a requirement that recipients of Com-
munist literature notify the Post Ofﬁce that they wish to
receive it).
Further, the added costs and burdens that these
requirements impose upon a cable system operator may en-
courage that operator to ban programming that the operator
would otherwise permit to run, even if only late at night.
The Government argues that, despite these adverse conse-
quences, the “segregate and block” requirements are lawful
because they are “the least restrictive means of realizing” a
“ ‘compelling interest,’ ” namely, “ ‘protecting the physical
and psychological well-being of minors.’ ”
See Brief for
Federal Respondents 11 (quoting Sable, 492 U. S., at 126).


[REPORT PAGE 755]
755
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of the Court
It adds that, in any event, the First Amendment, as applied
in Paciﬁca, “does not require that regulations of indecency
on television be subject to the strictest” First Amendment
“standard of review.”
Brief for Federal Respondents 11.
We agree with the Government that protection of children
is a “compelling interest.”
See supra, at 743.
But we do
not agree that the “segregate and block” requirements prop-
erly accommodate the speech restrictions they impose and
the legitimate objective they seek to attain.
Nor need we
here determine whether, or the extent to which, Paciﬁca
does, or does not, impose some lesser standard of review
where indecent speech is at issue, compare 438 U. S., at 745–
748 (opinion of Stevens, J.) (indecent materials enjoy lesser
First Amendment protection), with id., at 761–762 (Powell,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (refusing
to accept a lesser standard for nonobscene, indecent mate-
rial).
That is because once one examines this governmental
restriction, it becomes apparent that, not only is it not a
“least restrictive alternative” and is not “narrowly tailored”
to meet its legitimate objective, it also seems considerably
“more extensive than necessary.”
That is to say, it fails to
satisfy this Court’s formulations of the First Amendment’s
“strictest,” as well as its somewhat less “strict,” require-
ments.
See, e. g., Sable, 492 U. S., at 126 (“compelling inter-
est” and “least restrictive means” requirements applied to
indecent telephone communications); id., at 131 (requiring
“narrowly tailored” law); Turner, 512 U. S., at 641 (using
“heightened scrutiny” to address content-neutral structural
regulations of cable systems); id., at 662 (quoting “ ‘no
greater than . . . essential’ ” language from United States v.
O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367, 377 (1968), as an example of “height-
ened,” less-than-strictest, First Amendment scrutiny); Cen-
tral Hudson, 447 U. S., at 566 (restriction on commercial
speech cannot be “more extensive than is necessary”); Flor-
ida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., 515 U. S. 618, 624 (1995) (restric-
tion must be “narrowly drawn”); id., at 632 (there must be a


[REPORT PAGE 756]
756
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of the Court
“reasonable” “ﬁt” with the objective that legitimates speech
restriction).
The provision before us does not reveal the
caution and care that the standards underlying these various
verbal formulas impose upon laws that seek to reconcile the
critically important interest in protecting free speech with
very important, or even compelling, interests that sometimes
warrant restrictions.
Several circumstances lead us to this conclusion.
For one
thing, the law, as recently amended, uses other means to pro-
tect children from similar “patently offensive” material
broadcast on unleased cable channels, i. e., broadcast over
any of a system’s numerous ordinary, or public access, chan-
nels.
The law, as recently amended, requires cable opera-
tors to “scramble or . . . block” such programming on any
(unleased) channel “primarily dedicated to sexually-oriented
programming.”
Telecommunications Act of 1996, §505, 110
Stat. 136 (emphasis added).
In addition, cable operators
must honor a subscriber’s request to block any, or all, pro-
grams on any channel to which he or she does not wish to
subscribe.
§504, ibid.
And manufacturers, in the future,
will have to make television sets with a so-called “V-chip”—
a device that will be able automatically to identify and block
sexually explicit or violent programs.
§551, id., at 139–142.
Although we cannot, and do not, decide whether the new
provisions are themselves lawful (a matter not before us),
we note that they are signiﬁcantly less restrictive than the
provision here at issue.
They do not force the viewer to
receive (for days or weeks at a time) all “patently offensive”
programming or none; they will not lead the viewer automat-
ically to judge the few by the reputation of the many; and
they will not automatically place the occasional viewer’s
name on a special list.
They therefore inevitably lead us to
ask why, if they adequately protect children from “patently
offensive” material broadcast on ordinary channels, they
would not offer adequate protection from similar leased
channel broadcasts as well?
Alternatively, if these provi-


[REPORT PAGE 757]
757
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of the Court
sions do not adequately protect children from “patently of-
fensive” material broadcast on ordinary channels, how could
one justify more severe leased channel restrictions when
(given ordinary channel programming) they would yield so
little additional protection for children?
The record does not answer these questions.
It does not
explain why, under the new Act, blocking alone—without
written access requests—adequately protects children from
exposure to regular sex-dedicated channels, but cannot ade-
quately protect those children from programming on simi-
larly sex-dedicated channels that are leased.
It does not
explain why a simple subscriber blocking request system,
perhaps a phone-call-based system, would adequately protect
children from “patently offensive” material broadcast on or-
dinary non-sex-dedicated channels (i. e., almost all channels)
but a far more restrictive segregate/block/written-access
system is needed to protect children from similar broadcasts
on what (in the absence of the segregation requirement)
would be non-sex-dedicated channels that are leased.
Nor
is there any indication Congress thought the new ordinary
channel protections less than adequate.
The answers to the questions are not obvious.
We have
no empirical reason to believe, for example, that sex-
dedicated channels are all (or mostly) leased channels, or that
“patently
offensive”
programming
on
non-sex-dedicated
channels is found only (or mostly) on leased channels.
To
the contrary, the parties’ briefs (and major city television
guides) provide examples of what seems likely to be such
programming broadcast over both kinds of channels.
We recognize, as the Government properly points out, that
Congress need not deal with every problem at once.
Cf.
Semler v. Oregon Bd. of Dental Examiners, 294 U. S. 608,
610 (1935) (the legislature need not “strike at all evils at the
same time”); and Congress also must have a degree of leeway
in tailoring means to ends.
Columbia Broadcasting, 412
U. S., at 102–103.
But in light of the 1996 statute, it seems


[REPORT PAGE 758]
758
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of the Court
fair to say that Congress now has tried to deal with most of
the problem.
At this point, we can take Congress’ different,
and signiﬁcantly less restrictive, treatment of a highly simi-
lar problem at least as some indication that more restrictive
means are not “essential” (or will not prove very helpful).
Cf. Boos v. Barry, 485 U. S. 312, 329 (1988) (existence of
a less restrictive statute suggested that a challenged ordi-
nance, aimed at the same problem, was overly restrictive).
The record’s description and discussion of a different alter-
native—the “lockbox”—leads, through a different route, to a
similar conclusion.
The Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984 required cable operators to provide
“upon the request of a subscriber, a device by which the
subscriber can prohibit viewing of a particular cable
service during periods selected by the subscriber.”
47
U. S. C. §544(d)(2).
This device—the “lockbox”—would help protect children by
permitting their parents to “lock out” those programs or
channels that they did not want their children to see.
See
FCC 85–179, ¶132, 50 Fed. Reg. 18637, 18655 (1985) (“[T]he
provision for lockboxes largely disposes of issues involving
the Commission’s standard for indecency”).
The FCC, in
upholding the “segregate and block” provisions, said that
lockboxes protected children (including, say, children with
inattentive parents) less effectively than those provisions.
See First Report and Order ¶¶14–15, 8 FCC Rcd, at 1000.
But it is important to understand why that is so.
The Government sets forth the reasons as follows:
“In the case of lockboxes, parents would have to dis-
cover that such devices exist; ﬁnd out that their cable
operators offer them for sale; spend the time and money
to buy one; learn how to program the lockbox to block
undesired programs; and, ﬁnally, exercise sufﬁcient
vigilance to ensure that they have, indeed, locked out


[REPORT PAGE 759]
759
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of the Court
whatever indecent programming they do not wish their
children to view.”
Brief for Federal Respondents 37.
We assume the accuracy of this statement.
But the reasons
do not show need for a provision as restrictive as the one
before us.
Rather, they suggest a set of provisions very
much like those that Congress placed in the 1996 Act.
No provision, we concede, short of an absolute ban, can
offer certain protection against assault by a determined
child.
We have not, however, generally allowed this fact
alone to justify “ ‘ “reduc[ing] the adult population . . . to . . .
only what is ﬁt for children.” ’ ”
Sable, 492 U. S., at 128
(quoting Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products Corp., 463 U. S. 60,
73 (1983), in turn quoting Butler v. Michigan, 352 U. S. 380,
383 (1957)); see Sable, supra, at 130, and n. 10.
But, leaving
that problem aside, the Government’s list of practical difﬁ-
culties would seem to call, not for “segregate and block” re-
quirements, but, rather, for informational requirements, for
a simple coding system, for readily available blocking equip-
ment (perhaps accessible by telephone), for imposing cost
burdens upon system operators (who may spread them
through subscription fees); or perhaps even for a system that
requires lockbox defaults to be set to block certain channels
(say, sex-dedicated channels).
These kinds of requirements
resemble those that Congress has recently imposed upon all
but leased channels.
For that reason, the “lockbox” descrip-
tion and the discussion of its frailties reinforces our conclu-
sion that the leased channel provision is overly restrictive
when measured against the beneﬁts it is likely to achieve.
(We add that the record’s discussion of the “lockbox” does
not explain why the law now treats leased channels more
restrictively than ordinary channels.)
There may, of course, be other explanations.
Congress
may simply not have bothered to change the leased channel
provisions when it introduced a new system for other chan-
nels.
But responses of this sort, like guesses about the com-
parative seriousness of the problem, are not legally adequate.


[REPORT PAGE 760]
760
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
In other cases, where, as here, the record before Congress
or before an agency provides no convincing explanation, this
Court has not been willing to stretch the limits of the plausi-
ble, to create hypothetical nonobvious explanations in order
to justify laws that impose signiﬁcant restrictions upon
speech.
See, e. g., Sable, supra, at 130 (“[T]he congressional
record presented to us contains no evidence as to how effec-
tive or ineffective the FCC’s most recent regulations were
or might prove to be”); Simon & Schuster, 502 U. S., at 120;
Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm’r of
Revenue, 460 U. S. 575, 585–586 (1983); Arkansas Writers’
Project, 481 U. S., at 231–232.
Consequently, we cannot ﬁnd that the “segregate and
block” restrictions on speech are a narrowly, or reasonably,
tailored effort to protect children.
Rather, they are overly
restrictive, “sacriﬁc[ing]” important First Amendment inter-
ests for too “speculative a gain.”
Columbia Broadcasting,
412 U. S., at 127; see League of Women Voters, 468 U. S.,
at 397.
For that reason they are not consistent with the
First Amendment.
IV
The statute’s third provision, as implemented by FCC reg-
ulation, is similar to its ﬁrst provision, in that it too permits
a cable operator to prevent transmission of “patently offen-
sive” programming, in this case on public access channels.
1992 Act, §10(c); 47 CFR §76.702 (1995).
But there are four
important differences.
The ﬁrst is the historical background.
As Justice Ken-
nedy points out, see post, at 788–790, cable operators have
traditionally agreed to reserve channel capacity for public,
governmental, and educational channels as part of the con-
sideration they give municipalities that award them cable
franchises.
See H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, at 30.
In the terms
preferred by Justice Thomas, see post, at 827–828, the re-
quirement to reserve capacity for public access channels is
similar to the reservation of a public easement, or a dedica-


[REPORT PAGE 761]
761
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
tion of land for streets and parks, as part of a municipality’s
approval of a subdivision of land.
Cf. post, at 793–794 (opin-
ion of Kennedy, J.).
Signiﬁcantly, these are channels over
which cable operators have not historically exercised edito-
rial control.
H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, supra, at 30.
Unlike
§10(a) therefore, §10(c) does not restore to cable operators
editorial rights that they once had, and the countervailing
First Amendment interest is nonexistent, or at least much
diminished.
See also post, at 792–793 (opinion of Ken-
nedy, J.).
The second difference is the institutional background that
has developed as a result of the historical difference.
When
a “leased channel” is made available by the operator to a
private lessee, the lessee has total control of programming
during the leased time slot.
See 47 U. S. C. §532(c)(2).
Public access channels, on the other hand, are normally sub-
ject to complex supervisory systems of various sorts, often
with both public and private elements.
See §531(b) (fran-
chising authorities “may require rules and procedures for the
use of the [public access] channel capacity”).
Municipalities
generally provide in their cable franchising agreements for
an access channel manager, who is most commonly a non-
proﬁt organization, but may also be the municipality, or, in
some instances, the cable system owner.
See D. Brenner,
M. Price, & M. Myerson, Cable Television and Other Non-
broadcast Video ¶6.04[7] (1993); P. Aufderheide, Public Ac-
cess Cable Programming, Controversial Speech, and Free
Expression (1992) (hereinafter Aufderheide), reprinted in
App. 61, 63 (surveying 61 communities; the access manager
was: a nonproﬁt organization in 41, a local government ofﬁ-
cial in 12, the cable operator in 5, and an unidentiﬁed entity
in 3); D. Agosta, C. Rogoff, & A. Norman, The Participate
Report: A Case Study of Public Access Cable Television in
New York State 28 (1990) (hereinafter Agosta), attached as
Exh. K to Joint Comments for the Alliance for Community
Media et al., ﬁled with the FCC under MM Docket No. 92–


[REPORT PAGE 762]
762
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
258 (materials so ﬁled hereinafter FCC Record) (“In 88% [of
New York public access systems] access channels were pro-
grammed jointly between the cable operator and another in-
stitution such as a university, library, or non-proﬁt access
organization”); id., at 28–32, FCC Record; Comments of Na-
tional Cable Television Association Inc., at 14, FCC Record
(“Operators often have no involvement in PEG channels that
are run by local access organizations”).
Access channel ac-
tivity and management are partly ﬁnanced with public
funds—through franchise fees or other payments pursuant
to the franchise agreement, or from general municipal funds,
see Brenner, Price, & Myerson, supra, ¶6.04[3][c]; Aufder-
heide, App. 59–60—and are commonly subject to supervision
by a local supervisory board.
See, e. g., D. C. Code Ann.
§43–1829 (1990 and Supp. 1996); Lynchburg City Code §12.1–
44(d)(2) (1988).
This system of public, private, and mixed nonproﬁt ele-
ments, through its supervising boards and nonproﬁt or gov-
ernmental access managers, can set programming policy and
approve or disapprove particular programming services.
And this system can police that policy by, for example,
requiring indemniﬁcation by programmers, certiﬁcation of
compliance with local standards, time segregation, adult con-
tent advisories, or even by prescreening individual pro-
grams.
See Second Report and Order ¶26, 8 FCC Rcd, at
2642 (“[F]rom the comments received, it appears that a num-
ber of access organizations already have in place procedures
that require certiﬁcation statements [of compliance with local
standards], or their equivalent, from access programmers”);
Comments of Boston Community Access and Programming
Foundation, App. 163–164; Aufderheide, id., at 69–71; Com-
ments of Metropolitan Area Communications Commission 2,
FCC Record; Reply Comments of Waycross Community
Television 4–6, FCC Record; Reply Comments of Columbus
Community Cable Access, Inc., App. 329; Reply Comments
of City of St. Paul, id., at 318, 325; Reply Comments of Erik


[REPORT PAGE 763]
763
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Mollberg, Public Access Coordinator, Ft. Wayne, Ind., 3,
FCC Record; Comments of Deﬁance Community Television
3, FCC Record; Comments of Nutmeg Public Access Televi-
sion, Inc., 3–4, FCC Record.
Whether these locally account-
able bodies prescreen programming, promulgate rules for
the use of public access channels, or are merely available to
respond when problems arise, the upshot is the same: There
is a locally accountable body capable of addressing the prob-
lem, should it arise, of patently offensive programming
broadcast to children, making it unlikely that many children
will in fact be exposed to programming considered patently
offensive in that community.
See 56 F. 3d, at 127–128; Sec-
ond Report and Order ¶26, 8 FCC Rcd 2642.
Third, the existence of a system aimed at encouraging and
securing programming that the community considers valu-
able strongly suggests that a “cable operator’s veto” is less
likely necessary to achieve the statute’s basic objective, pro-
tecting children, than a similar veto in the context of leased
channels.
Of course, the system of access managers and
supervising boards can make mistakes, which the operator
might in some cases correct with its veto power.
Balanced
against this potential beneﬁt, however, is the risk that the
veto itself may be mistaken; and its use, or threatened use,
could prevent the presentation of programming, that, though
borderline, is not “patently offensive” to its targeted audi-
ence.
See Aufderheide, App. 64–66 (describing the pro-
grams that were considered borderline by access managers,
including sex education, health education, broadcasts of polit-
ically marginal groups, and various artistic experiments).
And this latter threat must bulk large within a system that
already has publicly accountable systems for maintaining
responsible programs.
Finally, our examination of the legislative history and the
record before us is consistent with what common sense sug-
gests, namely, that the public/nonproﬁt programming control
systems now in place would normally avoid, minimize, or


[REPORT PAGE 764]
764
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
eliminate any child-related problems concerning “patently
offensive” programming.
We have found anecdotal refer-
ences to what seem isolated instances of potentially indecent
programming, some of which may well have occurred on
leased, not public access, channels.
See 138 Cong. Rec. 984,
990 (1992) (statement of Sen. Wirth) (mentioning “abuses” on
Time Warner’s New York City channel); but see Comments
of Manhattan Neighborhood Network, App. 235, 238 (New
York access manager noting that leased, not public access,
channels regularly carry sexually explicit programming in
New York, and that no commercial programs or advertising
are allowed on public access channels); Brief for Time
Warner Cable as Amicus Curiae 2–3 (indicating that rele-
vant “abuses” likely occurred on leased channels).
See also
138 Cong. Rec., at 989 (statement of Sen. Fowler) (describing
solicitation of prostitution); id., at 985 (statement of Sen.
Helms) (identifying newspaper headline referring to mayor’s
protest of a “strip act”); 56 F. 3d, at 117–118 (recounting com-
ments submitted to the FCC describing three complaints of
offensive programming); Letter from Mayor of Rancho Palos
Verdes, FCC Record; Resolution of San Antonio City Coun-
cil, No. 92–49–40, FCC Record.
But these few examples do not necessarily indicate a sig-
niﬁcant nationwide pattern.
See 56 F. 3d, at 127–128 (public
access channels “did not pose dangers on the order of magni-
tude of those identiﬁed on leased access channels,” and “local
franchising authorities could respond” to such problems “by
issuing ‘rules and procedures’ or other ‘requirements’ ”).
The Commission itself did not report any examples of “inde-
cent” programs on public access channels.
See Second Re-
port and Order, 8 FCC Rcd, at 2638; see also Comments of
Boston Community Access and Programming Foundation,
App. 162–163 (noting that the FCC’s Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking, 7 FCC Rcd 7709 (1992), did not identify any
“inappropriate” programming that actually exists on public


[REPORT PAGE 765]
765
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
access channels).
Moreover, comments submitted to the
FCC undermine any suggestion that prior to 1992 there
were signiﬁcant problems of indecent programming on public
access channels.
See Agosta 10, 28, FCC Record (surveying
76 public access systems in New York over two years, and
ﬁnding “only two examples of controversial programming,
and both had been settled by the producers and the access
channel”); Reply Comments of Staten Island Community
Television 2, FCC Record (“Our access channels have been
on the air since 1986 without a single incident which would
be covered by Section 10 of the new law”); Reply Comments
of Waycross Community Television, at 2, FCC Record (“[I]n-
decent and obscene programs . . . [have] never been cablecast
through Waycross Community Television during our entire
ten year programming history”); Reply Comments of Cam-
bridge Community Television, App. 314 (“In Cambridge less
than one hour out of 15,000 hours of programming CCTV has
run in the past ﬁve year[s] may have been affected by the
Act”); ibid. (“CCTV feels that there simply is not a problem
which needs to be ﬁxed”); Reply Comments of Columbus
Community Cable Access, Inc., id., at 329 (“ACTV is un-
aware of any actions taken by the cable operators under [a
local law authorizing them to prohibit “legally obscene mat-
ter”] within the last 10 years”); Reply Comments of Cincin-
nati Community Video, Inc., id., at 316 (“[I]n 10 years of ac-
cess operations with over 30,000 access programs cablecast
not a single obscenity violation has ever occurred”); Com-
ments of Deﬁance Community Television, at 2–3, FCC Rec-
ord (in eight years of operation, “there has never been a
serious problem with the content of programming on the
channel”).
At most, we have found borderline examples as to which
people’s judgment may differ, perhaps acceptable in some
communities but not others, of the type that petitioners fear
the law might prohibit.
See, e. g., Aufderheide, App. 64–66;
Brief for Petitioners in No. 95–124, p. 7 (describing depiction


[REPORT PAGE 766]
766
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Breyer, J.
of a self-help gynecological examination); Comments of Time
Warner Entertainment Co., App. 252 (describing an Austin,
Tex., program that included “nude scenes from a movie,” and
an Indianapolis, Ind., “ ‘safe sex’ ” program).
It is difﬁcult
to see how such borderline examples could show a compelling
need, nationally, to protect children from signiﬁcantly harm-
ful materials.
Compare 138 Cong. Rec., at 985 (statement
of Sen. Helms) (justifying regulation of leased access chan-
nels in terms of programming that depicts “bestiality” and
“rape”).
In the absence of a factual basis substantiating the
harm and the efﬁcacy of its proposed cure, we cannot assume
that the harm exists or that the regulation redresses it.
See
Turner, 512 U. S., at 664–665.
The upshot, in respect to the public access channels, is a
law that could radically change present programming-related
relationships among local community and nonproﬁt super-
vising boards and access managers, which relationships are
established through municipal law, regulation, and contract.
In doing so, it would not signiﬁcantly restore editorial rights
of cable operators, but would greatly increase the risk that
certain categories of programming (say, borderline offensive
programs) will not appear.
At the same time, given present
supervisory mechanisms, the need for this particular provi-
sion, aimed directly at public access channels, is not obvious.
Having carefully reviewed the legislative history of the Act,
the proceedings before the FCC, the record below, and the
submissions of the parties and amici here, we conclude that
the Government cannot sustain its burden of showing that
§10(c) is necessary to protect children or that it is appro-
priately tailored to secure that end.
See, e. g., Columbia
Broadcasting, 412 U. S., at 127; League of Women Voters,
468 U. S., at 398–399; Sable, 492 U. S., at 126.
Consequently,
we
ﬁnd
that
this
third
provision
violates
the
First
Amendment.


[REPORT PAGE 767]
767
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
V
Finally, we must ask whether §10(a) is severable from the
two other provisions.
The question is one of legislative
intent: Would Congress still “have passed” §10(a) “had
it known” that the remaining “provision[s were] invalid”?
Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 506 (1985).
If so, we need not invalidate all three provisions.
New York
v. Ferber, 458 U. S., at 769, n. 24 (citing United States v.
Thirty-seven Photographs, 402 U. S. 363 (1971)).
Although the 1992 Act contains no express “severability
clause,” we can ﬁnd the Act’s “severability” intention in its
structure and purpose.
It seems fairly obvious Congress
would have intended its permissive “leased access” channels
provision, §10(a), to stand irrespective of §10(c)’s legal fate.
That is because the latter provision concerns only public,
educational, and governmental channels.
Its presence had
little, if any, effect upon “leased access” channels; hence its
absence in respect to those channels could not make a sig-
niﬁcant difference.
The “segregate and block” requirement’s invalidity does
make a difference, however, to the effectiveness of the per-
missive “leased access” provision, §10(a).
Together they
told the cable system operator: “Either ban a ‘patently offen-
sive’ program or ‘segregate and block’ it.”
Without the
“segregate and block” provision, cable operators are afforded
broad discretion over what to do with a patently offensive
program, and because they will no longer bear the costs of
segregation and blocking if they refuse to ban such pro-
grams, cable operators may choose to ban fewer programs.
Nonetheless, this difference does not make the two provi-
sions unseverable.
Without the “segregate and block” pro-
vision, the law simply treats leased channels (in respect to
patently offensive programming) just as it treats all other
channels.
And judging by the absence of similar segregate
and block provisions in the context of these other channels,
Congress would probably have thought that §10(a), standing


[REPORT PAGE 768]
768
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Stevens, J., concurring
alone, was an effective (though, perhaps, not the most effec-
tive) means of pursuing its objective.
Moreover, we can ﬁnd
no reason why, in light of Congress’ basic objective (the pro-
tection of children), Congress would have preferred no provi-
sions at all to the permissive provision standing by itself.
That provision, capable of functioning on its own, still helps
to achieve that basic objective.
Consequently, we believe
the valid provision is severable from the others.
VI
For these reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeals
is afﬁrmed insofar as it upheld §10(a); the judgment of the
Court of Appeals is reversed insofar as it upheld §10(b) and
§10(c).
It is so ordered.
Justice Stevens, concurring.
The difference between §10(a) and §10(c) is the difference
between a permit and a prohibition.
The former restores
the freedom of cable operators to reject indecent programs;
the latter requires local franchising authorities to reject such
programs.
While I join the Court’s opinion, I add these
comments to emphasize the difference between the two pro-
visions and to endorse the analysis in Part III–B of Justice
Kennedy’s opinion even though I do not think it necessary
to characterize the public access channels as public fora.
Like Justice Souter, I am convinced that it would be un-
wise to take a categorical approach to the resolution of novel
First Amendment questions arising in an industry as dy-
namic as this.
Cf. R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 426–427
(1992) (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment).
I
Federal law requires cable system operators to reserve
about 15 percent of their channels for commercial lease
to unafﬁliated programmers.
See 47 U. S. C. §532(b).
On


[REPORT PAGE 769]
769
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Stevens, J., concurring
these channels, federal law generally prohibits the cable op-
erator from exercising any control over program content, see
§532(c)(2), with one exception: Section 10(a) allows the oper-
ator to refuse to air “indecent” programs.
In my view, that
exception is permissible.
The Federal Government established the leased access re-
quirements to ensure that certain programmers would have
more channels available to them.
Section 10(a) is therefore
best understood as a limitation on the amount of speech that
the Federal Government has spared from the censorial con-
trol of the cable operator, rather than a direct prohibition
against the communication of speech that, in the absence of
federal intervention, would ﬂow freely.
I do not agree, however, that §10(a) established a public
forum.
Unlike sidewalks and parks, the Federal Govern-
ment created leased access channels in the course of its legit-
imate regulation of the communications industry.
In so
doing, it did not establish an entirely open forum, but rather
restricted access to certain speakers, namely, unafﬁliated
programmers able to lease the air time.
By facilitating cer-
tain speech that cable operators would not otherwise carry,
the leased access channels operate like the must-carry rules
that we considered in Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v.
FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 643–646 (1994), without reference to our
public forum precedents.
When the Federal Government opens cable channels that
would otherwise be left entirely in private hands, it deserves
more deference than a rigid application of the public forum
doctrine would allow.
At this early stage in the regulation
of this developing industry, Congress should not be put to an
all or nothing-at-all choice in deciding whether to open cer-
tain cable channels to programmers who would otherwise
lack the resources to participate in the marketplace of ideas.
Just as Congress may legitimately limit access to these
channels to unafﬁliated programmers, I believe it may also
limit, within certain reasonable bounds, the extent of the ac-


[REPORT PAGE 770]
770
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Stevens, J., concurring
cess that it confers upon those programmers.1
If the Gov-
ernment had a reasonable basis for concluding that there
were already enough classical musical programs or cartoons
being telecast—or, perhaps, even enough political debate—I
would ﬁnd no First Amendment objection to an open access
requirement that was extended on an impartial basis to all
but those particular subjects.
A contrary conclusion would
ill-serve First Amendment values by dissuading the Govern-
ment from creating access rights altogether.2
Of course, the fact that the Federal Government may be
entitled to some deference in regulating access for cable pro-
grammers does not mean that it may evade First Amend-
ment constraints by selectively choosing which speech should
be excepted from private control.
If the Government
spared all speech but that communicated by Republicans
from the control of the cable operator, for example, the First
Amendment violation would be plain.
See Cornelius v.
NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 806
1 Our precedents recognize that reasonable restraints may be placed on
access to certain well-regulated fora.
There is no reason why cable televi-
sion should be treated differently.
See Rosenberger v. Rector and Visi-
tors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829 (1995); id., at 892–895, 899 (Souter,
J., dissenting); see also Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U. S. 263, 278 (1981) (Ste-
vens, J., concurring in judgment) (“I should think it obvious, for example,
that if two groups of 25 students requested the use of a room at a particu-
lar time—one to view Mickey Mouse cartoons and the other to rehearse
an amateur performance of Hamlet—the First Amendment would not
require that the room be reserved for the group that submitted its ap-
plication ﬁrst”); Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367, 394
(1969) (approving access requirement limited to “matters of great public
concern”).
2 For purposes of these cases, canons of constitutional avoidance require
us to assume that the Government has the authority to impose leased
access requirements on cable operators.
Indeed, no party to this litiga-
tion contends to the contrary.
Because petitioners’ constitutional claim
depends for its success on the constitutionality of the underlying access
rights, they certainly cannot complain if we decide the cases on that
assumption.


[REPORT PAGE 771]
771
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Stevens, J., concurring
(1985).
More subtle viewpoint-based limitations on access
also may be prohibited by the First Amendment.
See
Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U. S. 546, 564
(1975) (Douglas, J., dissenting in part and concurring in re-
sult in part).
Even though it is often difﬁcult to determine whether a
given access restriction impermissibly singles out certain
ideas for repression, in these cases I ﬁnd no basis for conclud-
ing that §10(a) is a species of viewpoint discrimination.
By
returning control over indecent programming to the cable
operator, §10(a) treats indecent programming on access
channels no differently from indecent programming on regu-
lar channels.
The decision to permit the operator to de-
termine whether to show indecent programming on access
channels therefore cannot be said to reﬂect a governmental
bias against the indecent programming that appears on ac-
cess channels in particular.
Nor can it be argued that indecent programming has no
outlet other than leased access channels, and thus that the
exclusion of such speech from special protection is designed
to prohibit its communication altogether.
Petitioners im-
pliedly concede this point when they contend that the inde-
cency restrictions are arbitrarily underinclusive because
they do not affect the similarly indecent programming that
appears on regular channels.
Moreover, the criteria §10(a) identiﬁes for limiting access
are fully consistent with the Government’s contention that
the speech restrictions are not designed to suppress “a cer-
tain form of expression that the Government dislikes,” post,
at 802 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part, concurring in judg-
ment in part, and dissenting in part), but rather to protect
children from sexually explicit programming on a pervasive
medium.
In other cases, we have concluded that such a jus-
tiﬁcation is both viewpoint neutral and legitimate.
Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115 (1989);


[REPORT PAGE 772]
772
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Stevens, J., concurring
FCC v. Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978).
There is
no reason to conclude otherwise here.
Finally, §10(a) cannot be assailed on the somewhat broader
ground that it nevertheless reduces the programming avail-
able to the adult population to what is suitable for children.
Butler v. Michigan, 352 U. S. 380, 383 (1957); post, at 807
(Kennedy, J., concurring in part, concurring in judgment in
part, and dissenting in part).
Section 10(a) serves only to
ensure that the newly created access right will not require
operators to expose children to more unsuitable communica-
tions than would otherwise be the case.
It is thus far differ-
ent in both purpose and effect from the provision at issue in
Butler, which criminalized the sale of certain books.
352
U. S., at 381.
In sum, §10(a) constitutes a reasonable, viewpoint-neutral
limitation on a federally created access right for certain cable
programmers.
Accordingly, I would afﬁrm the judgment of
the Court of Appeals as to this provision.
II
As both Justice Breyer and Justice Kennedy have ex-
plained, the public, educational, and governmental access
channels that are regulated by §10(c) are not creations of the
Federal Government.
They owe their existence to contracts
forged between cable operators and local cable franchising
authorities.
Ante, at 734, 760–762 (opinion of Breyer, J.);
post, at 788–790, 791–794 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part,
concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part).
As their name reﬂects, so-called PEG channels are subject
to a variety of local governmental controls and regulations
that—apart
from any
federal requirement—may
result
either in a prohibition or a requirement that certain types of
programs be carried.
Ante, at 761–763 (opinion of Breyer,
J.)
Presumably, as Justice Breyer explains, the local au-
thorities seldom permit programming of the type described
by §10(c) to air.
Ante, at 762–763.


[REPORT PAGE 773]
773
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Stevens, J., concurring
What is of critical importance to me, however, is that if
left to their own devices, those authorities may choose to
carry some programming that the Federal Government has
decided to restrict.
As I read §10(c), the federal statute
would disable local governments from making that choice.
It would inject federally authorized private censors into fora
from which they might otherwise be excluded, and it would
therefore limit local fora that might otherwise be open to all
constitutionally protected speech.3
Section 10(c) operates as a direct restriction on speech
that, in the absence of federal intervention, might ﬂow freely.
The Federal Government is therefore not entitled to the
same leeway that I believe it deserves when it enacts provi-
sions, such as §10(a), that deﬁne the limits of federally cre-
ated access rights.
See supra, at 769–770.
The Federal
Government has no more entitlement to restrict the power
of a local authority to disseminate materials on channels of
its own creation, than it has to restrict the power of cable
operators to do so on channels that they own.
In this re-
spect, I agree entirely with Justice Kennedy, save for his
designation of these channels as public fora.
That is not to say that the Federal Government may not
impose restrictions on the dissemination of indecent materi-
als on cable television.
Although indecent speech is pro-
tected by the First Amendment, the Government may have
a compelling interest in protecting children from indecent
speech on such a pervasive medium.
Sable Communica-
tions of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115 (1989); FCC v.
Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978).
When the Gov-
3 Although in 1984 Congress essentially barred cable operators from
exercising editorial control over PEG channels, see 47 U. S. C. §531(e),
§10(c) does not merely restore the status quo ante.
Section 10(c) author-
izes private operators to exercise editorial discretion over “indecent” pro-
gramming even if the franchising authority objects.
Under the pre-1984
practice, local franchising authorities were free to exclude operators from
exercising any such control on PEG channels.


[REPORT PAGE 774]
774
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Souter, J., concurring
ernment acts to suppress directly the dissemination of such
speech, however, it may not rely solely on speculation and
conjecture.
See Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v.
FCC, 492 U. S., at 129–131.
Justice Breyer persuasively demonstrates that the Gov-
ernment has made no effort to identify the harm caused by
permitting local franchising authorities to determine the
quantum of so-called “indecent” speech that may be aired in
their communities.
Ante, at 763–766.
Nor has the Govern-
ment attempted to determine whether the intervention of
the discretionary censorial authority of a private cable oper-
ator constitutes an appropriately limited means of address-
ing that harm.
Ibid.
Given the direct nature of the restric-
tion on speech that §10(c) imposes, the Government has
failed to carry its burden of justiﬁcation.
Accordingly, I
agree that the judgment of the Court of Appeals with re-
spect to §10(c) should be reversed.
Justice Souter, concurring.
Justice Kennedy’s separate opinion stresses the worthy
point that First Amendment values generally are well
served by categorizing speech protection according to the
respective characters of the expression, its context, and the
restriction at issue.
Reviewing speech regulations under
fairly strict categorical rules keeps the starch in the stand-
ards for those moments when the daily politics cries loudest
for limiting what may be said.1
Justice Kennedy sees no
warrant in these cases for anything but a categorical and
rule-based approach applying a ﬁxed level of scrutiny, the
strictest, to judge the content-based provisions of §§10(a),
(b), and (c), and he accordingly faults the principal opinion
1 See, e. g., Blasi, The Pathological Perspective and the First Amend-
ment, 85 Colum. L. Rev. 449, 474 (1985) (arguing that “courts . . . should
place a premium on conﬁning the range of discretion left to future decision-
makers who will be called upon to make judgments when pathological
pressures are most intense”).


[REPORT PAGE 775]
775
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Souter, J., concurring
for declining to decide the precise doctrinal categories that
should govern the issue at hand.
The value of the categori-
cal approach generally to First Amendment security prompts
a word to explain why I join the Court’s unwillingness to
announce a deﬁnitive categorical analysis in these cases.
Neither the speech nor the limitation at issue here may be
categorized simply by content.
Our prior case most nearly
on point dealt not with a ﬂat restriction covering a separate
category of indecency at the First Amendment’s periphery,
but with less than a total ban, directed to instances of inde-
cent speech easily available to children through broadcasts
readily received in the household and difﬁcult or impossible
to control without immediate supervision.
See FCC v. Pa-
ciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, 747 (1978) (plurality opin-
ion) (“It is a characteristic of speech such as this that both
its capacity to offend and its ‘social value’ . . . vary with the
circumstances”).2
It is not surprising that so contextually
complex a category was not expressly assigned a standard
level of scrutiny for reviewing the Government’s limitation
at issue there.3
Nor does the fact that we deal in these cases with cable
transmission necessarily suggest that a simple category sub-
2 Our indecency cases since Paciﬁca have likewise turned as much on
the context or medium of the speech as on its content.
See, e. g., Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 127–128 (1989) (distin-
guishing Paciﬁca in part on the ground that the telephonic medium at
issue was less intrusive than broadcast television); Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, Inc., 475 U. S. 41, 47, 54 (1986) (permitting zoning regulation
of adult theaters based on their “secondary effects”); Bethel School Dist.
No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U. S. 675, 685–686 (1986) (upholding restriction on
indecent speech in a public school).
3 Our analysis of another important strand of the present cases, the right
of owners of the means of communication to refuse to serve as conduits for
messages they dislike, has been equally contextual.
Compare Red Lion
Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367 (1969) (upholding a right-of-reply
requirement in the broadcasting context), with Miami Herald Publishing
Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241 (1974) (rejecting such a requirement for
print journalism).


[REPORT PAGE 776]
776
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Souter, J., concurring
ject to a standard level of scrutiny ought to be recognized at
this point; while we have found cable television different
from broadcast with respect to the factors justifying intru-
sive access requirements under the rule in Red Lion Broad-
casting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367 (1969), see Turner Broad-
casting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 638–639 (1994)
(ﬁnding that Red Lion’s spectrum scarcity rationale had no
application to cable), today’s plurality opinion rightly ob-
serves that the characteristics of broadcast radio that ren-
dered indecency particularly threatening in Paciﬁca, that is,
its intrusion into the house and accessibility to children, are
also present in the case of cable television, ante, at 744–745.
It would seem, then, that the appropriate category for cable
indecency should be as contextually detailed as the Paciﬁca
example, and settling upon a deﬁnitive level-of-scrutiny rule
of review for so complex a category would require a subtle
judgment; but there is even more to be considered, enough
more to demand a subtlety tantamount to prescience.
All of the relevant characteristics of cable are presently
in a state of technological and regulatory ﬂux.
Recent and
far-reaching legislation not only affects the technical feasi-
bility of parental control over children’s access to undesir-
able material, see, e. g., Telecommunications Act of 1996,
§551, 110 Stat. 139–142 (provision for “V-chip” to block sexu-
ally explicit or violent programs), but portends fundamental
changes in the competitive structure of the industry and,
therefore, the ability of individual entities to act as bottle-
necks to the free ﬂow of information, see Title III, id., at
114–128 (promoting competition in cable services).
As cable
and telephone companies begin their competition for control
over the single wire that will carry both their services, we
can hardly settle rules for review of regulation on the as-
sumption that cable will remain a separable and useful cate-
gory of First Amendment scrutiny.
And as broadcast, cable,
and the cybertechnology of the Internet and the World Wide
Web approach the day of using a common receiver, we can


[REPORT PAGE 777]
777
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Souter, J., concurring
hardly assume that standards for judging the regulation of
one of them will not have immense, but now unknown and
unknowable, effects on the others.4
Accordingly, in charting a course that will permit reason-
able regulation in light of the values in competition, we have
to accept the likelihood that the media of communication will
become less categorical and more protean.
Because we can-
not be conﬁdent that for purposes of judging speech restric-
tions it will continue to make sense to distinguish cable from
other technologies, and because we know that changes in
these regulated technologies will enormously alter the struc-
ture of regulation itself, we should be shy about saying the
ﬁnal word today about what will be accepted as reasonable
tomorrow.
In my own ignorance I have to accept the real
possibility that “if we had to decide today . . . just what the
First Amendment should mean in cyberspace, . . . we would
get it fundamentally wrong.”
Lessig, The Path of Cyber-
law, 104 Yale L. J. 1743, 1745 (1995).
The upshot of appreciating the ﬂuidity of the subject that
Congress must regulate is simply to accept the fact that not
every nuance of our old standards will necessarily do for the
new technology, and that a proper choice among existing doc-
trinal categories is not obvious.
Rather than deﬁnitively
settling the issue now, Justice Breyer wisely reasons by
direct analogy rather than by rule, concluding that the
speech and the restriction at issue in these cases may use-
fully be measured against the ones at issue in Paciﬁca.5
If
4 See, e. g., Lynch, Speedier Access: Cable and Phone Companies Com-
pete, at http://www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/bonus/cb006.htm (June 17,
1996) (describing cable modem technology); Gateway 2000 ships ﬁrst Des-
tination big screen TV-PC’s, at http://www.gw2k.com/corpinfo/press/1996/
destin.htm (Apr. 29, 1996) (describing computer with both cable TV and
Internet reception capability).
5 See, e. g., Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning, 106 Harv. L. Rev. 741,
786 (1993) (observing that analogical reasoning permits “greater ﬂexibility
. . . over time”); Sullivan, Post-Liberal Judging: The Roles of Categoriza-
tion and Balancing, 63 U. Colo. L. Rev. 293, 295, n. 6 (1992) (noting that


[REPORT PAGE 778]
778
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Souter, J., concurring
that means it will take some time before reaching a ﬁnal
method of review for cases like these, there may be consola-
tion in recalling that 16 years passed, from Roth v. United
States, 354 U. S. 476 (1957), to Miller v. California, 413 U. S.
15 (1973), before the modern obscenity rule jelled; that it
took over 40 years, from Hague v. Committee for Industrial
Organization, 307 U. S. 496 (1939), to Perry Ed. Assn. v.
Perry Local Educators’ Assn., 460 U. S. 37 (1983), for the
public forum category to settle out; and that a round half-
century passed before the clear and present danger of
Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47 (1919), evolved into
the modern incitement rule of Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395
U. S. 444 (1969) (per curiam).
I cannot guess how much time will go by until the technol-
ogies of communication before us today have matured and
their relationships become known.
But until a category of
indecency can be deﬁned both with reference to the new
technology and with a prospect of durability, the job of the
courts will be just what Justice Breyer does today: recog-
nizing established First Amendment interests through a
close analysis that constrains the Congress, without wholly
incapacitating it in all matters of the signiﬁcance apparent
here, maintaining the high value of open communication,
measuring the costs of regulation by exact attention to fact,
and compiling a pedigree of experience with the changing
subject.
These are familiar judicial responsibilities in times
when we know too little to risk the ﬁnality of precision, and
attention to them will probably take us through the commu-
nications revolution.
Maybe the judicial obligation to shoul-
der these responsibilities can itself be captured by a much
older rule, familiar to every doctor of medicine: “First, do
no harm.”
“once the categories are established . . . the categorical mode leads to
briefs and arguments that concentrate much more on threshold character-
ization than on comparative analysis”).


[REPORT PAGE 779]
779
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of O’Connor, J.
Justice O’Connor, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
I agree that §10(a) is constitutional and that §10(b) is un-
constitutional, and I join Parts I, II, III, and V, and the judg-
ment in part.
I am not persuaded, however, that the as-
serted “important differences” between §§10(a) and 10(c),
ante, at 760, are sufﬁcient to justify striking down §10(c).
I
ﬁnd the features shared by §10(a), which covers leased ac-
cess channels, and §10(c), which covers public access chan-
nels, to be more signiﬁcant than the differences.
For that
reason, I would ﬁnd that §10(c) also withstands constitu-
tional scrutiny.
Both §§10(a) and 10(c) serve an important governmental
interest: the well-established compelling interest of protect-
ing children from exposure to indecent material.
See Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 126
(1989); Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629, 639–640 (1968).
Cable television, like broadcast television, is a medium that
is uniquely accessible to children, see ante, at 744–745, and,
of course, children have equally easy access to public access
channels as to leased access channels.
By permitting a cable
operator to prevent transmission of patently offensive sex-
related programming, §§10(a) and 10(c) further the interest
of protecting children.
Furthermore, both provisions are permissive.
Neither
presents an outright ban on a category of speech, such as we
struck down in Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC,
supra.
Sections 10(a) and 10(c) leave to the cable operator
the decision whether to broadcast indecent programming,
and, therefore, are less restrictive than an absolute govern-
mental ban.
Certainly §10(c) is not more restrictive than
§10(a) in this regard.
It is also signiﬁcant that neither §10(a) nor §10(c) is more
restrictive than the governmental speech restriction we up-
held in FCC v. Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978).
I
agree with Justice Breyer that we should not yet under-


[REPORT PAGE 780]
780
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
take fully to adapt our First Amendment doctrine to the new
context we confront here.
Because we refrain from doing
so, the precedent established by Paciﬁca offers an important
guide.
Section 10(c), no less than §10(a), is within the range
of acceptability set by Paciﬁca.
See ante, at 744–747.
The distinctions upon which the Court relies in deciding
that §10(c) must fall while §10(a) survives are not, in my
view, constitutionally signiﬁcant.
Much emphasis is placed
on the differences in the origins of leased access and public
access channels.
To be sure, the leased access channels cov-
ered by §10(a) were a product of the Federal Government,
while the public access channels at issue in §10(c) arose as
part of the cable franchises awarded by municipalities, see
ante, at 761–762, but I am not persuaded that the difference
in the origin of the access channels is sufﬁcient to justify
upholding §10(a) and striking down §10(c).
The interest in
protecting children remains the same, whether on a leased
access channel or a public access channel, and allowing the
cable operator the option of prohibiting the transmission of
indecent speech seems a constitutionally permissible means
of addressing that interest.
Nor is the fact that public ac-
cess programming may be subject to supervisory systems in
addition to the cable operator, see ante, at 761–763, sufﬁcient
in my mind to render §10(c) so ill tailored to its goal as to
be unconstitutional.
Given the compelling interest served by §10(c), its permis-
sive nature, and its ﬁt within our precedent, I would hold
§10(c), like §10(a), constitutional.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins,
concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and
dissenting in part.
The plurality opinion, insofar as it upholds §10(a) of the
1992 Cable Act, is adrift.
The opinion treats concepts such
as public forum, broadcaster, and common carrier as mere
labels rather than as categories with settled legal signiﬁ-


[REPORT PAGE 781]
781
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
cance; it applies no standard, and by this omission loses sight
of existing First Amendment doctrine.
When confronted
with a threat to free speech in the context of an emerging
technology, we ought to have the discipline to analyze the
case by reference to existing elaborations of constant First
Amendment principles.
This is the essence of the case-by-
case approach to ensuring protection of speech under the
First Amendment, even in novel settings.
Rather than un-
dertake this task, however, the plurality just declares that,
all things considered, §10(a) seems ﬁne.
I think the implica-
tions of our past cases for these cases are clearer than the
plurality suggests, and they require us to hold §10(a) invalid.
Though I join Part III of the opinion (there for the Court)
striking down §10(b) of the Act, and concur in the judgment
that §10(c) is unconstitutional, with respect I dissent from
the remainder.
I
Two provisions of the 1992 Act, §§10(a) and (c), authorize
the operator of a cable system to exclude certain program-
ming from two different kinds of channels.
Section 10(a)
concerns leased access channels.
These are channels the
cable operator is required by federal law to make available
to unafﬁliated programmers without exercising any control
over program content.
The statute allows a cable operator
to enforce a written and published policy of prohibiting on
these channels any programming it “reasonably believes de-
scribes or depicts sexual or excretory activities or organs in
a patently offensive manner as measured by contemporary
community standards,” speech we can refer to as “indecent
programming.”
Section 10(c) involves public, educational, and governmen-
tal access channels (or PEG access channels, as they are
known).
These are channels set aside for use by members
of the public, governmental authorities, and local school
systems.
As interpreted by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), §10(c) requires the agency to make regu-


[REPORT PAGE 782]
782
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
lations enabling cable operators to prohibit indecent pro-
gramming on PEG access channels.
See ante, at 734–736
(quoting statutory provisions in full and discussing interpre-
tive regulations).*
Though the two provisions differ in signiﬁcant respects,
they have common ﬂaws.
In both instances, Congress sin-
gles out one sort of speech for vulnerability to private cen-
sorship in a context where content-based discrimination is
not otherwise permitted.
The plurality at least recognizes
this as state action, ante, at 737, avoiding the mistake made
by the Court of Appeals, Alliance for Community Media v.
FCC, 56 F. 3d 105, 112–121 (CADC 1995).
State action lies
in the enactment of a statute altering legal relations between
persons, including the selective withdrawal from one group
of legal protections against private acts, regardless of
whether the private acts are attributable to the State.
Cf.
Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U. S. 385, 389–390 (1969) (state ac-
tion under the Fourteenth Amendment).
The plurality balks at taking the next step, however,
which is to advise us what standard it applies to determine
whether the state action conforms to the First Amendment.
Sections 10(a) and (c) disadvantage nonobscene, indecent pro-
gramming, a protected category of expression, Sable Com-
munications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 126 (1989),
on the basis of its content.
The Constitution in general does
not tolerate content-based restriction of, or discrimination
against, speech.
R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 382
(1992) (“Content-based regulations are presumptively in-
valid”); Carey v. Brown, 447 U. S. 455, 461–463 (1980); Police
Dept. of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92, 96 (1972).
In the
*The Telecommunications Act of 1996, §§506(a), (b), 110 Stat. 136, 137,
permits a cable operator to refuse to transmit any leased or public access
program or portion thereof which contains “obscenity, indecency, or nu-
dity.”
The constitutionality of the 1996 amendments, to the extent they
differ from the provisions here, is not before us.


[REPORT PAGE 783]
783
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
realm of speech and expression, the First Amendment envi-
sions the citizen shaping the government, not the reverse; it
removes “governmental restraints from the arena of public
discussion, putting the decision as to what views shall be
voiced largely into the hands of each of us, in the hope that
use of such freedom will ultimately produce a more capable
citizenry and more perfect polity.”
Cohen v. California, 403
U. S. 15, 24 (1971).
“[E]ach person should decide for himself
or herself the ideas and beliefs deserving of expression, con-
sideration, and adherence.
Our political system and cultural
life rest upon this ideal.”
Turner Broadcasting System,
Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 641 (1994).
We therefore have
given “the most exacting scrutiny to regulations that sup-
press, disadvantage, or impose differential burdens upon
speech because of its content.”
Id., at 642.
Sections 10(a) and (c) are unusual.
They do not require
direct action against speech, but do authorize a cable opera-
tor to deny the use of its property to certain forms of speech.
As a general matter, a private person may exclude certain
speakers from his or her property without violating the First
Amendment, Hudgens v. NLRB, 424 U. S. 507 (1976), and if
§§10(a) and (c) were no more than afﬁrmations of this princi-
ple they might be unremarkable.
Access channels, however,
are property of the cable operator, dedicated or otherwise
reserved for programming of other speakers or the govern-
ment.
A public access channel is a public forum, and laws
requiring leased access channels create common-carrier obli-
gations.
When the government identiﬁes certain speech
on the basis of its content as vulnerable to exclusion from
a common carrier or public forum, strict scrutiny applies.
These laws cannot survive this exacting review.
However
compelling Congress’ interest in shielding children from in-
decent programming, the provisions in these cases are not
drawn with enough care to withstand scrutiny under our
precedents.


[REPORT PAGE 784]
784
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
II
Before engaging the complexities of cable access channels
and explaining my reasons for thinking all of §10 unconstitu-
tional, I start with the most disturbing aspect of the plural-
ity opinion: its evasion of any clear legal standard in deciding
these cases.
See ante, at 741 (disavowing need to “declare
which, among the many applications of the general approach
that this Court has developed over the years, we are apply-
ing here”).
The plurality begins its ﬂight from standards with a num-
ber of assertions nobody disputes.
I agree, of course, that
it would be unwise “to declare a rigid single standard, good
for now and for all future media and purposes,” ante, at 742.
I do think it necessary, however, to decide what standard ap-
plies to discrimination against indecent programming on cable
access channels in the present state of the industry.
We owe
at least that much to public and leased access programmers
whose speech is put at risk nationwide by these laws.
In a similar vein, we are admonished, these cases are com-
plicated, not simple; the importance of contextual review, we
are told, cannot be evaded by recourse to simple analogies.
Ante, at 739–743, 748.
All this is true, but use of a standard
does not foreclose consideration of context.
Indeed, if strict
scrutiny is an instance of “judicial formulas so rigid that they
become a straitjacket that disables government from re-
sponding to serious problems,” ante, at 741, this is a grave
indictment of our First Amendment jurisprudence, which re-
lies on strict scrutiny in a number of settings where context
is important.
I have expressed misgivings about judicial
balancing under the First Amendment, see Burson v. Free-
man, 504 U. S. 191, 211–212 (1992) (concurring opinion);
Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State Crime
Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 124–125 (1991) (opinion concur-
ring in judgment), but strict scrutiny at least conﬁnes the
balancing process in a manner protective of speech; it does
not disable government from addressing serious problems,


[REPORT PAGE 785]
785
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
but does ensure that the solutions do not sacriﬁce speech to
a greater extent than necessary.
The plurality claims its resistance to standards is in keep-
ing with our case law, where we have shown a willingness to
be ﬂexible in confronting novel First Amendment problems.
The cases it cites, ante, at 740–741, however, demonstrate
the opposite of what the plurality supposes: In each, we de-
veloped specialized or more or less stringent standards when
certain contexts demanded them; we did not avoid the use of
standards altogether.
Indeed, the creation of standards and
adherence to them, even when it means affording protection
to speech unpopular or distasteful, is the central achieve-
ment of our First Amendment jurisprudence.
Standards
are the means by which we state in advance how to test a
law’s validity, rather than letting the height of the bar be
determined by the apparent exigencies of the day.
They
also provide notice and fair warning to those who must pre-
dict how the courts will respond to attempts to suppress
their speech.
Yet formulations like strict scrutiny, used in
a number of constitutional settings to ensure that the inequi-
ties of the moment are subordinated to commitments made
for the long run, see Simon & Schuster, supra, at 115–116;
Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators’ Assn., 460 U. S.
37, 45 (1983), mean little if they can be watered down when-
ever they seem too strong.
They mean still less if they can
be ignored altogether when considering a case not on all
fours with what we have seen before.
The plurality seems distracted by the many changes in
technology and competition in the cable industry.
See ante,
at 741–742; ante, at 776–777 (Souter, J., concurring).
The
laws challenged here, however, do not retool the structure of
the cable industry or (with the exception of §10(b)) involve
intricate technologies.
The straightforward issue here is
whether the Government can deprive certain speakers, on
the basis of the content of their speech, of protections af-


[REPORT PAGE 786]
786
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
forded all others.
There is no reason to discard our existing
First Amendment jurisprudence in answering this question.
While it protests against standards, the plurality does
seem to favor one formulation of the question in these cases:
namely, whether the Act “properly addresses an extremely
important problem, without imposing, in light of the relevant
interests, an unnecessarily great restriction on speech.”
Ante, at 743.
(Though the plurality frowns on any effort to
settle on a form of words, it likes this formulation well
enough to repeat it; see ante, at 741.)
This description of
the question accomplishes little, save to clutter our First
Amendment case law by adding an untested rule with an
uncertain relationship to the others we use to evaluate laws
restricting speech.
The plurality cannot bring itself to
apply strict scrutiny, yet realizes it cannot decide these cases
without uttering some sort of standard; so it has settled for
synonyms.
“[C]lose judicial scrutiny,” ibid., is substituted
for strict scrutiny, and “extremely important problem,” ante,
at 743, or “extraordinary proble[m],” ante, at 741, is substi-
tuted for “compelling interest.”
The admonition that the re-
striction not be unnecessarily great in light of the interest it
serves, ante, at 743, is substituted for the usual narrow tai-
loring requirements.
All we know about the substitutes is
that they are inferior to their antecedents.
We are told the
Act must be “appropriately tailored,” ante, at 741, “sufﬁ-
ciently tailored,” ante, at 743, or “carefully and appropriately
addressed,” ante, at 748, to the problems at hand—anything,
evidently, except narrowly tailored.
These restatements have unfortunate consequences.
The
ﬁrst is to make principles intended to protect speech easy to
manipulate.
The words end up being a legalistic cover for
an ad hoc balancing of interests; in this respect the plurality
succeeds after all in avoiding the use of a standard.
Second,
the plurality’s exercise in pushing around synonyms for the
words of our usual standards will sow confusion in the courts
bound by our precedents.
Those courts, and lawyers in the


[REPORT PAGE 787]
787
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
communications ﬁeld, now will have to discern what differ-
ence there is between the formulation the plurality applies
today and our usual strict scrutiny.
I can offer little guid-
ance, except to note the unprotective outcome the plurality
reaches here.
This is why comparisons and analogies to
other areas of our First Amendment case law become a re-
sponsibility, rather than the luxury the plurality considers
them to be.
The comparisons provide discipline to the
Court and guidance for others, and give clear content to our
standards—all the things I ﬁnd missing in the plurality’s
opinion.
The novelty and complexity of these cases is a rea-
son to look for help from other areas of our First Amendment
jurisprudence, not a license to wander into uncharted areas
of the law with no compass other than our own opinions
about good policy.
Another troubling aspect of the plurality’s approach is its
suggestion that Congress has more leeway than usual to
enact restrictions on speech where emerging technologies
are concerned, because we are unsure what standard should
be used to assess them.
Justice Souter recommends to
the Court the precept, “ ‘First, do no harm,’ ” ante, at 778.
The question, though, is whether the harm is in sustaining
the law or striking it down.
If the plurality is concerned
about technology’s direction, it ought to begin by allowing
speech, not suppressing it.
We have before us an urgent
claim for relief against content-based discrimination, not a
dry run.
I turn now to the issues presented, and explain why strict
scrutiny is warranted.
III
A
Cable operators deliver programming from four sources:
retransmission of broadcast stations; programming pur-
chased from professional vendors (including national services
like ESPN and Nickelodeon) and delivered by satellite; pro-


[REPORT PAGE 788]
788
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
grams created by the cable operator itself; and access chan-
nels (PEG and leased), the two kinds of programming at
issue here.
See Mueller, Note, Controversial Programming
on Cable Television’s Public Access Channels: The Limits of
Governmental Response, 38 DePaul L. Rev. 1051, 1056–1057
(1989) (hereinafter Mueller).
See also Turner Broadcast-
ing, 512 U. S., at 628–629.
PEG access channels grew out of local initiatives in the
late 1960’s and early 1970’s, before the Federal Government
began regulating cable television.
Mueller 1061.
Local
franchising was the ﬁrst form of cable regulation, arising
from the need of localities to control access to public rights-
of-way and easements and to minimize disruption to trafﬁc
and other public activity from the laying of cable lines.
See
D. Brenner, M. Price, & M. Meyerson, Cable Television and
Other Nonbroadcast Video §3.01[3] (1996) (hereinafter Bren-
ner); Turner Broadcasting, supra, at 628 (“[T]he cable me-
dium may depend for its very existence upon express permis-
sion from local governing authorities”).
A local government
would set up a franchise authority to oversee the cable sys-
tem and to negotiate a franchise agreement specifying the
cable operator’s rights and obligations.
See Brenner §3.01;
§3.01[4] (discussing States where local franchising has now
been displaced by state regulation).
Cf. 47 U. S. C. §522(10)
(deﬁning franchise authority).
A franchise, now mandatory
under federal law except for systems operating without them
prior to 1984, §541(b), is an authorization, akin to a license,
by a franchise authority permitting the construction or oper-
ation of a cable system.
§522(8).
From the early 1970’s on-
ward, franchise authorities began requiring operators to set
aside access channels as a condition of the franchise.
See
Mueller 1061–1062; D. Agosta, C. Rogoff, & A. Norman, The
Participate Report: A Case Study of Public Access Cable
Television in New York State 24 (1990) (hereinafter Agosta),
attached as Exhibit K to Joint Comments for the Alliance for


[REPORT PAGE 789]
789
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
Community Media et al., ﬁled with the FCC under MM
Docket No. 92–258 (hereinafter FCC Record).
The FCC entered the arena in 1972, requiring the cable
companies servicing the country’s largest television markets
to set aside four access channels (one each for public, educa-
tional, governmental, and leased programming) by a date
certain, and to add channel capacity if necessary to meet
the requirement.
Cable Television Report and Order, 36
F. C. C. 2d 141, 189–198 (1972).
See also In re Amendment
of Part 76 of the Commission’s Rules and Regulations Con-
cerning the Cable Television Channel Capacity and Access
Channel Requirements of Section 76.251, 59 F. C. C. 2d 294,
303, 321 (1976) (modifying the 1972 rules).
We struck down
the access rules as beyond the FCC’s authority under the
Communications Act of 1934.
FCC v. Midwest Video Corp.,
440 U. S. 689, 708–709 (1979).
When Congress turned its attention to PEG access chan-
nels in 1984, it recognized that “reasonable third-party ac-
cess to cable systems will mean a wide diversity of informa-
tion sources for the public—the fundamental goal of the First
Amendment—without the need to regulate the content of
programming provided over cable.”
H. R. Rep. No. 98–934,
p. 30 (1984).
It declined, however, to set new federal man-
dates or authorize the FCC to do so.
Since “[a]lmost all re-
cent franchise agreements provide for access by local gov-
ernments, schools, and non-proﬁt and community groups”
over some channels, the 1984 Act instead “continue[d] the
policy of allowing cities to specify in cable franchises that
channel capacity and other facilities be devoted to such
use.”
Ibid.
Section 611 of the Communications Act of 1934, added by
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (1984 Act), au-
thorized local franchise authorities to require cable operators
to set aside channel capacity for PEG access when seeking
new franchises or renewal of old ones.
47 U. S. C. §531(b).


[REPORT PAGE 790]
790
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
Franchise authorities may enforce franchise agreements,
§531(c), but they lack the power to impose requirements
beyond those authorized by federal law, §531(a).
But cf.
§557(a) (grandfathering as valid all pre-1984 franchise agree-
ments for the remainder of their term).
Federal law also
allows a franchise authority to “require adequate assurance
that the cable operator will provide adequate public, educa-
tional, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities,
or ﬁnancial support.”
§541(a)(4)(B).
Prior to the passage
of §10(c) of the 1992 Act, the cable operator, save for imple-
menting provisions of its franchise agreement limiting ob-
scene or otherwise constitutionally unprotected cable pro-
gramming, §544(d), was forbidden any editorial control over
PEG access channels.
47 U. S. C. §531(e) (1988 ed.).
Congress has not, in the 1984 Act or since, deﬁned what
public, educational, or governmental access means or placed
substantive limits on the types of programming on those
channels.
Those tasks are left to franchise agreements, so
long as the channels comport in some sense with the industry
practice to which Congress referred in the statute.
My principal concern is with public access channels (the P
of PEG).
These are the channels open to programming by
members of the public.
Petitioners here include public ac-
cess programmers and viewers who watch their shows.
By
contrast, educational and governmental access channels (the
E and G of PEG) serve other speakers.
Under many fran-
chises, educational channels are controlled by local school
systems, which use them to provide school information and
educational programs.
Governmental access channels are
committed by the cable franchise to the local municipal gov-
ernment, which uses them to distribute information to con-
stituents on public affairs.
Mueller 1065–1066.
No local
governmental entity or school system has petitioned for re-
lief in these cases, and none of the petitioners who are view-
ers has asserted an interest in viewing educational or gov-
ernmental programming or briefed the relevant issues.


[REPORT PAGE 791]
791
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
B
The public access channels established by franchise agree-
ments tend to have certain traits.
They are available at low
or no cost to members of the public, often on a ﬁrst-come,
ﬁrst-served basis.
Brenner §6.04[3][a]–[b], at 6–38.
The
programmer on one of these channels most often has com-
plete control over, as well as liability for, the content of its
show.
Ibid.; Mueller 1064.
The entity managing the tech-
nical aspects of public access, such as scheduling and trans-
mission, is not always the cable operator; it may be the local
government or a third party that runs the access centers,
which are facilities made available for the public to produce
programs and transmit them on the access channels.
Bren-
ner §6.04[7], at 6–48.
Public access channels meet the deﬁnition of a public
forum.
We have recognized two kinds of public fora.
The
ﬁrst and most familiar are traditional public fora, like streets,
sidewalks, and parks, which by custom have long been open
for public assembly and discourse.
Perry, 460 U. S., at 45;
Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization, 307 U. S.
496, 515 (1939) (opinion of Roberts, J.).
“The second cate-
gory of public property is the designated public forum,
whether of a limited or unlimited character—property that
the State has opened for expressive activity by part or all of
the public.”
International Soc. for Krishna Consciousness,
Inc. v. Lee, 505 U. S. 672, 678 (1992).
Public access channels fall in the second category.
Re-
quired by the franchise authority as a condition of the fran-
chise and open to all comers, they are a designated public
forum of unlimited character.
The House Report for the
1984 Act is consistent with this view.
It characterized pub-
lic access channels as “the video equivalent of the speaker’s
soap box or the electronic parallel to the printed leaﬂet.
They provide groups and individuals who generally have
not had access to the electronic media with the opportunity
to become sources of information in the electronic mar-


[REPORT PAGE 792]
792
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
ketplace of ideas.”
H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, supra, at 30.
Public fora do not have to be physical gathering places,
Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S.
819, 830 (1995), nor are they limited to property owned by
the government, Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Ed.
Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 800 (1985).
Indeed, in the major-
ity of jurisdictions, title to some of the most traditional of
public fora, streets and sidewalks, remains in private hands.
10A E. McQuillin, Law of Municipal Corporations §30.32 (3d
ed. 1990); Hague, supra, at 515 (“Wherever the title of
streets and parks may rest, they have immemorially been
held in trust for the use of the public and, time out of mind,
have been used for purposes of assembly, communicating
thoughts between citizens, and discussing public questions”).
Public access channels are analogous; they are public fora
even though they operate over property to which the cable
operator holds title.
It is important to understand that public access channels
are public fora created by local or state governments in the
cable franchise.
Section §10(c) does not, as the Court of Ap-
peals thought, just return rightful First Amendment discre-
tion to the cable operator, see Alliance for Community
Media, 56 F. 3d, at 114.
Cable operators have First Amend-
ment rights, of course; restrictions on entry into the cable
business may be challenged under the First Amendment, Los
Angeles v. Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 U. S. 488,
494 (1986), and a cable operator’s activities in originating
programs or exercising editorial discretion over programs
others provide on its system also are protected, Turner
Broadcasting, 512 U. S., at 636.
But cf. id., at 656 (distin-
guishing discretion of cable operators from that of newspa-
per editors).
Yet the editorial discretion of a cable operator
is a function of the cable franchise it receives from local gov-
ernment.
The operator’s right to exercise any editorial dis-
cretion over cable service disappears if its franchise is ter-
minated.
See 47 U. S. C. §541(b) (cable service may not


[REPORT PAGE 793]
793
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
be offered without a franchise); §546 (prescribing proce-
dures and standards for renewal).
Cf. Brenner §3.07[9][a]
(franchise terms of 15 years are the norm); §3.07[15] (typical
franchise agreements recognize the absolute right of the
franchiser to refuse renewal at expiration of term).
If the
franchise is transferred to another, so is the right of editorial
discretion.
The cable operator may own the cables trans-
mitting the signal, but it is the franchise—the agreement
between the cable operator and the local government—that
allocates some channels to the full discretion of the cable
operator while reserving others for public access.
In providing public access channels under their franchise
agreements, cable operators therefore are not exercising
their own First Amendment rights.
They serve as conduits
for the speech of others.
Cf. PruneYard Shopping Center
v. Robins, 447 U. S. 74, 87 (1980).
Section 10(c) thus restores
no power of editorial discretion over public access channels
that the cable operator once had; the discretion never ex-
isted.
It vests the cable operator with a power under fed-
eral law, deﬁned by reference to the content of speech, to
override the franchise agreement and undercut the public
forum the agreement creates.
By enacting a law in 1992
excluding indecent programming from protection but retain-
ing the prohibition on cable operators’ editorial control over
all other protected speech, the Federal Government at the
same time ratiﬁed the public-forum character of public access
channels but discriminated against certain speech based on
its content.
The plurality refuses to analyze public access channels as
public fora because it is reluctant to decide “the extent to
which private property can be designated a public forum,”
ante, at 742.
We need not decide here any broad issue
whether private property can be declared a public forum by
simple governmental decree.
That is not what happens in
the creation of public access channels.
Rather, in return for
granting cable operators easements to use public rights-of-


[REPORT PAGE 794]
794
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
way for their cable lines, local governments have bargained
for a right to use cable lines for public access channels.
Jus-
tice Thomas resists public-forum analysis because he sees
no evidence of a “formal easement.”
Post, at 828.
Under
general principles of property law, no particular formalities
are necessary to create an easement.
Easements may be
created by contract.
2 G. Thompson, Commentaries on the
Modern Law of Real Property §§331–332 (1980); 3 H. Tif-
fany, The Law of Real Property §776 (3d ed. 1939).
A fran-
chise agreement is a contract, and in those agreements the
cable operator surrenders his power to exclude certain pro-
grammers from use of his property for speciﬁc purposes.
A
state court confronted with the issue would likely hold the
franchise agreement to create a right of access equivalent to
an easement in land.
So one can even view these cases as a
local government’s dedication of its own property interest to
speech by members of the public.
In any event, it seems to
me clear that when a local government contracts to use pri-
vate property for public expressive activity, it creates a pub-
lic forum.
Treating access channels as public fora does not just place
a label on them, as the plurality suggests, see ante, at 750.
It deﬁnes the First Amendment rights of speakers seeking
to use the channels.
When property has been dedicated to
public expressive activities, by tradition or government des-
ignation, access is protected by the First Amendment.
Reg-
ulations of speech content in a designated public forum,
whether of limited or unlimited character, are “subject to
the highest scrutiny” and “survive only if they are narrowly
drawn to achieve a compelling state interest.”
Lee, 505
U. S., at 678.
Unless there are reasons for applying a lesser
standard, §10(c) must satisfy this stringent review.
C
Leased access channels, as distinct from public access
channels, are those the cable operator must set aside for un-


[REPORT PAGE 795]
795
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
afﬁliated programmers who pay to transmit shows of their
own without the cable operator’s creative assistance or edito-
rial approval.
In my view, strict scrutiny also applies to
§10(a)’s authorization to cable operators to exclude indecent
programming from these channels.
Congress created leased access channels in the 1984 Act.
Section 612 of the Act, as amended, requires a cable sys-
tem with more than 36 channels to set aside a certain per-
centage of its channels (up to 15%, depending on the size
of the system) “for commercial use by persons unafﬁliated
with the operator.”
47 U. S. C. §532(b)(1).
Commercial use
means “provision of video programming, whether or not
for proﬁt.”
§532(b)(5).
When an unafﬁliated programmer
seeks access, the cable operator shall set “the price, terms,
and conditions of such use which are at least sufﬁcient to
assure that such use will not adversely affect the operation,
ﬁnancial condition, or market development of the cable sys-
tem,” §532(c)(1).
Cf. 47 CFR §76.971 (1995) (rules govern-
ing terms and conditions of leased access).
The price may
not exceed the maximum charged any unafﬁliated program-
mer in the same program category for the use of nonaccess
channels.
§76.970.
Aggrieved programmers have recourse
to federal district court and the FCC (if there are repeated
violations) to compel access on appropriate terms.
47
U. S. C. §§532(d), (e).
Before 1992, cable operators were forbidden editorial con-
trol over any video programming on leased access channels,
and could not consider the content of the programming ex-
cept to set the price of access, 47 U. S. C. §532(c)(2) (1988
ed.).
But cf. 47 U. S. C. §532(h) (prohibiting programs that
are obscene or otherwise unprotected under the Constitution
on leased access channels).
Section 10(a) of the 1992 Act
modiﬁes the no-discretion rule by allowing cable operators
to reject, pursuant to a written and published policy, pro-
grams they reasonably believe to be indecent.
§532(h).
Under §10(b) of the Act, any indecent programming must be


[REPORT PAGE 796]
796
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
segregated onto one channel and blocked unless the sub-
scriber requests that the channel be provided to him.
§532(j); 47 CFR §76.701 (1995).
Two distinctions between public and leased access chan-
nels are important.
First, whereas public access channels
are required by state and local franchise authorities (subject
to certain federal limitations), leased access channels are
created by federal law.
Second, whereas cable operators
never have had editorial discretion over public access chan-
nels under their franchise agreements, the leased access pro-
visions of the 1984 Act take away channels the operator once
controlled.
Cf. Midwest Video, 440 U. S., at 708, n. 17 (fed-
eral mandates “compelling cable operators indiscriminately
to accept access programming will interfere with their deter-
minations regarding the total service offering to be extended
to subscribers”).
In this sense, §10(a) now gives back to the
operator some of the discretion it had before Congress im-
posed leased access requirements in the ﬁrst place.
The constitutionality under Turner Broadcasting, 512
U. S., at 665–668, of requiring a cable operator to set aside
leased access channels is not before us.
For purposes of
these cases, we should treat the cable operator’s rights in
these channels as extinguished, and address the issue these
petitioners present: namely, whether the Government can
discriminate on the basis of content in affording protection
to certain programmers.
I cannot agree with Justice
Thomas, post, at 821–822, that the cable operator’s rights
inform this analysis.
Laws requiring cable operators to provide leased access
are the practical equivalent of making them common carri-
ers, analogous in this respect to telephone companies: They
are obliged to provide a conduit for the speech of others.
The plurality resists any classiﬁcation of leased access chan-
nels (as created in the 1984 Act) as a common-carrier provi-
sion, ante, at 739–740, although we described in just those


[REPORT PAGE 797]
797
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
terms the access (including leased access) rules promulgated
by the FCC in 1976:
“The access rules plainly impose common-carrier obli-
gations on cable operators.
Under the rules, cable sys-
tems are required to hold out dedicated channels on a
ﬁrst-come, nondiscriminatory basis.
Operators are pro-
hibited from determining or inﬂuencing the content of
access programming.
And the rules delimit what oper-
ators may charge for access and use of equipment.”
Midwest Video, 440 U. S., at 701–702 (citations and foot-
notes omitted).
Indeed, we struck down the FCC’s rules as beyond the
agency’s statutory authority at the time precisely because
they made cable operators common carriers.
Id., at 702–
709.
The FCC characterizes §612 as a form of common-
carrier requirement, App. to Pet. for Cert. 139a–140a, as
does the Government, Brief for Federal Respondents 23.
Section 10(a) authorizes cable operators to ban indecent
programming on leased access channels.
We have held that
a law precluding a common carrier from transmitting pro-
tected speech is subject to strict scrutiny, Sable Communi-
cations, 492 U. S., at 131 (striking down ban on indecent tele-
phonic communications), but we have not had occasion to
consider the standard for reviewing a law, such as §10(a),
permitting a carrier in its discretion to exclude speciﬁed
speech.
Laws removing common-carriage protection from a single
form of speech based on its content should be reviewed under
the same standard as content-based restrictions on speech in
a public forum.
Making a cable operator a common carrier
does not create a public forum in the sense of taking prop-
erty from private control and dedicating it to public use;
rather, regulations of a common carrier dictate the manner
in which private control is exercised.
A common-carriage


[REPORT PAGE 798]
798
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
mandate, nonetheless, serves the same function as a public
forum.
It ensures open, nondiscriminatory access to the
means of communication.
This purpose is evident in the
statute itself and in the committee ﬁndings supporting it.
Congress described the leased access requirements as in-
tended “to promote competition in the delivery of diverse
sources of video programming and to assure that the widest
possible diversity of information sources are made available
to the public from cable systems in a manner consistent with
growth and development of cable systems.”
47 U. S. C.
§532(a).
The House Committee reporting the 1984 cable
bill acknowledged that, in general, market demand would
prompt cable operators to provide diverse programming.
It
recognized, though, the incentives cable operators might
have to exclude “programming which represents a social or
political viewpoint that a cable operator does not wish to
disseminate, or . . . competes with a program service already
being provided by that cable system.”
H. R. Rep. No. 98–
934, at 48.
In its view, the leased access provisions were
narrowly drawn structural regulations of private industry,
cf. Associated Press v. United States, 326 U. S. 1 (1945), to
enhance the free ﬂow and diversity of information available
to the public without governmental intrusion into decisions
about program content.
H. R. Rep. No. 98–934, supra, at
32–35.
The functional equivalence of designating a public
forum and mandating common carriage suggests the same
scrutiny should be applied to attempts in either setting to
impose content discrimination by law.
Under our prece-
dents, the scrutiny is strict.
“The Constitution forbids a State to enforce certain ex-
clusions from a forum generally open to the public even
if it was not required to create the forum in the ﬁrst
place.
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U. S. 263 (1981) (univer-
sity meeting facilities); City of Madison Joint School
District v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm’n,
429 U. S. 167 (1976) (school board meeting); Southeast-


[REPORT PAGE 799]
799
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
ern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U. S. 546 (1975)
(municipal theater).
Although a State is not required
to indeﬁnitely retain the open character of the facility,
as long as it does so it is bound by the same standards
as apply in a traditional public forum.
Reasonable time,
place, and manner regulations are permissible, and a
content-based prohibition must be narrowly drawn to ef-
fectuate a compelling state interest.”
Perry, 460 U. S.,
at 45–46 (footnote omitted).
In Police Dept. of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92 (1972),
we made clear that selective exclusions from a public forum
were unconstitutional.
Invoking the First and Fourteenth
Amendments to strike down a city ordinance allowing only
labor picketing on any public way near schools, we held the
“government may not grant the use of a forum to people
whose views it ﬁnds acceptable, but deny use to those wish-
ing to express less favored or more controversial views.”
Id., at 96.
“Once a forum is opened up to assembly or speaking by
some groups, government may not prohibit others from
assembling or speaking on the basis of what they intend
to say.
Selective exclusions from a public forum may
not be based on content alone, and may not be justiﬁed
by reference to content alone.”
Ibid.
Since the same standard applies to exclusions from limited
or unlimited designated public fora as from traditional
forums, Lee, 505 U. S., at 678, there is no reason the kind of
selective exclusion we condemned in Mosley should be toler-
ated here.
The plurality acknowledges content-based exclusions from
the right to use a common carrier could violate the First
Amendment.
It tells us, however, that it is wary of analo-
gies to doctrines developed elsewhere, and so does not ad-
dress this issue.
Ante, at 749.
This newfound aversion to
analogical reasoning strikes at a process basic to legal analy-


[REPORT PAGE 800]
800
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
sis.
See E. Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning 1–2
(1949).
I am not suggesting the plurality should look far
aﬁeld to other areas of law; these are settled First Amend-
ment doctrines dealing with state action depriving certain
speakers of protections afforded to all others.
In all events, the plurality’s unwillingness to consider our
public-forum precedents does not relieve it of the burden of
explaining why strict scrutiny should not apply.
Except in
instances involving well-settled categories of proscribable
speech, see R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 382–390, strict scrutiny is
the baseline rule for reviewing any content-based discrimi-
nation against speech.
The purpose of forum analysis is to
determine whether, because of the property or medium
where speech takes place, there should be any dispensation
from this rule.
See Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y. v. Pub-
lic Service Comm’n of N. Y., 447 U. S. 530, 538–539 (1980).
In the context of government property, we have recognized
an exception “[w]here the government is acting as a proprie-
tor, managing its internal operations, rather than acting as
lawmaker with the power to regulate or license,” and in
those circumstances, we have said, regulations of speech
need only be reasonable and viewpoint neutral.
Lee, supra,
at 678–679.
Here, of course, the Government has not dedi-
cated the cable operator’s property for leased access to serve
some proprietary function of its own; it has done so to pro-
vide a forum for a vital class of programmers who otherwise
would be excluded from cable television.
The question remains whether a dispensation from strict
scrutiny might be appropriate because §10(a) restores in
part an editorial discretion once exercised by the cable oper-
ator over speech occurring on its property.
This is where
public-forum doctrine gives guidance.
Common-carrier re-
quirements of leased access are little different in function
from designated public fora, and no different standard of
review should apply.
It is not that the functional equiv-
alence of leased access channels to designated public fora


[REPORT PAGE 801]
801
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
compels strict scrutiny; rather, it simply militates against
recognizing an exception to the normal rule.
Perhaps, as the plurality suggests, ante, at 749–750, §10(a)
should be treated as a limitation on a forum rather than an
exclusion from it.
This would not change the analysis, how-
ever.
If Government has a freer hand to draw content-
based distinctions in limiting a forum than in excluding
someone from it, the First Amendment would be a dead
letter in designated public fora; every exclusion could be
recast as a limitation.
See Post, Between Governance and
Management: the History and Theory of the Public Forum,
34 UCLA L. Rev. 1713, 1753 (1987).
We have allowed
content-based limitations of public fora, but only when neces-
sary to serve speciﬁc institutional ends.
See Perry, 460
U. S., at 48 (school mailboxes, if considered designated public
fora, could be limited to mailings from “organizations that
engage in activities of interest and educational relevance to
students”); Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U. S. 263, 267–268, n. 5
(1981) (recognizing a public university could limit the use of
its facilities by reasonable regulations compatible with its
mission of education); Madison Joint School Dist. No. 8 v.
Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm’n, 429 U. S. 167,
175, n. 8 (1976) (in assessing a teacher’s right to speak at a
school board meeting, considering it obvious that “public
bodies may conﬁne their meetings to speciﬁed subject mat-
ter”).
The power to limit or redeﬁne fora for a speciﬁc legit-
imate purpose, see Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 829–830, does
not allow the government to exclude certain speech or speak-
ers from them for any reason at all.
Madison Joint School Dist., supra, illustrates the point.
The Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission had or-
dered a school board to prohibit school employees other than
union representatives from speaking at its meetings on mat-
ters subject to collective bargaining between the board and
the union.
Id., at 173.
While recognizing the power of a
State to limit school board meetings to certain subject mat-


[REPORT PAGE 802]
802
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
ter, we held it could not conﬁne the forum “to one category
of interested individuals.”
Id., at 175.
The exclusion would
skew the debate and deprive decisionmakers of the beneﬁt
of other voices.
Id., at 175–176.
It is no answer to say Congress does not have to create
access channels at all, so it may limit access as it pleases.
Whether or not a government has any obligation to make
railroads common carriers, under the Equal Protection
Clause it could not deﬁne common carriage in ways that dis-
criminate against suspect classes.
See Bailey v. Patterson,
369 U. S. 31, 33 (1962) (per curiam) (States may not require
railroads to segregate the races).
For the same reason, even
if Congress has no obligation to impose common-carriage
rules on cable operators or retain them forever, it is not at
liberty to exclude certain forms of speech from their protec-
tion on the suspect basis of content.
See Perry, supra, at
45–46.
I do not foreclose the possibility that the Government
could create a forum limited to certain topics or to serving
the special needs of certain speakers or audiences without
its actions being subject to strict scrutiny.
This possibility
seems to trouble the plurality, which wonders if a local gov-
ernment must “show a compelling state interest if it builds
a band shell in the park and dedicates it solely to classical
music (but not to jazz).”
Ante, at 750.
This is not the cor-
rect analogy.
These cases are more akin to the Govern-
ment’s creation of a band shell in which all types of music
might be performed except for rap music.
The provisions
here are content-based discriminations in the strong sense of
suppressing a certain form of expression that the Govern-
ment dislikes or otherwise wishes to exclude on account of
its effects, and there is no justiﬁcation for anything but strict
scrutiny here.
Giving government free rein to exclude speech it dislikes
by delimiting public fora (or common-carriage provisions)
would have pernicious effects in the modern age.
Minds are


[REPORT PAGE 803]
803
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
not changed in streets and parks as they once were.
To an
increasing degree, the more signiﬁcant interchanges of ideas
and shaping of public consciousness occur in mass and elec-
tronic media.
Cf. United States v. Kokinda, 497 U. S. 720,
737 (1990) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment).
The ex-
tent of public entitlement to participate in those means of
communication may be changed as technologies change; and
in expanding those entitlements the Government has no
greater right to discriminate on suspect grounds than it does
when it effects a ban on speech against the backdrop of the
entitlements to which we have been more accustomed.
It
contravenes the First Amendment to give Government a
general license to single out some categories of speech for
lesser protection so long as it stops short of viewpoint
discrimination.
D
The Government advances a different argument for not
applying strict scrutiny in these cases.
The nature of access
channels to one side, it argues the nature of the speech in
question—indecent broadcast (or cablecast)—is subject to
the lower standard of review it contends was applied in FCC
v. Paciﬁca Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, 748 (1978) (upholding
an FCC order declaring the radio broadcast of indecent
speech during daytime hours to be sanctionable).
Paciﬁca did not purport, however, to apply a special stand-
ard for indecent broadcasting.
Emphasizing the narrowness
of its holding, the Court in Paciﬁca conducted a context-
speciﬁc analysis of the FCC’s restriction on indecent pro-
gramming during daytime hours.
See id., at 750.
See also
Sable Communications, 492 U. S., at 127–128 (underscoring
the narrowness of Paciﬁca).
It relied on the general rule
that “broadcasting . . . has received the most limited First
Amendment protection.”
438 U. S., at 748.
We already
have rejected the application of this lower broadcast stand-
ard of review to infringements on the liberties of cable opera-
tors, even though they control an important communica-


[REPORT PAGE 804]
804
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
tions medium.
Turner Broadcasting, 512 U. S., at 637–641.
There is even less cause for a lower standard here.
Paciﬁca did identify two important considerations rele-
vant to the broadcast of objectionable material.
First, inde-
cent broadcasting “confronts the citizen, not only in public,
but also in the privacy of the home, where the individual’s
right to be left alone plainly outweighs the First Amendment
rights of an intruder.”
438 U. S., at 748.
Second, “broad-
casting is uniquely accessible to children, even those too
young to read.”
Id., at 749.
Paciﬁca teaches that access
channels, even if analogous to ordinary public fora from the
standpoint of the programmer, must also be considered from
the standpoint of the viewer.
An access channel is not a
forum conﬁned to a discrete public space; it can bring in-
decent expression into the home of every cable subscriber,
where children spend astounding amounts of time watching
television, cf. ante, at 744–745 (citing studies).
Though in
Cohen we explained that people in public areas may have to
avert their eyes from messages that offend them, 403 U. S.,
at 21, we further acknowledged that “government may prop-
erly act in many situations to prohibit intrusion into the pri-
vacy of the home of unwelcome views and ideas which cannot
be totally banned from the public dialogue,” ibid.
See Hess
v. Indiana, 414 U. S. 105, 108 (1973) (per curiam); Rowan v.
Post Ofﬁce Dept., 397 U. S. 728, 736–738 (1970).
This is more
true when the interests of children are at stake.
See id., at
738 (“[T]he householder [should not] have to risk that offen-
sive material come into the hands of his children before it
can be stopped”).
These concerns are weighty and will be relevant to
whether the law passes strict scrutiny.
They do not justify,
however, a blanket rule of lesser protection for indecent
speech.
Other than the few categories of expression that
can be proscribed, see R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 382–390, we
have been reluctant to mark off new categories of speech for
diminished constitutional protection.
Our hesitancy reﬂects


[REPORT PAGE 805]
805
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
skepticism about the possibility of courts drawing principled
distinctions to use in judging governmental restrictions on
speech and ideas, Cohen, 403 U. S., at 25, a concern height-
ened here by the inextricability of indecency from expres-
sion.
“[W]e cannot indulge the facile assumption that one
can forbid particular words without also running a substan-
tial risk of suppressing ideas in the process.”
Id., at 26.
The same is true of forbidding programs indecent in some
respect.
In artistic or political settings, indecency may have
strong communicative content, protesting conventional
norms or giving an edge to a work by conveying “otherwise
inexpressible emotions.”
Ibid.
In scientiﬁc programs, the
more graphic the depiction (even if to the point of offensive-
ness), the more accurate and comprehensive the portrayal of
the truth may be.
Indecency often is inseparable from the
ideas and viewpoints conveyed, or separable only with loss
of truth or expressive power.
Under our traditional First
Amendment jurisprudence, factors perhaps justifying some
restriction on indecent cable programming may all be taken
into account without derogating this category of protected
speech as marginal.
IV
At a minimum, the proper standard for reviewing §§10(a)
and (c) is strict scrutiny.
The plurality gives no reason why
it should be otherwise.
I would hold these enactments un-
constitutional because they are not narrowly tailored to
serve a compelling interest.
The Government has no compelling interest in restoring a
cable operator’s First Amendment right of editorial discre-
tion.
As to §10(c), Congress has no interest at all, since
under most franchises operators had no rights of editorial
discretion over PEG access channels in the ﬁrst place.
As
to §10(a), any governmental interest in restoring operator
discretion over indecent programming on leased access chan-
nels is too minimal to justify the law.
First, the transmis-
sion of indecent programming over leased access channels


[REPORT PAGE 806]
806
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
is not forced speech of the operator.
Turner Broadcasting,
supra, at 655–656; PruneYard, 447 U. S., at 87.
Second, the
discretion conferred by the law is slight.
The operator is
not authorized to place programs of its own liking on the
leased access channels, nor to remove other speech (racist or
violent, for example) that might be offensive to it or to view-
ers.
The operator is just given a veto over the one kind of
lawful speech Congress disdains.
Congress does have, however, a compelling interest in pro-
tecting children from indecent speech.
Sable Communica-
tions, 492 U. S., at 126; Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629,
639–640 (1968). See also Paciﬁca, 438 U. S., at 749–750
(same).
So long as society gives proper respect to parental
choices, it may, under an appropriate standard, intervene to
spare children exposure to material not suitable for minors.
This interest is substantial enough to justify some regulation
of indecent speech even under, I will assume, the indecency
standard used here.
Sections 10(a) and (c) nonetheless are not narrowly tailored
to protect children from indecent programs on access chan-
nels.
First, to the extent some operators may allow inde-
cent programming, children in localities those operators
serve will be left unprotected.
Partial service of a compel-
ling interest is not narrow tailoring.
FCC v. League of
Women Voters of Cal., 468 U. S. 364, 396 (1984) (asserted
interest in keeping noncommercial stations free from contro-
versial or partisan opinions not served by ban on station
editorials, if such opinions could be aired through other pro-
gramming); Florida Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S. 524, 540–541
(1989) (selective ban on publication of rape victim’s name
in some media but not others not narrowly tailored).
Cf.
Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products Corp., 463 U. S. 60, 73
(1983) (restriction that “provides only the most limited incre-
mental support for the interest asserted” cannot pass muster
under commercial-speech standards).
Put another way, the


[REPORT PAGE 807]
807
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
interest in protecting children from indecency only at the
caprice of the cable operator is not compelling.
Perhaps
Congress drafted the law this way to avoid the clear consti-
tutional difﬁculties of banning indecent speech from access
channels, but the First Amendment does not permit this sort
of ill ﬁt between a law restricting speech and the interest it
is said to serve.
Second, to the extent cable operators prohibit indecent
programming on access channels, not only children but adults
will be deprived of it.
The Government may not “reduce
the adult population . . . to [viewing] only what is ﬁt for
children.”
Butler v. Michigan, 352 U. S. 380, 383 (1957).
It
matters not that indecent programming might be available
on the operator’s other channels.
The Government has no
legitimate interest in making access channels pristine.
A
block-and-segregate requirement similar to §10(b), but with-
out its constitutional inﬁrmity of requiring persons to place
themselves on a list to receive programming, see ante, at
756–757, protects children with far less intrusion on the lib-
erties of programmers and adult viewers than allowing cable
operators to ban indecent programming from access channels
altogether.
When applying strict scrutiny, we will not as-
sume plausible alternatives will fail to protect compelling in-
terests; there must be some basis in the record, in legislative
ﬁndings or otherwise, establishing the law enacted as the
least restrictive means.
Sable Communications, supra, at
128–130.
Cf. Turner Broadcasting, 512 U. S., at 664–668.
There is none here.
Sections 10(a) and (c) present a classic case of discrimina-
tion against speech based on its content.
There are legiti-
mate reasons why the Government might wish to regulate
or even restrict the speech at issue here, but §§10(a) and (c)
are not drawn to address those reasons with the precision
the First Amendment requires.


[REPORT PAGE 808]
808
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
V
Not only does the plurality fail to apply strict scrutiny, but
its reasoning is unpersuasive on its own terms.
The plurality declares §10(c) unconstitutional because it
interferes with local supervisory systems that “can set pro-
gramming policy and approve or disapprove particular pro-
gramming services.”
Ante, at 762.
Replacing these local
schemes with a cable operator veto would, in the plurality’s
view, “greatly increase the risk that certain categories of
programming (say, borderline offensive programs) will not
appear,” ante, at 766.
Although the plurality terms these
local schemes “public/nonproﬁt programming control sys-
tems,” ante, at 763, it does not contend (nor does the record
suggest) that any local board or access center has the author-
ity to exclude indecent programming, or to do anything that
would cast doubt on the status of public access channels
as public fora.
Cf. Agosta 88 (New York state law forbids
editorial control over public access programs by either the
cable operator or the municipality); Comments of Hills-
borough County Board of County Commissioners 2, FCC
Record (explaining county’s inability to exclude indecent pro-
gramming).
Indeed, “[m]ost access centers surveyed do not
prescreen at all, except, as in [two named localities], a high
speed run-through for technical quality.”
P. Aufderheide,
Public Access Cable Programming, Controversial Speech,
and Free Expression (1992), reprinted in App. 61, 68.
As
the plurality acknowledges, the record indicates no response
to indecent programming by local access centers (whether
they prescreen or not) other than “requiring indemniﬁcation
by programmers, certiﬁcation of compliance with local stand-
ards, time segregation, [and] adult content advisories,” ante,
at 762.
Those are measures that, if challenged, would likely
survive strict scrutiny as narrowly tailored to safeguard
children.
If those measures, in the words of the plurality,
“normally avoid, minimize, or eliminate any child-related


[REPORT PAGE 809]
809
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
problems concerning ‘patently offensive’ programming” on
public access channels, ante, at 763–764, one is left to wonder
why the cable operator veto over leased access programming
authorized in §10(a) is constitutional even under the plural-
ity’s First Amendment analysis.
Although I concur in its
judgment that §10(c) is invalid, I cannot agree with the plu-
rality’s reasoning.
In regard to §10(a), the plurality’s analysis there under-
mines its claims of faithfulness to our First Amendment
jurisprudence and close attention to context.
First, the plurality places some weight on there being
“nothing to stop ‘adults who feel the need’ from ﬁnding [inde-
cent] programming elsewhere, say, on tape or in theaters,”
or on competitive services like direct broadcast television,
ante, at 745.
The availability of alternative channels of com-
munication may be relevant when we are assessing content-
neutral time, place, and manner restrictions, Ward v. Rock
Against Racism, 491 U. S. 781, 791, 802 (1989), but the fact
that speech can occur elsewhere cannot justify a content-
based restriction, Southeastern Promotions, 420 U. S., at
556; Schneider v. State (Town of Irvington), 308 U. S. 147,
163 (1939).
Second, the plurality suggests the permissive nature of
§10(a) at least does not create the same risk of exclusion as
a total ban on indecency.
Ante, at 745–746.
This states the
obvious, but the possibility the Government could have im-
posed more draconian limitations on speech never has justi-
ﬁed a lesser abridgment.
Indeed, such an argument almost
always is available; few of our First Amendment cases in-
volve outright bans on speech.
See, e. g., Forsyth County v.
Nationalist Movement, 505 U. S. 123, 130–137 (1992) (broad
discretion of county administrator to award parade permits
and to adjust permit fee according to content of speech vio-
lates First Amendment); Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan,
372 U. S. 58 (1963) (informal threats to recommend crimi-
nal prosecutions and other pressure tactics by state moral-


[REPORT PAGE 810]
810
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
ity commission against book publishers violate the First
Amendment).
Third, based on its own factual speculations, the plurality
discounts the risks created by the law that operators will not
run indecent programming on access channels.
The plural-
ity takes “a glance at the programming that cable operators
allow on their own (nonaccess) channels,” and, espying some
indecent programming there, supposes some cable operators
may be willing to allow similar programs on leased access
channels.
Ante, at 746.
This sort of surmise, giving the
Government the beneﬁt of the doubt when it restricts
speech, is an unusual approach to the First Amendment, to
put it mildly.
Worse, it ignores evidence of industry struc-
ture that should cast doubt on the plurality’s sanguine view
of the probable fate of programming considered “indecent”
under §10(a).
The plurality fails to note that, aside from
the indecency provisions of §10 tacked on in a Senate ﬂoor
amendment, the 1992 Act strengthened the regulation of
leased access channels because it was feared cable operators
would exercise their substantial market power to exclude
disfavored programmers.
The congressional ﬁndings in the
statute and the conclusions of the Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation after more than two
years of hearings on the cable market, see S. Rep. No. 102–
92, pp. 3–4 (1991), are instructive.
Leased access channels
had been underused since their inception in 1984, the Senate
Committee determined.
Id., at 30.
Though it recognized
the adverse economics of leased access for programmers may
have been one reason for the underutilization, the Commit-
tee found the obstinacy of cable operators and their control
over prices, terms, and conditions also were to blame.
Id.,
at 31.
“The cable operator is almost certain to have interests
that clash with that of the programmer seeking to use
leased access channels.
If their interests were similar,
the operator would have been more than willing to carry


[REPORT PAGE 811]
811
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
the programmer on regular cable channels.
The opera-
tor thus has already decided for any number of reasons
not to carry the programmer.
For example, the opera-
tor may believe that the programmer might compete
with programming that the [operator] owns or controls.
To permit the operator to establish the leased access
rate thus makes little sense.”
Ibid.
Perhaps some operators will choose to show the indecent
programming they now may banish if they can command a
better price than other access programmers are willing to
pay.
In the main, however, leased access programs are the
ones the cable operator, for competitive reasons or other-
wise, has no interest in showing.
And because the cable op-
erator may put to his own commercial use any leased access
capacity not taken by unafﬁliated programmers, 47 U. S. C.
§532(b)(4), operators have little incentive to allow indecent
programming if they have excess capacity on leased access
channels.
There is even less reason to think cable operators will
choose to show indecent programs on public access channels.
The operator is not paid, or paid much, for transmitting pro-
grams on these channels; public access programs may com-
pete with the operator’s own programs; the operator will
wish to avoid unwanted controversy; and here, as with leased
access channels, the operator may reclaim unused PEG ca-
pacity for its own paid use, 47 U. S. C. §531(d)(1).
In the 1992 Act, Congress recognized cable operators
might want to exclude unafﬁliated or otherwise disfavored
programmers from their channels, but it granted operators
discretion to do so in regard to but a single category of
speech.
The obvious consequence invited by the discretion
is exclusion.
I am not sure why the plurality would suppose
otherwise, or contend the practical consequences of §10(a)
would be no worse for programmers than those ﬂowing from
the sort of time-segregation requirement approved in Pa-
ciﬁca.
See ante, at 746–747.
Despite its claim of making


[REPORT PAGE 812]
812
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
“a more contextual assessment” of these cases, ante, at 748,
the plurality ignores a key difference of these cases from
Paciﬁca.
There, the broadcaster wanted to air the speech
in question; here, the cable operator does not.
So the safe
harbor of late-night programming permitted by the FCC in
Paciﬁca would likely promote speech, whereas suppression
will follow from §10(a).
VI
In agreement with the plurality’s analysis of §10(b) of the
Act, insofar as it applies strict scrutiny, I join Part III of its
opinion.
Its position there, however, cannot be reconciled
with upholding §10(a).
In the plurality’s view, §10(b), which
standing alone would guarantee an indecent programmer
some access to a cable audience, violates the First Amend-
ment, but §10(a), which authorizes exclusion of indecent pro-
gramming from access channels altogether, does not.
There
is little to commend this logic or result.
I dissent from the
judgment of the Court insofar as it upholds the constitution-
ality of §10(a).
Justice Thomas, joined by The Chief Justice and
Justice Scalia, concurring in the judgment in part and
dissenting in part.
I agree with the principal opinion’s conclusion that §10(a)
is constitutionally permissible, but I disagree with its conclu-
sion that §§10(b) and (c) violate the First Amendment.
For
many years, we have failed to articulate how, and to what
extent, the First Amendment protects cable operators, pro-
grammers, and viewers from state and federal regulation.
I
think it is time we did so, and I cannot go along with Justice
Breyer’s assiduous attempts to avoid addressing that
issue openly.
I
The text of the First Amendment makes no distinctions
among print, broadcast, and cable media, but we have done
so.
In Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S. 367


[REPORT PAGE 813]
813
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
(1969), we held that, in light of the scarcity of broadcasting
frequencies, the Government may require a broadcast li-
censee “to share his frequency with others and to conduct
himself as a proxy or ﬁduciary with obligations to present
those views and voices which are representative of his com-
munity and which would otherwise, by necessity, be barred
from the airwaves.”
Id., at 389.
We thus endowed the pub-
lic with a right of access “to social, political, esthetic, moral,
and other ideas and experiences.”
Id., at 390.
That public
right left broadcasters with substantial, but not complete,
First Amendment protection of their editorial discretion.
See, e. g., Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Demo-
cratic National Committee, 412 U. S. 94, 117–118 (1973) (“A
broadcast licensee has a large measure of journalistic free-
dom but not as large as that exercised by a newspaper”).
In contrast, we have not permitted that level of govern-
ment interference in the context of the print media.
In
Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241
(1974), for instance, we invalidated a Florida statute that re-
quired newspapers to allow, free of charge, a right of reply
to political candidates whose personal or professional charac-
ter the paper assailed.
We rejected the claim that the stat-
ute was constitutional because it fostered speech rather than
restricted it, as well as a related claim that the newspaper
could permissibly be made to serve as a public forum.
Id.,
at 256–258.
We also ﬂatly rejected the argument that the
newspaper’s alleged media monopoly could justify forcing
the paper to speak in contravention of its own editorial dis-
cretion.
Id., at 256.
Our First Amendment distinctions between media, dubi-
ous from their infancy,1 placed cable in a doctrinal wasteland
in which regulators and cable operators alike could not be
sure whether cable was entitled to the substantial First
Amendment protections afforded the print media or was
1 See Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 638, and
n. 5 (1994).


[REPORT PAGE 814]
814
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
subject to the more onerous obligations shouldered by the
broadcast media.
See Los Angeles v. Preferred Communi-
cations, Inc., 476 U. S. 488, 496 (1986) (Blackmun, J., concur-
ring) (“In assessing First Amendment claims concerning
cable access, the Court must determine whether the charac-
teristics of cable television make it sufﬁciently analogous to
another medium to warrant application of an already existing
standard or whether those characteristics require a new
analysis”).
Over time, however, we have drawn closer to
recognizing that cable operators should enjoy the same First
Amendment rights as the nonbroadcast media.
Our ﬁrst ventures into the world of cable regulation in-
volved no claims arising under the First Amendment, and
we addressed only the regulatory authority of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) over cable operators.2
Only in later cases did we begin to address the level of First
Amendment protection applicable to cable operators.
In
Preferred Communications, for instance, when a cable oper-
ator challenged the city of Los Angeles’ auction process for
a single cable franchise, we held that the cable operator had
stated a First Amendment claim upon which relief could be
granted.
Id., at 493.
We noted that cable operators com-
municate various topics “through original programming or
by exercising editorial discretion over which stations or pro-
grams to include in [their] repertoire.”
Id., at 494.
Cf.
FCC v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U. S. 689, 707 (1979) (Mid-
west Video II) (“Cable operators now share with broadcast-
ers a signiﬁcant amount of editorial discretion regarding
what their programming will include”).
But we then lik-
2 See United States v. Southwestern Cable Co., 392 U. S. 157 (1968);
United States v. Midwest Video Corp., 406 U. S. 649 (1972) (Midwest Video
I).
Our decisions in Southwestern Cable and Midwest Video I were
purely regulatory and gave no indication whether, or to what extent, cable
operators were protected by the First Amendment.


[REPORT PAGE 815]
815
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
ened the operators’ First Amendment interests to those of
broadcasters subject to Red Lion’s right of access require-
ment.
476 U. S., at 494–495.
Five years later, in Leathers v. Medlock, 499 U. S. 439
(1991), we dropped any reference to the relaxed scrutiny
permitted by Red Lion.
Arkansas had subjected cable
operators to the State’s general sales tax, while continuing
to exempt newspapers, magazines, and scrambled satellite
broadcast television.
Cable operators, among others, chal-
lenged the tax on First Amendment grounds, arguing that
the State could not discriminatorily apply the tax to some,
but not all, members of the press.
Though we ultimately
upheld the tax scheme because it was not content based, we
agreed with the operators that they enjoyed the protection
of the First Amendment.
We found that cable operators
engage in speech by providing news, information, and en-
tertainment to their subscribers and that they are “part
of the ‘press.’ ”
499 U. S., at 444.
Two Terms ago, in Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v.
FCC, 512 U. S. 622 (1994), we stated expressly what we had
implied in Leathers: The Red Lion standard does not apply
to cable television.
512 U. S., at 637 (“[T]he rationale for
applying a less rigorous standard of First Amendment scru-
tiny to broadcast regulation . . . does not apply in the context
of cable regulation”); id., at 639 (“[A]pplication of the more
relaxed standard of scrutiny adopted in Red Lion and the
other broadcast cases is inapt when determining the First
Amendment validity of cable regulation”).
While Members
of the Court disagreed about whether the must-carry rules
imposed by Congress were content based, and therefore sub-
ject to strict scrutiny, there was agreement that cable opera-
tors are generally entitled to much the same First Amend-
ment protection as the print media.
But see id., at 670
(Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)
(“Cable operators’ control of essential facilities provides a


[REPORT PAGE 816]
816
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
basis for intrusive regulation that would be inappropriate
and perhaps impermissible for other communicative media”).
In Turner, by adopting much of the print paradigm, and
by rejecting Red Lion, we adopted with it a considerable
body of precedent that governs the respective First Amend-
ment rights of competing speakers.
In Red Lion, we had
legitimized consideration of the public interest and empha-
sized the rights of viewers, at least in the abstract.
Under
that view, “[i]t is the right of the viewers and listeners, not
the right of the broadcasters, which is paramount.”
395
U. S., at 390.
After Turner, however, that view can no
longer be given any credence in the cable context.
It is the
operator’s right that is preeminent.
If Tornillo and Paciﬁc
Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util. Comm’n of Cal., 475 U. S. 1
(1986), are applicable, and I think they are, see Turner,
supra, at 681–682 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and dis-
senting in part), then, when there is a conﬂict, a program-
mer’s asserted right to transmit over an operator’s cable sys-
tem must give way to the operator’s editorial discretion.
Drawing an analogy to the print media, for example, the au-
thor of a book is protected in writing the book, but has no
right to have the book sold in a particular bookstore without
the store owner’s consent.
Nor can government force the
editor of a collection of essays to print other essays on the
same subject.
The Court in Turner found that the FCC’s must-carry
rules implicated the First Amendment rights of both cable
operators and cable programmers.
The rules interfered
with the operators’ editorial discretion by forcing them to
carry broadcast programming that they might not otherwise
carry, and they interfered with the programmers’ ability to
compete for space on the operators’ channels.
512 U. S., at
636–637; id., at 675–676 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part
and dissenting in part).
We implicitly recognized in Turner
that the programmer’s right to compete for channel space


[REPORT PAGE 817]
817
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
is derivative of, and subordinate to, the operator’s editorial
discretion.
Like a freelance writer seeking a paper in which
to publish newspaper editorials, a programmer is protected
in searching for an outlet for cable programming, but has no
freestanding First Amendment right to have that program-
ming transmitted.
Cf. Miami Herald Publishing Co. v.
Tornillo, 418 U. S., at 256–258.
Likewise, the rights of
would-be viewers are derivative of the speech rights of oper-
ators and programmers.
Cf. Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy v.
Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U. S. 748,
756–757 (1976) (“Freedom of speech presupposes a willing
speaker.
But where a speaker exists, . . . the protection
afforded is to the communication, to its source and to its re-
cipients both”).
Viewers have a general right to see what a
willing operator transmits, but, under Tornillo and Paciﬁc
Gas, they certainly have no right to force an unwilling opera-
tor to speak.
By recognizing the general primacy of the cable operator’s
editorial rights over the rights of programmers and viewers,
Turner raises serious questions about the merits of petition-
ers’ claims.
None of the petitioners in these cases are cable
operators; they are all cable viewers or access programmers
or their representative organizations.
See Brief for Peti-
tioners in No. 95–124, pp. 5–6; Brief for Petitioners New
York Citizens Committee for Responsible Media et al. in No.
95–227, p. 3; Brief for Petitioners Alliance for Community
Media et al. in No. 95–227, p. 3.
It is not intuitively obvious
that the First Amendment protects the interests petitioners
assert, and neither petitioners nor the plurality have ade-
quately explained the source or justiﬁcation of those as-
serted rights.
Justice Breyer’s detailed explanation of why he believes
it is “unwise and unnecessary,” ante, at 742, to choose a
standard against which to measure petitioners’ First Amend-
ment claims largely disregards our recent attempt in Turner


[REPORT PAGE 818]
818
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
to deﬁne that standard.3
His attempt to distinguish Turner
on the ground that it did not involve “the effects of television
viewing on children,” ante, at 748, is meaningless because
that factual distinction has no bearing on the existence and
ordering of the free speech rights asserted in these cases.
In the process of deciding not to decide on a governing
standard, Justice Breyer purports to discover in our cases
an expansive, general principle permitting government to
“directly regulate speech to address extraordinary problems,
where its regulations are appropriately tailored to resolve
those problems without imposing an unnecessarily great re-
striction on speech.”
Ante, at 741.
This heretofore un-
known standard is facially subjective and openly invites bal-
ancing of asserted speech interests to a degree not ordinarily
permitted.
It is true that the standard I endorse lacks the
“ﬂexibility” inherent in the plurality’s balancing approach,
ante, at 740, but that relative rigidity is required by our
precedents and is not of my own making.
In any event, even if the plurality’s balancing test were an
appropriate standard, it could only be applied to protect
speech interests that, under the circumstances, are them-
selves protected by the First Amendment.
But, by shifting
the focus to the balancing of “complex” interests, ante, at
743, Justice Breyer never explains whether (and if so,
how) a programmer’s ordinarily unprotected interest in af-
ﬁrmative transmission of its programming acquires constitu-
tional signiﬁcance on leased and public access channels.
See
3 Curiously, the plurality relies on “changes taking place in the law, the
technology, and the industrial structure related to telecommunications,”
ante, at 742, to justify its avoidance of traditional First Amendment stand-
ards.
If anything, as the plurality recognizes, ante, at 745, those recent
developments—which include the growth of satellite broadcast program-
ming and the coming inﬂux of video dialtone services—suggest that local
cable operators have little or no monopoly power and create no program-
ming bottleneck problems, thus effectively negating the primary justiﬁca-
tions for treating cable operators differently from other First Amend-
ment speakers.


[REPORT PAGE 819]
819
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
ibid. (“interests of programmers in maintaining access chan-
nels”); ibid. (“interests served by the access requirements”).
It is that question, left unanswered by the plurality, to which
I now turn.
II
A
In 1984, Congress enacted 47 U. S. C. §532(b), which gen-
erally requires cable operators to reserve approximately 10
to 15 percent of their available channels for commercial lease
to “unafﬁliated persons.”
Operators were prohibited from
“exercis[ing] any editorial control” over these leased access
channels.
§532(c)(2).
In 1992, Congress withdrew part of
its prohibition on the exercise of the cable operators’ edito-
rial control and essentially permitted operators to censor pri-
vately programming that the “operator reasonably believes
describes or depicts sexual or excretory activities or organs
in a patently offensive manner.”
§532(h).
Since 1984, federal law has also permitted local franchise
authorities to require cable operators to set aside certain
channels for “public, educational, or governmental use” (PEG
channels),4 §531(a), but unlike the leased access provisions,
has not directly required operators to do so.
As with leased
access, Congress generally prohibited cable operators from
exercising “any editorial control” over public access chan-
nels, but provided that operators could prohibit the transmis-
sion of obscene programming.
§531(e); see §544(d).
Sec-
tion 10(c) of the 1992 Act broadened the operators’ editorial
control and instructed the FCC to promulgate regulations
enabling a cable operator to ban from its public access chan-
nels “any programming which contains obscene material,
sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting
unlawful conduct.”
Note following 47 U. S. C. §531.
The
4 Because indecent programming on PEG channels appears primarily
on public access channels, I will generally refer to PEG access as public
access.


[REPORT PAGE 820]
820
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
FCC subsequently promulgated regulations in its Second
Report and Order, In re Implementation of Section 10 of the
Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992:
Indecent Programming and Other Types of Materials on
Cable Access Channels, 8 FCC Rcd 2638 (1993) (Second Re-
port and Order).
The FCC interpreted Congress’ reference
to “sexually explicit conduct” to mean that the programming
must be indecent, and its regulations therefore permit cable
operators to ban indecent programming from their public ac-
cess channels.
Id., at 2640.
As I read these provisions, they provide leased and public
access programmers with an expansive and federally en-
forced statutory right to transmit virtually any program-
ming over access channels, limited only by the bounds of
decency.
It is no doubt true that once programmers have
been given, rightly or wrongly, the ability to speak on access
channels, the First Amendment continues to protect pro-
grammers from certain Government intrusions.
Certainly,
under our current jurisprudence, Congress could not impose
a total ban on the transmission of indecent programming.
See Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S.
115, 127 (1989) (striking down total ban on indecent dial-a-
porn messages).
At the same time, however, the Court has
not recognized, as entitled to full constitutional protection,
statutorily created speech rights that directly conﬂict with
the constitutionally protected private speech rights of an-
other person or entity.5
We have not found a First Amend-
ment violation in statutory schemes that substantially ex-
pand the speech opportunities of the person or entity
challenging the scheme.
There is no getting around the fact that leased and public
access are a type of forced speech.
Though the constitution-
ality of leased and public access channels is not directly at
5 Even in PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U. S. 74, 87–88
(1980), for instance, we permitted California’s compelled access rule only
because it did not burden or conﬂict with the mall owner’s own speech.


[REPORT PAGE 821]
821
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
issue in these cases,6 the position adopted by the Court in
Turner ineluctably leads to the conclusion that the federal
access requirements are subject to some form of heightened
scrutiny.
See Turner, 512 U. S., at 661–662 (citing Ward v.
Rock Against Racism, 491 U. S. 781 (1989); United States v.
O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367 (1968)).
Under that view, content-
neutral governmental impositions on an operator’s editorial
discretion may be sustained only if they further an important
governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of free
speech and are no greater than is essential to further the
asserted interest.
See id., at 377.
Of course, the analysis
I joined in Turner would have required strict scrutiny.
512
U. S., at 680–682 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and dis-
senting in part).
Petitioners must concede that cable access is not a consti-
tutionally required entitlement and that the right they claim
to leased and public access has, by deﬁnition, been govern-
mentally created at the expense of cable operators’ editorial
6 Following Turner, some commentators have questioned the constitu-
tionality of leased and public access.
See, e. g., J. Goodale, All About
Cable §6.04[5], pp. 6–38.6 to 6–38.7 (1996) (“In the wake of the Supreme
Court’s decision in the Turner Broadcasting case, the constitutionality of
both PEG access and leased access requirements would seem open to
searching reexamination. . . . To the extent that an access requirement . . .
is considered to be a content-based restriction on the speech of a cable
system operator, it seems clear, after Turner Broadcasting, that such a
requirement would be found to violate the operator’s First Amendment
rights” (footnotes omitted)); Ugland, Cable Television, New Technologies
and the First Amendment After Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v.
F. C. C., 60 Mo. L. Rev. 799, 837 (1995) (“PEG requirements are content-
based on their face because they force cable system operators to carry
certain types of programming” (emphasis in original)); Perritt, Access to
the National Information Infrastructure, 30 Wake Forest L. Rev. 51, 66
(1995) (leased access and public access requirements “were called into
question in Turner”).
Moreover, as Justice O’Connor noted in Turner,
Congress’ imposition of common-carrier-like obligations on cable operators
may raise Takings Clause questions.
512 U. S., at 684 (opinion concurring
in part and dissenting in part).
Such questions are not at issue here.


[REPORT PAGE 822]
822
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
discretion.
Just because the Court has apparently accepted,
for now, the proposition that the Constitution permits some
degree of forced speech in the cable context does not mean that
the beneﬁciaries of a Government-imposed forced speech
program enjoy additional First Amendment protections be-
yond those normally afforded to purely private speakers.
We have said that “[i]n the realm of private speech or ex-
pression, government regulation may not favor one speaker
over another,” Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ.
of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 828 (1995), but this principle hardly
supports petitioners’ claims, for, if they do anything, the
leased and public access requirements favor access program-
mers over cable operators.
I do not see §§10(a) and (c) as
independent restrictions on programmers, but as intricate
parts of the leased and public access restrictions imposed
by Congress (and state and local governments) on cable op-
erators.
The question petitioners pose is whether §§10(a)
and (c) are improper restrictions on their free speech rights,
but Turner strongly suggests that the proper question is
whether the leased and public access requirements (with
§§10(a) and (c)) are improper restrictions on the operators’
free speech rights.
In my view, the constitutional presump-
tion properly runs in favor of the operators’ editorial dis-
cretion, and that discretion may not be burdened without a
compelling reason for doing so.
Petitioners’ view that
the constitutional presumption favors their asserted right to
speak on access channels is directly contrary to Turner and
our established precedents.
It is one thing to compel an operator to carry leased and
public access speech, in apparent violation of Tornillo, but it
is another thing altogether to say that the First Amendment
forbids Congress to give back part of the operators’ editorial
discretion, which all recognize as fundamentally protected,
in favor of a broader access right.
It is no answer to say
that leased and public access are content neutral and that


[REPORT PAGE 823]
823
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
§§10(a) and (c) are not, for that does not change the funda-
mental fact, which petitioners never address, that it is the
operators’ journalistic freedom that is infringed, whether the
challenged restrictions be content neutral or content based.
Because the access provisions are part of a scheme that
restricts the free speech rights of cable operators and ex-
pands the speaking opportunities of access programmers,
who have no underlying constitutional right to speak
through the cable medium, I do not believe that access pro-
grammers can challenge the scheme, or a particular part of
it, as an abridgment of their “freedom of speech.”
Outside
the public forum doctrine, discussed infra, at 826–831, Gov-
ernment intervention that grants access programmers an op-
portunity to speak that they would not otherwise enjoy—
and which does not directly limit programmers’ underlying
speech rights—cannot be an abridgment of the same pro-
grammers’ First Amendment rights, even if the new speak-
ing opportunity is content based.
The permissive nature of §§10(a) and (c) is important in
this regard.
If Congress had forbidden cable operators to
carry indecent programming on leased and public access
channels, that law would have burdened the programmer’s
right, recognized in Turner, supra, at 645, to compete for
space on an operator’s system.
The Court would undoubt-
edly strictly scrutinize such a law.
See Sable, 492 U. S., at
126.
But §§10(a) and (c) do not burden a programmer’s
right to seek access for its indecent programming on an oper-
ator’s system.
Rather, they merely restore part of the edi-
torial discretion an operator would have absent Government
regulation without burdening the programmer’s underlying
speech rights.7
7 The plurality, in asserting that §10(c) “does not restore to cable opera-
tors editorial rights that they once had,” ante, at 761, mistakes inability
to exercise a right for absence of the right altogether.
That cable opera-
tors “have not historically exercised editorial control” over public access


[REPORT PAGE 824]
824
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
The First Amendment challenge, if one is to be made, must
come from the party whose constitutionally protected free-
dom of speech has been burdened.
Viewing the federal ac-
cess requirements as a whole, it is the cable operator, not the
access programmer,8 whose speech rights have been in-
fringed.
Consequently, it is the operator, and not the pro-
grammer, whose speech has arguably been infringed by
these provisions.
If Congress passed a law forcing book-
stores to sell all books published on the subject of congres-
sional politics, we would undoubtedly entertain a claim by
bookstores that this law violated the First Amendment prin-
ciples established in Tornillo and Paciﬁc Gas.
But I doubt
that we would similarly ﬁnd merit in a claim by publishers
of gardening books that the law violated their First Amend-
ment rights.
If that is so, then petitioners in these cases
cannot reasonably assert that the Court should strictly scru-
tinize the provisions at issue in a way that maximizes their
ability to speak over leased and public access channels and,
by necessity, minimizes the operators’ discretion.
B
It makes no difference that the leased access restrictions
may take the form of common carrier obligations.
See Mid-
west Video II, 440 U. S., at 701; see also Brief for Federal
Respondents 23.
But see 47 U. S. C. §541(c) (“Any cable
system shall not be subject to regulation as a common carrier
or utility by reason of providing any cable service”).
That
the leased access provisions may be described in common
carrier terms does not demonstrate that access programmers
channels, ibid., does not diminish the underlying right to do so, even if the
operator’s forbearance is viewed as a contractual quid pro quo for the
local franchise.
8 Turner recognized that the must-carry rules burden programmers
who must compete for space on fewer channels.
512 U. S., at 636–637.
Leased access requirements may also similarly burden programmers who
compete for space on nonaccess channels.


[REPORT PAGE 825]
825
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
have obtained a First Amendment right to transmit pro-
gramming over leased access channels.
Labeling leased ac-
cess a common carrier scheme has no real First Amendment
consequences.
It simply does not follow from common car-
rier status that cable operators may not, with Congress’
blessing, decline to carry indecent speech on their leased ac-
cess channels.
Common carriers are private entities and
may, consistent with the First Amendment, exercise editorial
discretion in the absence of a speciﬁc statutory prohibition.
Concurring in Sable, Justice Scalia explained: “I note that
while we hold the Constitution prevents Congress from ban-
ning indecent speech in this fashion, we do not hold that the
Constitution requires public utilities to carry it.”
492 U. S.,
at 133.
See also Information Providers’ Coalition for De-
fense of First Amendment v. FCC, 928 F. 2d 866, 877 (CA9
1991) (“[A] carrier is free under the Constitution to terminate
service to dial-a-porn operators altogether”); Carlin Com-
munications, Inc. v. Mountain States Telephone & Tele-
graph Co., 827 F. 2d 1291, 1297 (CA9 1987) (same), cert. de-
nied, 485 U. S. 1029 (1988); Carlin Communication, Inc. v.
Southern Bell Telephone & Telegraph Co., 802 F. 2d 1352,
1357 (CA11 1986) (same).
Nothing about common carrier status per se constitutional-
izes the asserted interests of petitioners in these cases, and
Justice Kennedy provides no authority for his assertion
that common carrier regulations “should be reviewed under
the same standard as content-based restrictions on speech
in a public forum.”
Ante, at 797.
Whether viewed as the
creation of a common carrier scheme or simply as a regula-
tory restriction on cable operators’ editorial discretion, the
net effect is the same: operators’ speech rights are restricted
to make room for access programmers.
Consequently, the
fact that the leased access provisions impose a form of com-
mon carrier obligation on cable operators does not alter my
view that Congress’ leased access scheme burdens the consti-
tutionally protected speech rights of cable operators in order


[REPORT PAGE 826]
826
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
to expand the speaking opportunities of access programmers,
but does not independently burden the First Amendment
rights of programmers or viewers.
C
Petitioners argue that public access channels are public
forums in which they have First Amendment rights to speak
and that §10(c) is invalid because it imposes content-based
burdens on those rights.
Brief for Petitioners New York
Citizens Committee for Responsible Media et al. in No. 95–
227, pp. 8–23; Brief for Petitioners Alliance for Community
Media et al. in No. 95–227, pp. 32–35.
Though I agree that
content-based prohibitions in a public forum “must be nar-
rowly drawn to effectuate a compelling state interest,”
Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators’ Assn., 460 U. S.
37, 46 (1983), I do not agree with petitioners’ antecedent as-
sertion that public access channels are public forums.
We have said that government may designate public prop-
erty for use by the public as a place for expressive activ-
ity and that, so designated, that property becomes a pub-
lic forum.
Id., at 45.
Petitioners argue that “[a] local
government does exactly that by requiring as a condition
of franchise approval that the cable operator set aside a
public access channel for the free use of the general pub-
lic on a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served, nondiscriminatory basis.” 9
9 In Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819,
829–830 (1995), we found the university’s student activity fund, a nontangi-
ble channel of communication, to be a limited public forum, but generally
we have been quite reluctant to ﬁnd even limited public forums in such
channels of communication.
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Ed.
Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 804 (1985) (Combined Federal Campaign not a
limited public forum); Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators’ Assn.,
460 U. S. 37, 47–48 (1983) (school mail facilities not a limited public forum).
In any event, we certainly have never held that public access channels are
a fully designated public forum that entitles programmers to freedom from
content-based distinctions.


[REPORT PAGE 827]
827
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
Brief for Petitioners Alliance for Community Media et al. in
No. 95–227, p. 33.
I disagree.
Cable systems are not public property.10
Cable systems
are privately owned and privately managed, and petitioners
point to no case in which we have held that government may
designate private property as a public forum.
The public
forum doctrine is a rule governing claims of “a right of access
to public property,” Perry Ed. Assn., supra, at 44, and has
never been thought to extend beyond property generally un-
derstood to belong to the government.
See International
Soc. for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 505 U. S. 672,
681 (1992) (evidence of expressive activity at rail stations,
bus stations, wharves, and Ellis Island was “irrelevant to
public fora analysis, because sites such as bus and rail termi-
nals traditionally have had private ownership” (emphasis in
original)).
See also id., at 678 (public forum is “govern-
ment” or “public” property); Perry Ed. Assn., supra, at 45
(designated public forum “consists of public property”).
Petitioners point to dictum in Cornelius v. NAACP Legal
Defense & Ed. Fund, 473 U. S. 788, 801 (1985), that a public
forum may consist of “private property dedicated to public
use,” but that statement has no applicability here.
That
statement properly refers to the common practice of for-
mally dedicating land for streets and parks when subdividing
real estate for developments.
See 1A C. Antieau & J. Anti-
eau, Antieau’s Local Government Law §9.05 (1991); 11A E.
McQuillin, Law of Municipal Corporations §33.03 (3d ed.
1991).
Such dedications may or may not transfer title, but
they at least create enforceable public easements in the dedi-
cated land.
1A Antieau, supra, §9.15; 11A McQuillin, supra,
10 See G. Shapiro, P. Kurland, & J. Mercurio, “CableSpeech”: The Case
for First Amendment Protection 119 (1983) (“Because cable systems are
operated by private rather than governmental entities, cable television
cannot be characterized as a public forum and, therefore, rights derived
from the public forum doctrine cannot be asserted by those who wish to
express themselves on cable systems”).


[REPORT PAGE 828]
828
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
§33.68.
To the extent that those easements create a prop-
erty interest in the underlying land, it is that government-
owned property interest that may be designated as a public
forum.
It may be true, as petitioners argue, that title is not dis-
positive of the public forum analysis, but the nature of the
regulatory restrictions placed on cable operators by local
franchising authorities is not consistent with the kinds of
governmental property interests we have said may be for-
mally dedicated as public forums.
Our public forum cases
have involved property in which the government has held at
least some formal easement or other property interest per-
mitting the government to treat the property as its own in
designating the property as a public forum.
See, e. g.,
Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization, 307 U. S.
496, 515 (1939) (streets and parks); Police Dept. of Chicago
v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92, 96 (1972) (sidewalks adjoining public
school); Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U. S.
546, 555 (1975) (theater under long-term lease to city); Carey
v. Brown, 447 U. S. 455, 460–462 (1980) (sidewalks in front of
private residence); Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U. S. 263, 267–268
(1981) (university facilities that had been opened for student
activities).
That is simply not true in these cases.
Pursu-
ant to federal and state law, franchising authorities require
cable operators to create public access channels, but nothing
in the record suggests that local franchising authorities take
any formal easement or other property interest in those
channels that would permit the government to designate
that property as a public forum.11
11 Petitioners’ argument that a property right called “the right to ex-
clude” has been transferred to the government is not persuasive.
Though
it is generally true that, excepting §10(c), cable operators are forbidden to
exercise editorial discretion over public access channels, that prohibition
is not absolute.
Section 531(e) provides that the prohibition on the exer-
cise of editorial discretion is subject to §544(d)(1), which permits operators
and franchising authorities to ban obscene or other constitutionally unpro-
tected speech.
Some States, however, have not permitted exercise of that
authority.
See, e. g., Minn. Stat. §238.11 (1994) (prohibiting any censor-


[REPORT PAGE 829]
829
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
Similarly, assertion of government control over private
property cannot justify designation of that property as a
public forum.
We have expressly stated that neither gov-
ernment ownership nor government control will guarantee
public access to property.
See Cornelius, supra, at 803;
Postal Service v. Council of Greenburgh Civic Assns., 453
U. S. 114, 129 (1981).
Government control over its own
property or private property in which it has taken a cogniza-
ble property interest, like the theater in Southeastern Pro-
motions, is consistent with designation of a public forum.
But we have never even hinted that regulatory control, and
particularly direct regulatory control over a private entity’s
First Amendment speech rights, could justify creation of a
public forum.
Properly construed, our cases have limited
the government’s ability to declare a public forum to prop-
erty the government owns outright, or in which the govern-
ment holds a signiﬁcant property interest consistent with the
communicative purpose of the forum to be designated.
Nor am I convinced that a formal transfer of a property
interest in public access channels would sufﬁce to permit a
local franchising authority to designate those channels as a
public forum.
In no other public forum that we have recog-
nized does a private entity, owner or not, have the obligation
not only to permit another to speak, but to actually help
produce and then transmit the message on that person’s be-
half.
Cable operators regularly retain some level of manage-
rial and operational control over their public access channels,
subject only to the requirements of federal, state, and local
law and the franchise agreement.
In more traditional public
forums, the government shoulders the burden of administer-
ing and enforcing the openness of the expressive forum, but
it is frequently a private citizen, the operator, who shoul-
ders that burden for public access channels.
For instance,
ship of leased or public access programming); N. Y. Pub. Serv. Law §229
(McKinney Supp. 1996) (same).
At any rate, the Court has never recog-
nized a public forum based on a property interest “taken” by regulatory
restriction.


[REPORT PAGE 830]
830
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
it is often the operator who must accept and schedule an
access programmer’s request for time on a channel.12
And,
in many places, the operator is actually obligated to provide
production facilities and production assistance to persons
seeking to produce access programming.13
Moreover, unlike
a park picketer, an access programmer cannot transmit its
own message.
Instead, it is the operator who must trans-
mit, or “speak,” the access programmer’s message.
That the
speech may be considered the operator’s is driven home by
47 U. S. C. §559, which authorizes a ﬁne of up to $10,000 and
two years’ imprisonment for any person who “transmits over
any cable system any matter which is obscene.”
See also
12 See D. Brenner, M. Price, & M. Meyerson, Cable Television and Other
Nonbroadcast Video §6.04[7] (1996) (hereinafter Brenner).
Some States
and local governments have formed nonproﬁt organizations to perform
some of these functions.
See D. C. Code Ann. §43–1829(a) (1990 and
Supp. 1996) (establishing Public Access Corporation “for the purpose
of facilitating and governing nondiscriminatory use” of public access
channels).
13 See, e. g., 47 U. S. C. §541(a)(4)(B) (authorizing franchise authorities to
“require adequate assurance that the cable operator will provide adequate
public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities,
or ﬁnancial support”); Conn. Gen. Stat. §16–331c (1995) (requiring cable
operators to contribute money or resources to cable advisory councils that
monitor compliance with public access standards); §16–333(c) (requiring
the department of public utility control to adopt regulations “establishing
minimum standards for the equipment supplied . . . for the community
access programming”); D. C. Code Ann. §43–1829.1(c) (1990) (“For public
access channel users, the franchisee shall provide use of the production
facilities and production assistance at an amount set forth in the request
for proposal”); Minn. Stat. §238.084.3(b) (1994) (requiring cable operators
to “make readily available for public use at least the minimal equipment
necessary for the production of programming and playback of prerecorded
programs”).
That these activities are “partly ﬁnanced with public funds,”
ante, at 762, does not diminish the fact that these activities are also “partly
ﬁnanced” with the operator’s money.
See Brenner §6.04[7], at 6–48
(“Frequently, access centers receive money and equipment from the cable
operator”); id., §6.04[3][c], at 6–41 (discussing cable operator ﬁnancing of
public access channels and questioning its constitutionality as “forced sub-
sidization of speech”).


[REPORT PAGE 831]
831
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
§558 (making operators immune for all public access pro-
gramming, except that which is obscene).14
Thus, even were I inclined to view public access channels
as public property, which I am not, the numerous additional
obligations imposed on the cable operator in managing and
operating the public access channels convince me that these
channels share few, if any, of the basic characteristics of a
public forum.
As I have already indicated, public access re-
quirements, in my view, are a regulatory restriction on the
exercise of cable operators’ editorial discretion, not a trans-
fer of a sufﬁcient property interest in the channels to support
a designation of that property as a public forum.
Public ac-
cess channels are not public forums, and, therefore, petition-
ers’ attempt to redistribute cable speech rights in their favor
must fail.
For this reason, and the other reasons articulated
earlier, I would sustain both §10(a) and §10(c).
III
Most sexually oriented programming appears on premium
or pay-per-view channels that are naturally blocked from
nonpaying customers by market forces, see In re Implemen-
tation of Section 10 of the Consumer Protection and Compe-
tition Act of 1992: Indecent Programming and Other Types
of Materials on Cable Access Channels, First Report and
Order, 8 FCC Rcd 998, 1001, n. 20 (1993) (First Report and
Order), and it is only governmental intervention in the ﬁrst
instance that requires access channels, on which indecent
programming may appear, to be made part of the basic cable
package.
Section 10(b) does nothing more than adjust the
nature of Government-imposed leased access requirements
14 Petitioners argue that §10(d) of the 1992 Act, 47 U. S. C. §558, which
lifts cable operators’ immunity for obscene speech, forces or encourages
operators to ban indecent speech.
Because Congress could directly im-
pose an outright ban on obscene programming, see Sable Communica-
tions of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 124 (1989), petitioners’ encourage-
ment argument is meritless.


[REPORT PAGE 832]
832
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
in order to emulate the market forces that keep indecent
programming
primarily
on
premium
channels
(without
permitting the operator to charge subscribers for that
programming).
Unlike §§10(a) and (c), §10(b) clearly implicates petition-
ers’ free speech rights.
Though §10(b) by no means bans
indecent speech, it clearly places content-based restrictions
on the transmission of private speech by requiring cable op-
erators to block and segregate indecent programming that
the operator has agreed to carry.
Consequently, §10(b)
must be subjected to strict scrutiny and can be upheld only
if it furthers a compelling governmental interest by the least
restrictive means available.
See Sable, 492 U. S., at 126.
The parties agree that Congress has a “compelling interest
in protecting the physical and psychological well-being of mi-
nors” and that its interest “extends to shielding minors from
the inﬂuence of [indecent speech] that is not obscene by adult
standards.”
Ibid.
See Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629,
639 (1968) (persons “who have th[e] primary responsibility
for children’s well-being are entitled to the support of laws
designed to aid discharge of that responsibility”).
Because
§10(b) is narrowly tailored to achieve that well-established
compelling interest, I would uphold it.
I therefore dissent
from the Court’s decision to the contrary.
Our precedents establish that government may support
parental authority to direct the moral upbringing of their
children by imposing a blocking requirement as a default
position.
For example, in Ginsberg, in which we upheld a
State’s ability to prohibit the sale of indecent literature to
minors, we pointed out that the State had simply imposed
its own default choice by noting that “the prohibition against
sales to minors does not bar parents who so desire from pur-
chasing the magazines for their children.”
Ibid.
Likewise,
in Sable we set aside a complete ban on indecent dial-a-porn
messages in part because the FCC had previously imposed
certain default rules intended to prevent access by minors,


[REPORT PAGE 833]
833
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
and there was no evidence that those rules were ineffective.
492 U. S., at 128–130.15
The Court strikes down §10(b) by pointing to alternatives,
such as reverse blocking and lockboxes, that it says are less
restrictive than segregation and blocking.
Though these
methods attempt to place in parents’ hands the ability to
permit their children to watch as little, or as much, indecent
programming as the parents think proper, they do not effec-
tively support parents’ authority to direct the moral up-
bringing of their children.
See First Report and Order,
8 FCC Rcd, at 1000–1001.16
The FCC recognized that
leased access programming comes “from a wide variety of
independent sources, with no single editor controlling [its]
selection and presentation.”
Id., at 1000.
Thus, indecent
programming on leased access channels is “especially likely
to be shown randomly or intermittently between non-
indecent programs.”
Ibid.
Rather than being able to sim-
ply block out certain channels at certain times, a subscriber
armed with only a lockbox must carefully monitor all leased
access programming and constantly reprogram the lockbox
15 After Sable, Congress quickly amended the statute and the FCC again
promulgated those “safe harbor” rules.
Those rules were later upheld
against a First Amendment challenge.
See Dial Information Servs.
Corp. of N. Y. v. Thornburgh, 938 F. 2d 1535 (CA2 1991), cert. denied, 502
U. S. 1072 (1992); Information Providers’ Coalition for Defense of First
Amendment v. FCC, 928 F. 2d 866 (CA9 1991).
In promulgating regula-
tions pursuant to §10(b), the FCC was well aware that the default rules
established for dial-a-porn had been upheld and asserted that similar rules
were necessary for leased access channels.
See First Report and Order,
8 FCC Rcd 998, 1000 (1993) (“The blocking scheme upheld in these cases
is, in all relevant respects, identical to that required by section 10(b)”);
ibid. (“[J]ust as it did in section 223 relating to ‘dial-a-porn’ telephone
services—Congress has now determined that mandatory, not voluntary,
blocking is essential”).
16 In the context of dial-a-porn, courts upholding the FCC’s mandatory
blocking scheme have expressly found that voluntary blocking schemes
are not effective.
See Dial Information Servs., supra, at 1542; Informa-
tion Providers’ Coalition, supra, at 873–874.


[REPORT PAGE 834]
834
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
to keep out undesired programming.
Thus, even assuming
that cable subscribers generally have the technical proﬁ-
ciency to properly operate a lockbox, by no means a given,
this distinguishing characteristic of leased access channels
makes lockboxes and reverse blocking largely ineffective.
Petitioners argue that §10(b)’s segregation and blocking
scheme is not sufﬁciently narrowly tailored because it re-
quires the viewer’s “written consent,” 47 CFR §76.701(b)
(1995); it permits the cable operator 30 days to respond to
the written request for access, §76.701(c); and it is impermis-
sibly underinclusive because it reaches only leased access
programming.
Relying on Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U. S. 301
(1965), petitioners argue that forcing customers to submit a
written request for access will chill dissemination of speech.
In Lamont, we struck down a statute barring the mail deliv-
ery of “ ‘communist political propaganda’ ” to persons who
had not requested the Post Ofﬁce in writing to deliver such
propaganda.
Id., at 307.
The law required the Post Ofﬁce
to keep an ofﬁcial list of persons desiring to receive commu-
nist political propaganda, id., at 303, which, of course, was
intended to chill demand for such materials.
Here, however,
petitioners’ allegations of an ofﬁcial list “of those who wish
to watch the ‘patently offensive’ channel,” as the majority
puts it, ante, at 754, are pure hyperbole.
The FCC regula-
tion implementing §10(b)’s written request requirement, 47
CFR §76.701(b) (1995), says nothing about the creation of a
list, much less an ofﬁcial Government list.
It requires only
that the cable operator receive written consent.
Other stat-
utory provisions make clear that the cable operator may not
share that, or any other, information with any other person,
including the Government.
Section 551 mandates that all
personally identiﬁable information regarding a subscriber be
kept strictly conﬁdential and further requires cable opera-
tors to destroy any information that is no longer necessary
for the purpose for which it was collected.
47 U. S. C. §551.


[REPORT PAGE 835]
835
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
None of the circumstances that ﬁgured prominently in La-
mont exists here.
Though petitioners cannot reasonably fear the specter of
an ofﬁcially published list of leased access indecency viewers,
it is true that the fact that a subscriber is unblocked is ascer-
tainable, if only by the cable operator.
I ﬁnd no legally sig-
niﬁcant stigma in that fact.
If a segregation and blocking
scheme is generally permissible, then a subscriber’s access
request must take some form, whether written or oral, and
I see nothing nefarious in Congress’ choice of a written,
rather than an oral, consent.17
Any request for access to
blocked
programming—by
whatever
method—ultimately
will make the subscriber’s identity knowable.18
But this is
hardly the kind of chilling effect that implicates the First
Amendment.
Though making an oral request for access, perhaps by tele-
phone, is slightly less bothersome than making a written re-
quest, it is also true that a written request is less subject
to fraud “by a determined child.”
Ante, at 759.
Conse-
quently, despite the fact that an oral request is slightly less
restrictive in absolute terms, it is also less effective in sup-
porting parents’ interest in denying enterprising, but paren-
tally unauthorized, minors access to blocked programming.
The segregation and blocking requirement was not in-
tended to be a replacement for lockboxes, V-chips, reverse
blocking, or other subscriber-initiated measures.
Rather,
Congress enacted in §10(b) a default setting under which a
subscriber receives no blocked programming without a writ-
17 Because, under the circumstances of these cases, I see no constitution-
ally signiﬁcant difference between a written and an oral request to see
blocked programming, I also see no relevant distinction between §10(b)
and the blocking requirement enacted in the 1996 Act, on which the major-
ity places so much reliance.
See ante, at 756–758.
18 Indeed, persons who request access to blocked programming pursuant
to 47 CFR §76.701(c) (1995) are no more identiﬁable than persons who
subscribe to sexually oriented premium channels, because those persons
must specially request that premium service.


[REPORT PAGE 836]
836
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
ten request.
Thus, subscribers who do not want the blocked
programming are protected, and subscribers who do want it
may request access.
Once a subscriber requests access to
blocked programming, however, the subscriber remains free
to use other methods, such as lockboxes, to regulate the kind
of programming shown on those channels in that home.19
Thus, petitioners are wrong to portray §10(b) as a highly
ineffective method of screening individual programs, see
Brief for Petitioners in No. 95–124, at 43, and the majority
is similarly wrong to suggest that a person cannot “watch a
single program . . . without letting the ‘patently offensive’
channel in its entirety invade his household for days, perhaps
weeks, at a time,” ante, at 754; see ante, at 756.
Given the
limited scope of §10(b) as a default setting, I see nothing
constitutionally inﬁrm about Congress’ decision to permit
the cable operator 30 days to unblock or reblock the segre-
gated channel.
Petitioners also claim that §10(b) and its implementing
regulations are impermissibly underinclusive because they
apply only to leased access programming.
In R. A. V. v.
St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377 (1992), we rejected the view that a
content-based restriction is subject to a separate and inde-
pendent “underinclusiveness” evaluation.
Id., at 387 (“In
our view, the First Amendment imposes not an ‘underinclu-
siveness’ limitation but a ‘content discrimination’ limitation
upon a State’s prohibition of proscribable speech”).
See also
ante, at 757 (“Congress need not deal with every problem at
once”).
Also, petitioners’ claim is in tension with the consti-
tutional principle that Congress may not impose a remedy
that is more restrictive than necessary to satisfy its asserted
compelling interest and with their own arguments pressing
that very principle.
Cf. R. A. V., supra, at 402 (White, J.,
concurring in judgment) (though the “overbreadth doctrine
19 The lockbox provision, originally passed in 1984, was unaffected by
the 1992 Act and remains fully available to every subscriber.
47 U. S. C.
§544(d)(2).


[REPORT PAGE 837]
837
Cite as: 518 U. S. 727 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
has the redeeming virtue of attempting to avoid the chilling
of protected expression,” an underbreadth challenge “serves
no desirable function”).
In arguing that Congress could not impose a blocking re-
quirement without also imposing that requirement on public
access and nonaccess channels, petitioners fail to allege,
much less argue, that doing so would further Congress’ com-
pelling interest.
While it is true that indecent program-
ming appears on nonaccess channels, that programming ap-
pears almost exclusively on “per-program or per channel
services that subscribers must speciﬁcally request in ad-
vance, in the same manner as under the blocking approach
mandated by section 10(b).”
First Report and Order, 8
FCC Rcd, at 1001, n. 20.20
In contrast to these premium
services, leased access channels are part of the basic cable
package, and the segregation and blocking scheme Congress
imposed does nothing more than convert sexually oriented
leased access programming into a free “premium service.” 21
Similarly, Congress’ failure to impose segregation and block-
ing requirements on public access channels may have been
based on its judgment that those channels presented a less
severe problem of unintended indecency—it appears that
most of the anecdotal evidence before Congress involved
leased access channels.
Congress may also have simply de-
20 In examining the restrictions imposed by the 1996 Act, the majority
is probably correct to doubt that “sex-dedicated channels are all (or
mostly) leased channels,” ante, at 757, but surely the majority does not
doubt that most nonleased sex-dedicated channels are premium channels
that must be expressly requested.
I thus disagree that the provisions of
the 1996 Act address a “highly similar problem.”
Ante, at 758.
21 Unlike Congress’ blocking scheme, and the market norm of requiring
viewers to pay a premium for indecent programming, lockboxes place a
ﬁnancial burden on those seeking to avoid indecent programming on leased
access channels.
See 47 U. S. C. §544(d)(2) (“[A] cable operator shall
provide (by sale or lease) a device by which the subscriber can prohibit
viewing of a particular cable service during periods selected by that
subscriber”).


[REPORT PAGE 838]
838
DENVER AREA ED. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONSORTIUM, INC. v. FCC
Opinion of Thomas, J.
cided to permit the States and local franchising authorities
to address the issue of indecency on public access channels
at a local level, in accordance with the local rule policies
evinced in 47 U. S. C. §531.
In any event, if the segregation
and blocking scheme established by Congress is narrowly
tailored to achieve a compelling governmental interest, it
does not become constitutionally suspect merely because
Congress did not extend the same restriction to other chan-
nels on which there was less of a perceived problem (and
perhaps no compelling interest).
The United States has carried its burden of demonstrating
that §10(b) and its implementing regulations are narrowly
tailored to satisfy a compelling governmental interest.
Ac-
cordingly, I would afﬁrm the judgment of the Court of
Appeals in its entirety.
I therefore concur in the judgment
upholding §10(a) and respectfully dissent from that portion
of the judgment striking down §§10(b) and (c).
