_— 


a a 6 


Nos. 95-124 and 95-227 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 
—_ 


DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
CONSORTIUM, INC. and AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, 
Petitioners, 


— 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, et ai., 
Respondents. 


ALLIANCE FOR COMMUNITY MEDIA, et al., 


Petitioners, 


a Y , oe 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, et al., 
Respondents. 


ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS POR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


CHARLES S. SIMS* I. MICHAEL GREENBERGER* 

PETER J.W. SHERWIN Shea & Gardner 

Proskauer Rose Goetz 1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
& Mendelsohn LLP Washington, D.C. 20036 

1585 Broadway (202) 828-2000 

New York, New York 10036 Counsel for Petitioners Alliance 

(212) 969-3000 for Community Media, Alliance 
Counsel for Petitioners for Communications Democracy, 
in No. 95-124 and People For the American 


Way in No. 95-227 


DREW S. DAYS, Ill 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


Counsel for Respondents 
* Counsel of Record 


(Counsel continued on inside front cover) 


PETITIONS FOR CERTIORARI FILED JULY 21, 1995 AND AUGUST 9, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED NOVEMBER 13, 1995 I¥ 


\. 


STEVEN R. SHAPIRO 
MARJORIE HEINS 
American Civil Liberties 
Union Foundation 
132 West 43d Street 
New York, New York 10036 
Counsel for Petitioners 
in No. 95-124 


THOMAS J. MIKULA 

MICHAEL K. ISENMAN 

DAVID B. GOODHAND 

Shea & Gardner 

1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW 

Washington, D.C. 20036 
Counsel for Petitioners 
Alliance for Community Media, 
Alliance for Communications 
Democracy, and People For the 
American Way in No. 95-227 


JAMES N. HORWOOD 
Spiegel & McDiarmid 
1350 New York Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
Counsel for Petitioners 
Alliance for Community Media 
and Alliance for Communications 
Democracy in No. 95-227 


ANDREW JAY SCHWARTZMAN 
GIGI SOHN 

Media Access Project 

2000 M Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20036 


ELLIOT MINCBERG 

LAWRENCE OTTINGER 

People For the American Way 

2000 M Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20036 
Counsel for Petitioners 
People For the American Way 
in No. 95-227 


ROBERT T. PERRY 

509-12th Street, Apt. 2C 

Brooklyn, New York 11215 
Counsel for Petitioners 
New York Citizens Committee for 
Responsible Media, Media Access 
New York, Brooklyn Producers’ 
Group, and David Channon in 
No. 95-227 


li 


EDITOR'S NOTE 
THE FOLLOWING PAGES WERE POOR HARD COPY 
AT THE TIME OF FILMING. — IF AND WHEN A 


BETTER COPY CAN BE OBTAINED, A NEW FICHE 


WILL BE ISSUED. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Opinions, Orders, and Parts of the Record Omitted from the 
DUES Ei eke ee bweebeccec cece cs v 
ee ee tcc cee vi 


Comments of Acton Corp., Allen's Television Cable Service, 


Inc., Cable Television Association of Maryland, Dela- 

ware and District of Columbia, Century Communications 
Corp., Columbia International, Inc., Florida Cable Tele- 
vision Association, Gilmer Cable Television Company, 

Inc., Monmouth Cablevision Assoc., TeleCable Corpora- 
tion, Texas Cable TV Association, United Video Cable- 
vision, Inc., and West Virginia Cable Television Associa- 


Joint Comments of Alliance for Community Media, the Alli- 


Civil Liberties Union and People For the American Way. 4 
Exhibit A: Patricia Aufderheide, Cable Television and 
the Public Interest, 42 J}. COMM. 52 (1992) ...... 55 
Exhibit L: Patricia Aufderheide, Public Access Cable 
Programming, Controversial Speech, and Free Ex- 
he bere hs Géeewcerccs 61 
Exhibit M: Affidavit of Joseph J. Collins submitted in 
Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. FCC, No. 92- 


ace ccees 74 
Exhibit N: Letter from InterMedia Partners to Tucson 
Community Cable Corp. of Nov. 13, 1992 ...... 77 


Exhibit O: Customer Handbook, Jerrold IMPULSE 
7000, Model DP71**, DPV72** and DPBB73** 


Exhibit P: Customer Handbook, Jerrold STARCOM VI 
Model DPV5-* Addressable Converter with Volume 


i 
Exhibit Q: Customer Handbook, Jerrold STARCOM 7 

Model DQN7-* Digital Plain Converter ........ 133 

Comments of Ann Arbor Community Access Television... 155 


Joint Comments of Blade Communications, Inc., Multivision 
Cable TV Corp., Parcable, Inc., Providence Journal 


Company, and Sammons Communications, Inc. ..... 157 
Comments of the Boston Community Access and Program- 
| ss Per eres 162 
Comments of Roxie Lee Cole, Citizen .............. 170 
Comments of Columbus Community Cable Access, Inc 
STE cennt cae cb beecesehscaseetane 172 
Comments of the Community Antenna Television Associa- 
Gt ccbmdeeeceso és awet até ce enteuuts 174 
Comments of Continental Cablevision, Inc............ 181 
Comments of Cox Cable Communications, a Division of Cox 
GR, GE. oc oc hb cds ee da Cecsecedoces 196 
Comments of Denver Area Educational Telecommunications 
Consortium, Inc. on Notice of Proposed Rule Making . 199 
Appendix A: Articles Concerning CamNet ........ 211 


Mark Robichaux, Camcorders Spark Two Cable 
Ventures, WALL ST. J., July 30, 1992 at BI... 212 


Steve Weinstein, A Cable Network About the Real 
World, L.A. TIMES, Oct. 16, 1992 at F24 .... 216 


Joe Rhodes, Video: Power to the People, TV GUIDE, 


Pe Ct. cconentuece oenees 220 
PD cece weeeeGeeeedaseeeces 221 
Appendix B: Program Segments Carried by The 90's 
Channel Dealing with Sexuality ............. 224 
Comments of InterMedia Partners ................. 226 


Comments of the National Association of Telecommunica- 
tions Officers and Advisors, National League of Cities, 
United States Conference of Mayors, and the National 


a ne 239 
Comments of National Cable Television Association, Inc... 244 
Comments of Tele-Communications Inc. ............ 246 


Comments of Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. . 249 
Comments of Virginia B. Bogue and Amy Lerom, Citizens of 


Tampa, Florida to Proposed Rule Making ......... 271 
Comments of City of Tampa Office of Cable Communication 
I, oc ncconcscccsccees: 275 


Joint Reply Comments of the Alliance for Community Media, 
the Alliance for Communications Democracy, the Ameri 
can Civil Liberties Union and People For the American 


Linda Haugsted, Warner, Access Group in Shootout, 
MULTICHANNEL NEWS, May 20, 1992 at 1, 56 . 302 


Linda Haugsted, Warner Cable Up for Renewal, 
MULTICHANNEL NEWS, July 22, 1991 at 14... 305 


System Notes, MULTICHANNEL NEWS, October 13, 


EE Whol cose eed eb e ce ebs 00 307 
REED ba é ballin 6 se cecchecoebicuees ci 308 
Jerry Adler, Was lt Good for You, Too, NEWSWEEK, 

* & rae 309 


Reply Comments of Cambridge Community Television ... 311 
Reply Comments of Cincinnati Community Video, Inc. ... 316 
Reply Comments of the City of St. Paul... .......... 318 


Reply Comments of Columbus Community Cable Access, 
DL -ccceees 6668600866048 68046 327 


iv 


Reply Comments of the Denver Area Educational Telecom- 
munications Consortium, Inc. on Notice of Proposed 


GED hu ce Ce Wkwic 6 0 ohs obs hee ae ss 330 
Reply Comments of the Motion Picture Association of Amer 
DAG ss cw stbcthoabe'c Cee ecwbtwd Gakct' 333 


Reply Comments of the National Association of Telecommu- 
nications Officers and Advisors, National League of 
Cities, United States Conference of Mayors, and the 


National Association of Counties ............... 342 
Reply Comments of the National Cable Television Associa- 
«BEY SERUETTLE CITI LUT LETC TLE Le 349 
Reply Comments of ‘Olelo: The Corporation for Community 
WED 6. 646-0 Cd oS COWS SS ew TES 6 eh UW SES 351 
Reply Comments of Viacom International Inc.......... 353 
Comments of New York Citizens Committee for Responsible 
Pas aGvcteesuude enced seeeeaeeeeuas 358 
ee ee re 369 
TV GUIDE Manhattan Cable TV Edition, Dec. 12 
SE « 26 am dae er ies Abo eo © 68 370 
Petition for Reconsideration of the NYNEX Telephone Com- 
So ncinndeustekbcdkd teak elkade nce c< 375 


Opposition of Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. to 
the Petition for Reconsideration of the NYNEX Tele- 


SPEED 2 ces bic SeebewevebendNoccecs 379 
Reply of the NYNEX Telephone Companies to Comments 
Opposing their Petition for Reconsideration ........ 382 


Vv 


The following opinions, orders, and parts of the record have 
in full without deletion at the following pages as appendices to the 
printed petition for writ of certiorari in No. 95-124: 

First Report and Order in the Matter of Implementation of 

Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Protection and Compe- 

EE nn cts 6k oend 00 Ome eee 4 6 128a 


Second Report and Order in the Matter of Implementation 
of Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Protection and 


Competition Act of 1992 .............50005: 178a 
Panel Opinion of the Court of Appeals for the District of 
DE . Sp oGcden Wd bvececesbeces 90a 


In Banc Per Curiam Order of the Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia Circuit Vacating the Panel 


Dt Whaus 666906 bbuS OER CeE CR Cee es 89a 
In Banc Opinion of the Court of Appeals for the District of 
SE co cco ccccceeencoccesceecs 2a 


In Banc Per Curiam Order of the Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia Circuit Staying the Issuance of the 


vi 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-1169, 93-1171, 93-1270, 93-1276 


February 22, 1993 Petitions for review filed in nos. 93-1169 


and 93-1171. 
April 7, 1993 Stay of First Report and Order granted. 
April 15, 1993 Petition for review filed in no. 93-1270. 
April 20, 1993 Petition for review filed in no. 93-1276. 
May 7, 1993 Stay of Second Report and Order granted. 


November 23, 1993 Opinion and judginent filed. 


February 16, 1994 Suggestion for rehearing in banc granted 
and judgment vacated. 
June 6, 1995 In banc opinion and judgment filed. 


July 10, 1995 Stay of issuance of mandate granted. 


Before the 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 


Washington, D.C. 


Implementation of Section 10 of 
the Consumer Protection 


and Competition Act of 1992 


Indecent Programming and Other 
Types of Materials on Cable 
Access Channels 


MM Docket 
No. 92-258 


i 


* - * 


I. The Commission Must Clarify That Voluntary Prohibitions 
On Leased Access Programming Are Based On The 
Exercise Of The Operator’s Editorial Judgment And That 
, May Fashion A iate Individual Polici 

The first provision of Section 10 authorizes cable operators to 
impose certain voluntary restrictions on leased access programming. 
The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“NPRM”) suggests this area 
is self-executing and requires no Commission action. But the 
Commission could greatly advance the public interest by taking this 
opportunity to clarify the statutory language in furtherance of 
Congress’ underlying objectives. 

There are several critical points that the Commission should 
expand upon. First, the statute wisely provides that any decision 
about the carriage of “offensive” programming is to be made on the 
basis of the operator’s “judgment.” The critical question is not 
whether a particular program is “obscene . . . lewd, lascivious, 
filthy, or indecent or otherwise unprotected by the Constitution of 


2 


the United States,” but whether the cable operator believes the 
programming falls into that category. 


Despite the concerns underlying Section 10, most cable 
operators carry relatively little indecent programming on leased 
access channels. Although the statute talks about a single blocked 
“channel,” the Commission should clarify that so long as the 
offensive programming is blocked, the channel need not be blocked 
on a 24 hour per day basis. Rather than devote an entire channel 
for this purpose, an operator might chose to maintain a single leased 
access channel and simply scramble the “indecent” portions of the 
programming to every subscriber who has not affirmatively 
requested it. We submit this approach is entirely consistent with 
Section 10(b), and enhances utilization limited channel capacity. 


Finally, the Commission should make clear that the costs 
associated with establishing and maintaining a “blocked” channel 
should be borne by leased access providers of indecent 
programming. The Commission should incorpovate that finding 
into its future rulemaking regarding reasonable rates, terms, and 
conditions for leased access use. 


Respectfully submitted, 

Acton Corp. 

Allen's Television Cable Service, Inc. 

Cable Television Association of 
Maryland, Delaware and District 
of Columbia 

Century Communications Corp. 

Columbia International, Inc. 

Florida Cable Television Association 

Gilmer Cable Television Company, 
Inc. 

Helicon Corp. 

Jones Intercable, Inc. 

KBLCOM Inc. 

Monmouth Cablevision Assoc. 


3 


TeleCable Corporation 

Texas Cable TV Association 

United Video Cablevision, Inc. 

West Virginia Cable Television 
Association 


By /s/ 


December 7, 1992 


FCC Caption Omitted 


JOINT COMMENTS OF THE ALLIANCE FOR 
COMMUNITY MEDIA, THE ALLIANCE FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS DEMOCRACY, THE AMERICAN 
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION AND PEOPLE FOR THE 
AMERICAN WAY 


These comments are being jointly filed by The Alliance for 
Community Media (formerly the National Federation of Local 
Cable Programmers), The Alliance for Communications 
Democracy, The American Civil Liberties Union, and People for 
the American Way. These four non-profit corporations represent 
organizations and individuals who use public, educational or 
governmental (“PEG”) and leased access channels either as 
programmers or as viewers, Their comments are submitted in 
response to the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking adopted by the 
Commission on November 5, 1992 and released on November 10, 
1992, whereby the Commission proposes to promulgate a rule 
pursuant to Section 10 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection 
and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 
(1992). The Commission's Proposed Rule is contained in Appendix 
A of its Notice. It would place restrictions on PEG programming 
that contains “obscene material, sexually explicit conduct, or 
material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct.” It would also 


5 


place restrictions on allegedly “indecent” programming on leased 
access channels. 


BACKGROUND 


These commenters fully support the goal that apparently 
underlies Section 10 and the Commission's Proposed Rule — the 
protection of minors from cable programming that their parents find 
unsuitable for children. However, for a variety of reasons, we 
cannot support the regulatory mechanism chosen by Congress and 
the Commission. Before stating our objections, we place Section 
10 and the Commission's Proposed Rule in context. 


A. The 1984 Act. — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 
1984 (“the 1984 Act”) added Title VI to the Communications Act 
of 1934. As Congress's first direct legislation concerning cable, the 
1984 Act was in part concerned with deregulating cable rates, 
which was thought necessary to encourage prosperity in an 
emerging industry. See generally H.R. Rep. No. 628, 102d Cong., 
2d Sess. 28-29 (1992). 


At the same time, Congress was equally concerned with 
preventing local cable operators from exercising sole programming 
choice. These operators are often owned by media conglomerates 
that also have ownership interests in the programmers chosen by 
their cable subsidiaries. Even when programmer ownership is not 
an issue, “cable conglomerates have shown themselves to be 
capable of using their dominant position in electronic media 
distribution to obtain economic advantages from those program 
channels they agree to deliver, and to allow these financial 
considerations to dictate which particular communication options to 
offer the public they ostensibly serve.” Don R. LeDuc, 
“Unbundling” the Channels: A Functional Approach to Cable TV 
Legal Analysis, 41 Fed. Comm. L.J. 1, 8 (1988). 


To that end, Congress incorporated into the 1984 Act leased 
access provisions that require a cable operator to “designate channel 
capacity for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the 
operator.” 47 U.S.C. § 532(b)(1). This legislation specified that 
“[(a] cable operator shall not exercise any editorial control over any 
video programming provided” over leased access channels. 47 


6 


U.S.C. § 532(c(2). According to the legislative history of that 
Act, 


“A requirement that channels be set aside for third-party 
commercial access separates editorial control over a limited 
number of cable channels from the ownership of the cable 
system itself. Such a requirement is fundamental to the goal of 
providing subscribers with the diversity of information sources 
intended by the First Amendment.” H.R. Rep. No. 934, 98th 
Cong., 2d Sess. 31 (1984), reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
4655, 4668. 


Congress was not only worried about financial disincentives. 
Leased access was also viewed as a way to insure subscribers 
“programming which represents a social or political viewpoint that 
a cable operator does not wish to disseminate.” /d. at 48, 1984 
U.S.C.C.A.N. at 4685. 


The 1984 Act also included provisions that allow local 
franchising authorities to establish PEG access channels. By then, 
PEG had a long history of having been incorporated by local 
authorities into their franchise agreements. The earliest public 
access channels had appeared in the early 1960's, see Daniel L. 
Brenner et al., Cable Television and Other Nonbroadcast Video 
§ 6.04[2], at 6-32 (1992), and by 1969 the Commission had issued 
an order in part “encouraging” PEG, FCC 69-1170, 20 F.C.C.2d 
201, 206-07 (1969). The 1984 Act thus did not create PEG; rather, 
it ratified the efforts in this area by localities across the country, 
and it assured other franchising authorities of their ability to require 
PEG channels in their franchise agreements. 


PEG, as is true of leased access, addresses the bottlenecking 
that occurs when operators impede subscriber access to the full 
variety of cable programming, whether out of commercial concerns 
or hostility to diverse programming. Congress therefore specified 
that “a cable operator shall not exercise any editorial control over 
any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity.” 


47 U.S.C. § 531(e). In doing so, Congress purposefully recognized 
that PEG was a public forum: 


7 


“Public access channels are often the video equivalent of the 
speaker's soap box or the electronic parallel to the printed 
leaflet. They provide groups and individuals who generally 
have not had access to the electronic media with the opportunity 
to become sources of information in the electronic marketplace 
of ideas.” H.R. Rep. No. 934, supra, at 3, 1984 
U.S.C.C.A.N. at 4667. 


While thus seeking to assure the greatest diversity of cable 
programs, the 1984 Act was also concerned with protecting 
unsupervised children from all types of cable programming — be it 
on general or access channels — that their parents found unsuitable. 
Congress therefore enacted a “lockbox” provision, now codified at 
47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A), which requires all cable operators to 
make lockboxes available to their subscribers. According to the 
legislative history of the 1984 Act, Congress 


“recognize[d] with respect to cable the need to provide for the 
restriction, within constitutionally permissible grounds, on the 
availability of programming, which might not be obscene, but 
is nonetheless indecent, if children are going to be adequately 
protected from exposure to such material. Thus, [47 U.S.C. 
§ 544(d)(2)(A)] provides one method for dealing with obscene 
or indecent programming by requiring every cable operator to 
provide to any subscriber upon request a device (often referred 
to as a ‘lock box’) which is capable of restricting the viewing, 
during any period selected by the subscriber, of a cable service 
which contains obscene or indecent programming. The 
Committee believes that the requirement that these devices be 
furnished (by sale or lease) by the cable operator provides one 
means to effectively restrict the availability of such 
programming, particularly with respect to child viewers, 
without infringing the First Amendment rights of the cable 
operator, the cable programmer, or other cable viewers.” /d. 
at 70, 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 4707. 


Thus, in 1984, Congress specifically accounted for the first 
amendment rights of programmers and viewers when it adopted 
lockboxes as the least restrictive means for effectively protecting 
children. Pursuant to court order, see ACLU v. FCC, 823 F.2d 


1554, 1579 (D.C. Cir. 1987). cert. denied, 485 U.S. 959 (1988), 
the Commission has subsequently required that lockboxes be 
capable of blocking all channels carried on a cable system, 
including PEG and leased access channels. See FCC 87-306, 2 
F.C.C.R. 5893, 9, at 5894 (1987). 


B. PEG and Leased Access,’ — PEG access channels have by 
any measure abundantly fulfilled the hope that they would become 
a robust “electronic marketplace of ideas” in those communities 
where they are provided for and supported with adequate 
resources.’ First, PEG programming is a widely diverse mix from 
numerous sources. Some 2,000 centers produce about 10,000 hours 
of local programming a week. Cable Television Regulation (Part 
2), 1990: Hearings on H.R. 4415 Before the U.S. House of 
Representatives Subcomm. on Telecommunications and Finance of 
the Comm. on Energy and Commerce, \01st Cong., 2d Sess. (1990) 
(testimony of Sharon Ingraham, on behalf of the National 
Federation of Local Cable Programmers). An annual video festival 
known as the Hometown USA Video Festival is dedicated to 
showcasing the best of local origination and PEG channel 
productions, and in 1990 it attracted 2,100 entries from 360 cities 
in 41 states. Patricia Aufderheide, Cable Television and the Public 
Interest, 42 3. Comm. 52, 58 (1992) [hereinafter Cable Television] 
(App., Exh. A). 


Second, access channels are widely viewed in those 
communities where they are available. Approximately 30 million 


' The description that follows is based in very large measure on Patricia 
Aufderheide, Cable Television and the Public Interest, 42 J. Comm. 52, 
58-60 (1992), which is included in the Appendix that is presented with 
these comments (hereafter, “ App.”) as Exhibit A. Dr. Aufderheide teaches 
in the School of Communication at The American University of 
Washington, D.C., and greatly assisted in the preparation of these 


? The robust quality of access programming has attracted a great deal 
of press attention. See App., Exh. B & C (examples of articles). Indeed, 
cable operators have often touted access channels when trumpeting the 
public good furthered by their systems. See App., Exh. D-O. 


9 


homes or 70 million people are provided with an access channel on 
their cable system. Margie Nicholson, Cable Access: A 
Community Communications Resource for Nonprofits, Bull. 3 


(Benton Found., Washington, D.C.), Apr. 1990, at 7 [hereinafter 
Cable Access). 


“One multisite study shows that 47% of cable viewers watch 
community access channels, a quarter of them at least three 
times in two weeks; 46% say it was “somewhat” to “very” 
important in deciding to subscribe to or remain with cable. 
(Frank Jamison, Community Programming Viewership Study 
Composite Profile (1987) (App., Exh. H).] Another study, 
commissioned by Access Sacramento, showed that two-thirds of 
cable subscribers who knew about the channel watched it. 
[Access Sacramento, /99/ Audience Survey Findings Report 
(1991) (App., Exh. I).]” Cable Television, supra, at 58. 


Similarly, Northwest Community Television found that 50% of 
subscribers who could receive their programming watched it 
“frequent[ly)” or “occasional[ly],” and 46% rated this 
“very valuable” or “somewhat valuable.” William 
Morris, Northwest Community Television Subscriber Study (1992) 
(App., Exh. J). 

Finally, PEG programming speaks to a multitude of vital local 
programming as city council and school board meetings, local 
sports events, religious programming or a videotext community 


| 


specialized studies, such as an examination of the immigrant 
experience through oral histories. Diana Agosta et al., The 
Participate Report: A Cas 


10 


education series is sponsored by the Los Angeles Jazz Society. Jd. 
at 39. 

Moreover, PEG access channels are often the forum for core 
political debate. The Wrightwood Improvement Association of 
Chicago, for instance, used public access to marshal support for a 
“home equity” referendum. /d. at 30. In Tampa, Florida, public 
access cable provided the primary informational vehicle for citizens 
concerned about a county tax that was defeated in a record voter 
turnout. Cable Television, supra, at 59. “Also in Tampa, the 
educational cable access system's airing of school board meetings 
has resulted in vastly increased public contact with school board 
members.” /d. at 59. In New York City, Paper Tiger television 


regularly produces programs that are sharply critical of the media. 
Id. at 60-61. 


Austin, Texas, is home of one of access cable's oldest public 
affairs talk shows. Cable Television, supra, at 60. The League of 
Women Voters of Bucks County, Pennsylvania produces the 
ongoing video documentary series, “AT Issue.” Cable Access, 
supra, at 57. Public access has also been host to viewpoints as 
diverse as those of leftist critics of the Gulf War (in Deep Dish 
TV's national series) and those of conservative Rep. Newt Gingrich 
(R-GA), who hosted half-hour shows produced by the Washington, 
DC-based American Citizen's Television (ACTV). Cable 
Television, supra, at 60-61. 


Given the vital role that PEG has assumed, it is not surprising 
to find that its programming is at times controversial. For example, 
the Ku Klux Klan has circulated national programs for local 
viewing. George H. Shapiro, Litigation Concerning Challenges to 
the Franchise Process, Programming and Access Channel 
Requirements, and Franchise Fees, in 1 Cable Television Law 1990: 
Revisiting the Cable Act 341, § Ill, { F., at 409 (Frank W. Lioyd 
ed. 1990). In the spirit of robust debate that is appropriate to an 
open electronic marketplace of ideas, the Klan programs spurred 
civil liberty and ethnic minority organizations to use the access 
service in response, which these groups have continued to do. 
Daniel L. Brenner, supra, § 604[7]. at 6-42.2 (1992). 


ll 


Leased access has not to date been as successful as PEG. Cable 
operators have exercised their market power to price leased access 
out of the range of most programmers, as the Senate recognized in 
the legislative history of the 1992 Act: 


“The cable operator is almost certain to have interests that 
clash with that of the programmer seeking to use leased access 
channels. If their interests were similar, the operator would 
have been more than willing to carry the programmer on 
regular cable channels. The operator thus has already decided 
for any number of reasons not to carry the programmer. For 
example, the operator may believe that the programmer might 
compete with programming that the [operator] owns or 
controls. To permit the operator to establish the leased access 
rate thus makes little sense.” S. Rep. No. 92, 102d Cong., Ist 
Sess. 31 (1991). 


Congress thus found that leased access was undermined by the 
system of operator-established rates that existed from 1984 until 
_ passage of the 1992 Act. 


C. The 1992 Act. — During the period of federally mandated 
rate deregulation ushered in by the 1984 Act, the cable industry 
experienced tremendous growth. In the seven years following 
passage of the 1984 Act, cable penetration increased from thirty- 
seven to sixty-one percent of television households; monthly 
revenue increased from $18.94 to $31.51 per subscriber; and 
advertising revenue increased from $600 million to $3 billion. 
H.R. Rep. No. 628, supra, at 29. 

Cable's growth spurred renewed congressional scrutiny of the 
industry. Since the beginning of October 1989, for example, the 
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation held 
eleven hearings on cable television. S. Rep. No. 92, supra, at 3. 
This oversight culminated in 1992 when Congress overrode a 
presidential veto and enacted the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“the 1992 Act” or “the 
Act”). 

Neither of the bills that originated the 1992 Act contained any 
provision that even remotely resembles what is now Section 10. 


12 


Rather, both bills, as well as the hearings and committee reports on 
each of them, where predominantly concerned with issues related 
to rate re-regulation, local “must carry” rules, customer service 
practices, and industry integration and concentration. See S. Rep. 
No. 92, supra; H.R. Rep. No. 628, supra. 


Portions of the original bills did evince a concern for leased 
access. Thus, what is now Section 9 of the Act strengthens leased 
access by introducing rate regulation for those channels, under 
which the Commission must establish maximum reasonable rates 
and reasonable terms and conditions for carriage. As the legislative 
history of this provision discloses, rate regulation is expected to 
“increas[e] certainty and the use of these channels.” S. Rep. No. 
92, supra, at 32. Similarly, by encouraging the use of leased 
access by “programming source(s] which devote[ ] substantially al! 
of [their] programming to coverage of minority viewpoints, or to 
programming directed at members of minority groups,” Section 9(c) 
of the 1992 Act further “assure(s] that the widest possible diversity 
of information sources are made available to the public,” S. Rep. 
No. 92, supra, at 29 (citation omitted). 


D. Pertinent Amendments in the 1992 Act. — After both 
were to become the 1992 Act, those bills were modified by two 
amendments directed at controlling the content of cablecasts that 
were sexually explicit or otherwise deemed to be objectionable. 
First, both the House and Senate bills were modified by what was 
to become Section 15 of the Act. 138 Cong. Rec. § 589 (daily ed. 
Jan. 29, 1992); id. at H6528-30 (daily ed. July 23, 1992). This 
provision is entitled “Notice to Cable Subscribers of Unsolicited 
Sexually Explicit Programs.” It requires a cable operator to notify 
subscribers at least thirty days before they are provided any 
“premium channel” — defined as a pay service that offers movies 
rated by the Motion Picture Association of America (“MPAA”) X, 
R or NC-17 — as part of a free promotion. The subscriber may 
then request that the operator block the transmission of this channe] 
to his home, and the operator must comply. 


The legislative history of Section 15 discloses that the 
provisions of this amendment were purposefully crafted to be 


13 


similar to the subscriber-initiated lockbox requirement of 47 U.S.C. 
§ 544(d)(2)(A), which the viewer can use to block programs on pre- 
existing channels. As the Senate sponsor recognized, under Section 
15, “[t}he subscriber must call the cable company and ask that the 
channel be blocked or that the cable company provide a lockout 
device.” 138 Cong. Rec. § 589 (daily ed. Jan. 29, 1992) 
(statement of Sen. Helms).’ 


The second such amendment was Section 10. In contrast to 
Section 15, Section 10 did not arise as an amendment in both 
houses of Congress. Rather, it was offered in three different parts 
as floor amendments on the last legislative day before the Senate 
approved its bill. Senator Helms first proposed subsections (a) and 
(b) with regard to leased access, Id. at § 646 (daily ed. Jan. 30, 
1992). Senator Fowler immediately added subsection (c) for PEG. 
Id. at § 649. Some time later, Senator Helms added subsection (d) 
which abrogates statutory immunity for cable operators if they are 
- found to have carried on PEG or leased access any program that 
“involves obscene material.” Jd. at S652. No provisions similar 
to any of Section 10’s four subsections were introduced in the 
House. 

Also in contrast to Section 15, Section 10’s provisions are not 
even remotely analogous to lockboxes or any other system of 
initiated blocking, Section 10 allows an operator to prohibit even 
protected speech, without regard to whether subscribers want to see 
it or not. It therefore differs from a system of subscriber-initiated 
blocking, which allows parents to decide what (if any) programming 
to screen from their children. 

For leased access, Section 10(a) allows cable operators to 
prohibit programming that the operator “reasonably believes” is 


> We note that Section 15's system of subscriber-initiated blocking is 
problematic for a reason unrelated to the concerns of these Comments. 
Because the MPAA rating system does not provide the safeguards required 
by the first amendment, Motion Picture Ass'n., v. Specter, 315 F. Supp. 
824, 825 (E.D. Pa. 1970), government regulations may not rely upon it, 
Swope v. Lubbers, 560 F. Supp. 1328, 1334 (W.D. Mich. 1983). 


14 


indecent. If the operator does not prohibit such programming on 
leased access channels, the operator is required by Section 10(b) to 
place all indecent programs (as defined by the Commission and self- 
identified by the programmer) on a single channel and to block that 
channel unless a subscriber requests access in writing. The 
Commission is required to promulgate leased access regulations 
within 120 days. 


For PEG access, Section 10 follows a different approach. 
Section 10(c) requires the Commission to promulgate regulations 
within 180 days that will enable a cable operator to prohibit not just 
sexually explicit programming, but also “material soliciting or 
promoting unlawful conduct.” 


In the case of both PEG and leased access, Section 10(d) 
abrogates a statutory immunity and allows a cable programmer to 
be held liable if it carries any program that “involves obscene 
material.” Liability may be imposed whether or not the operator 
has exercised the authority to prohibit programming given to it 
under subsections (a) and (c). 

In sum, although Section 10 treats PEG and leased access 
differently, for both types of channels it allows an outright ban on 
purportedly offensive programming. Rather than directly instituting 
these bans, however, Section 10 follows a bifurcated approach. 
First, subsections (a) and (c) allow cable operators to ban the 
disfavored programming. Second, subsection (d) waives the 
statutory immunity otherwise available to those operators if they fail 
to ban programming that “involves obscene material.” 

Section 10 and its legislative history are remarkably void of any 
reference to the lockbox requirement of the 1984 Act, now codified 
at 47 U.S.C. § 544(d\(2)(4). The congressional record thus 
contains no legislative findings to support a conclusion that 
lockboxes have somehow become ineffective in achieving the 
interest of protecting minors. Rather, the portions of the bill that 
were enacted as Section 10 were introduced on the floor of the 
Senate without a committee report on their purpose, justification or 
likely effect. Even then, no Senator so much as purported to 
present a considered judgment with respect to how often or to what 


15 


extent minors were being exposed to cablecasts that their parents 
considered unsuitable, despite the lockbox requirement. 


E. The Commission’s Proposed Rule. — On November 5, 
1992, the Commission instituted the instant docket in order to 


promulgate a rule ander Section 10. Appendix A of its Notice of 
Proposed Rule Making presents the Commission’s Proposed Rule, 
which is intended to implement Section 10. In large measure, the 
commission’s proposed Rule merely reiterates the provisions of 
Section 10’s first three subsections, but it omits any construction of 
subsection (d)’s imposition of liability. 


The Commission’s Proposed Rule is accompanied by a 
prefatory Notice that generally solicits suggestions for regulations 
not contained in the Proposed Rule. For example, with respect to 
the content-based regulation of PEG, it requests commenters to 
- address “whether our regulations should provide for any additional 
matters not expressly addressed in the statute,” and it “invite[s] 
interested persons to comment on these and any other aspects that 
they believe would be germane to proper implementation of this 
provision.” Notice 4 14, at 7. See also id. 4 12, at 6 (similar 
language with respect to leased access). It also speaks in general 
terms about other possible regulations that are not a part of the 
Proposed Rule. 

In contrast to the congressional record, the Commission's 
Notice does recognize that lockboxes remain an effective means to 
“control access to other cable services on the system or to limit 
access to [an unblocked leased access channel] to others in the 
household.” Notice 49, at 5. It is nonetheless similar to the 
congressional record in that it, too, is void of either evidence or 
reason to support a conclusion that lockboxes have somehow 
become ineffective in achieving the interest of protecting minors 
from programming that their parents consider unsuitable for 
children. 


SUMMARY 


Because the first amendment commands that “Congress shall 
make no law .. . abridging the freedom of speech,” the federal 
courts have held that the power to regulate “must be so exercised 


16 


as not, in attaining a permissible end, unduly to infringe on the 
protected freedom.” Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 304 
(1940). Section 10 and the Commission's Proposed Rule violates 
this basic tenet, as we discuss in detail below. 


As an initial matter, Section 10 does not escape first amendment 
scrutiny merely because the programming standards contained in 
subsections (a) and (c) are expressed in permissive terms. State 
action is implicated because this federal legislation impinges on 
locally-created PEG and leased access public fora. The leased 
access blocking requirements of subsection (b) also demonstrates 
direct state action. Additionally, the threat of liability contained in 
subsection (d) exercises coercive government power over the 
operator, thereby “convert[ing] its otherwise private conduct into 
state action.” Carlin Communications, Inc. v. Mountain States Tel. 
& Tel. Co., 827 F.2d 1291, 1295 (9th Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 485 
U.S. 1029 (1988). 


Even if the prohibitions allowed by Section 10 were not 
considered state action, they would still be subject to the first 
amendment, for they impinge on a public forum. Local franchising 
authorities have, with Congress's approval, “intentionally open[ed} 
a nontraditional forum for public discourse” and created a public 
forum for “the free exchange of ideas.” International Soc'y for 
Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 112 S. Ct. 2701, 2706 (1992). 
Even private restrictions on access channels are therefore subject to 
first amendment scrutiny.‘ 

Under appropriate first amendment analysis, Section 10 is itself 
unconstitutional, for it fails the least restrictive means test. Federal 
law already requires cable operators to make lockboxes available, 
47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A), and these have been recognized by the 
courts and the Commission as an effective and non-intrusive means 
of controlling the access of unsupervised children to programming 


* Missouri Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Kansas City, Mo., 723 
F. Supp. 1347 (W.D. Mo. 1989). 


17 


that their parents find inappropriate.’ Content-based restrictions 
are therefore unconstitutional .° 


By largely reiterating the statute, the Commission has failed to 
propose constitutional regulations under Section 10. First, the 
Commission's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking is completely devoid 
of any consideration of less restrictive means. The ban it envisions 
on all sexually explicit and otherwise assertedly objectionable 


programming impermissibly reduces adults to viewing only those 
access programs that are suitable for a child. For that reason, such 


bans have always failed, even when advanced as a scheme to 
protect minors from television broadcasts.’ Moreover, even if such 
a ban could be justified, it is unnecessarily restrictive in the case of 
cable. The Commission has often determined that the far less 
restrictive option of lockboxes sufficiently guards children from 
sexually explicit programming, and it has been supported in this 
determination by Congress and the courts. However, the Notice 
fails to offer a reason for the Commission's change in position, and 
no facts are presented on the record to support that change. 
Second, because it is woefully underinclusive, the Proposed 
Rule cannot be justified as necessary to serve a compelling state 
interest. It mirrors the statute’s concern for programming only on 
PEG and leased access channels, without preventing other sexually 
explicit or otherwise objectionable cablecasts from reaching the 
unsupervised children who are assertedly being protected. This is 
especially suspect because Congress has recognized the existence of 
other forms of sexually explicit cablecasts, but it has not given the 


* ACLU v. FCC, 823 F.2d 1554, 1579 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 
485 U.S. 959 (1988); FCC 87-306, 2 F.C.C.R. 5893, ¢ 9, at 5894 (1987). 


* See, ¢.g., Cruz v. Ferre, 755 F.2d 1415, 1419 (11th Cir. 1985); 


Community Television v. Roy City, 555 F. Supp. 1164 (D. Utah 1982); 
Home Box Office, Inc. v. Wilkinson, 531 F. Supp. 987 (D. Utah 1982). 


’ Action for Children's Television v. FCC, 932 F.2d 1504, 1508-09 
(D.C. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 1281, and cert. denied, 112 
S. Ct. 1282 (1992). See generally Butler v. Michigan, 352 U.S. 380, 383 
(1957). 


standard must be narrowed, see Notice at 6 n.11, but it has not 
done so in the Proposed Rule, see id. App. A. In the same vein, 
the immunity waiver provision of Section 10(d) is overbroad 
because it subjects cable operators to liability for carrying not only 
obscene programs, but also those that “involve[ }” obscenity. The 
Commission has similarly failed to use its interpretive powers to 
narrow this vague statutory provision. 


Finally, the Commission has not proposed appropriate 
procedures for the prior imposition of these content-based 
restrictions on speech. Although not always invalid per se, content- 
based prior restraints must be accompanied by a highly protective 
system of judicial safeguards. Because the provision for imposing 
liability on cable operators is vague, it, too, should only be imposed 
after a court has previously found a program obscene. Such 
procedures are totally absent from the Proposed Rule, however. 


The Commission has not exercised its interpretive power to 
narrowly construe Section 10 to avoid these constitutional 
deficiencies. Rather, it has at best indicated that such steps would 
be appropriate without incorporating corresponding regulatory 
language into the Proposed Rule. See, ¢.g., Notice at 6 n.11 
(suggesting basis for narrowing statutory prohibition standard for 
PEG access). Indeed, the Commission has indicated that it intends 
to incorporate a host of other measures into its Proposed Rule, but 
it has not delineated the breadth of those measures. see, ¢.g., id. 
4 14, at 7 (“Commenters should also address whether our 


19 


regulations should provide for any additional measures not expressly 
addressed in the statute.”). In any circumstance, this rulemaking 
approach prejudices the public's right to comment on regulatory 
proposals. it should be especially disfavored in this situation, 
where core first amendment rights are threatened. 


The Alliance for Community Media, the Alliance for 
Communications Democracy, the American Civil Liberties Union, 
and People for the American Way are non-profit corporations that 
represent organizations and individuals who use PEG and leased 
access channels both as programmers and as viewers. The 
comments that they jointly submit therefore reflect the unique 
shared perspective of organizations whose members have a direct 
interest in assuring that cable operators use the public rights of way 
in a manner consistent with the interests of the entire community. 


The Alliance for Community Media (formerly the National 
Federation of Local Cable Programmers) is dedicated to both 
ensuring that people have access to cable and other electronic media 
and promoting community uses of such media. It is a national 
membership organization comprised of more than twelve-hundred 
organizations and individuals in more than seven-hundred 
communities, including volunteer access producers, access center 
managers and staff members, local cable advisory board members, 
city cable officials, cable company staff working in community 
programming, and others interested in local programming around 
the country. The Alliance for Community Media assists its 
members in all aspects of community programming over access 
channels, from production and operations to regulatory oversight. 

The Alliance for Communications Democracy supports efforts 
to protect the rights of the public to speak via cable, and it 
promotes the availability of the widest possible diversity of 
information sources and services to the public. The Board of 
Directors of the organization is composed of representatives of 


20 


nonprofit access corporations in communities around the country," 
who together have helped thousands of members of the public use 
the access channels that have been established in their communities. 


The American Civil Liberties Union (“the ACLU”) is a 
nationwide, nonpartisan organization with nearly 300,000 members, 
many of whom are viewers of PEG and leased access cable 
channels. It is dedicated to the protection and promotion of 
individual rights and liberties, primary among them freedom of 
speech. In 1990 the ACLU established an Arts Censorship Project 
specifically to combat an increased climate of censorship in the 
United States, including in particular efforts to suppress creative 
expression and information about sexuality and sexual orientation. 


People for the American Way (“People For”) is a nonpartisan, 
education-oriented citizens’ organization established to promote and 
protect civil and constitutional rights, including first amendment 
freedoms. Founded in 1980 by a group of religious, civic and 
education leaders devoted to our nation’s heritage of tolerance, 
pluralism and liberty, People For now has over 300,000 members 
nationwide. Many of People For’s members subscribe to cable 
television and watch programs on PEG and leased access channels. 
People For’s members have specific and personal interests in 
promoting the free flow of information and in receiving uncensored 
cable programming. People For seeks to protect the intcrests of its 
members, as well as the broader interest in preventing censorship 
of expression protected by the first amendment. 


Although the commenters generally support the goal of 
protecting unsupervised children from cable programming that their 
parents find inappropriate, we cannot support the commission's 
Proposed Rule. The content-based restrictions that the Commission 
proposes will prove seriously disruptive to access programming and 
the value that it brings to local communities across the country. 


* These communities include Chicago, Illinois; Montgomery County, 
Maryland; Boston, Massachusetts; Grand Rapids, Michigan; Manhattan 
and Staten Island, New York; Columbus, Ohio; Tucson, Arizona; and the 
State of Hawaii. 


21 


Moreover, the Proposed Rule will work this mischief without 
adding anything to the already effective requirement that cable 
operators provide lockboxes to protect unsupervised children. 


First, the PEG restriction on “material soliciting or promoting 
unlawful conduct” presents special problems for programming that 
engages in core political speech.’ For example, in Grand Rapids, 
Michigan, the producers of “Lies of Our Times” have endorsed 
sanctuary for Latin American refugees and encouraged blockades of 
government offices in protest of various official positions. 
Similarly, “The Flying Focus Video Collective” of Portland, 
Oregon has hosted a speaker who advocated direct and illegal action 
to protect old timber growth. Several programs have advocated the 
decriminalization of marijuana, including “Libertarian Conspiracy” 
of Sacramento, California, “Libertarian Review” and “Time for 
Hemp” in Tucson, Arizona, and “Cannabis” in Kalamazoo, 
Michigan. Patricia Aufderheide, Public Access Cable 
Programming, Controversial Speech, and Free Expression, 4-5 
(Nov. 1992) [hereinafter Public Access} (App., Exh. L),. 


Second, the restriction on sexually explicit programming would 
curtail programming on health education and sex education, 
including programs that deal frankly with AIDS. This would 
include programming directed at both the gay minority and 
heterosexuals. 


Examples of each of these types of programming are literally 
too extensive to document here. For example, Cambridge 
Community Television in Massachusetts could be faced with 
restrictions on a program entitled “Truth or Consequences: A Guide 
to Safe Sex at MIT.” /d. at 4. So could Kalamazoo Community 
Access Center of Michigan for an AIDS prevention special that 
involved role-playing. Jd. Similarly, the Northern Virginia Youth 
Services Coalition produces the weekly cable access series, “Focus 


* The description that follows is based in very large measure on Public 
Access Cable Programming, Controversial Speech and Free Expression, a 
draft article by Dr. Aufderheide, that is included in the Appendix as 
Exhibit L. 


22 


on Youth.” In one program on AIDS, two professionals role- 
playing a dating situation were asked, “If you were dating, how 
would you get your partner to reveal his sexual history?” Cable 
Access, supra, at 49. 


A video of a home birth in Amherst, Massachusetts might have 
fallen under scrutiny, as might have “Desperately Seeking Susan,” 
a program in Olympia, Washington that is hosted by a therapist and 
includes frank discussion of sexual behavior and sexual 
dysfunctions. Public Access, supra, at 4. The same is true for the 
“HealthVisions” series, produced by the community and 
professional education department of Good Samaritan Hospital and 
Medical Center of Portland, Oregon. Programs in the sefies have 
included “PMS: Breaking the Cycle” and “Understanding 
Impotence: A Common and Treatable Problem.” Cable Access, 
supra, at 37, 


Moreover, some programs would face restrictions under either 
or both of the “unlawful” and “explicit” standards. For example, 
access centers in Forest Park Ohio, Fort Wayne, Indiana, 
Oregon have aired programs, some produced by Operation Rescue, 
that have opposed abortion. Some of these programs have either 
encouraged blocking access to abortion clinics or have contained 
possibly offensive explicit images, or both. Public Access, Supra, 
at 5. 


Finally, live programming, including call-in programs, will be 
particularly hindered by the commission's proposed Rule. These 
shows fulfill a unique role by both making cable immediately 


Live 
from Chicago, included a seventeen-year-old girl asking how 
respond to a boyfriend who assured her that they did not need 


23 


use condoms because he was loyal to her. Speakers may also hold 
up items such as condoms to explain their use. /d. at 8. 


Health education shows could also have the same problems, For 
example, “Health in America” is produced monthly in Sacramento 
and discusses alternative and holistic health-care options. It has 
included graphic images of women with mastectomies and damaged 
breast implants. /d. at 8. 


Finally, topical call-in programs would also be threatened. 
Sacramento aired “Live Wire” within hours of the Rodney King 
verdict, on which callers had their volatile moments. And access 
programs in Oregon hotly debated that state's ballot initiative that 
would have criminalized some homosexual behavior. /d. at 5, 8. 


No one can dispute the value of these programs to an adult 
viewing audience. Even if some parents feel that unsupervised 
minors should not be given free access to all of them, it ill serves 
society to reduce adults to viewing cable that is only fit for 
children. For that reason, we see lockboxes as the alternative that 
is superior to allowing the prohibition of this type of programming. 
Lockboxes allow adults both to control children's access and to 
pertake of the robust speech and debate being aired on access 
channels. They also allow parents to decide for themselves whether 
or not their children will benefit from receiving information on 
sensitive topics, and they allow access to be granted for just the 
space of one program. Bans and blocking schemes offer none of 
these advantages, yet the congressional record and the 
Commission's Notice both disclose that hardly a whisper of 
attention has been paid to the lockbox option. 


I. SECTION 10 VIOLATES THE FIRST AMENDMENT 


There can be little doubt that the purpose and effect of Section 
10 of the Act is to establish a system of censorship that violates the 
first amendment rights of those who wish to cablecast on PEG and 
leased access channels and those who wish to view the censored 
programming. As such, if the Commission is to implement this 
section of the Act in haec verba (as its Proposed Rule suggests), 


any final rule that it may promulgate in these proceedings will itself 
be unconstitutional. We discuss the various constitutional 


24 


difficulties that the Commission's Proposed Rule presents in the 
sections that follow this one. 


This section focuses on the statute itself, and our purpose is 
twofold. First, we demonstrate the propriety of applying first 
amendment analysis to the content-based restrictions on free 
expression that are either enshrined in Section 10 or called for by 
it. Second, we show that Section 10's regulation of non-obscene 
cable programming is necessarily unconstitutional. 

A. STATE ACTION 


As an initial matter, we are aware of certain statements in the 
floor debates concerning Section 10 that attempt to categorize the 
restrictions on speech contained in that enactment as non- 

and hence beyond constitutional scrutiny. See, ¢.g., 
138 Cong. Rec. § 646 (daily ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (statement of Sen. 
Helms); id. at § 648 (statements of Sen. Thurmond); id. at § 649 
(statement of Sen. Inouye). In our view, these statements are 
clearly mistaken.” As a general matter, Congress’ role in 
establishing this system of censorship (as well as that of the 
Commission in implementing it) involves sufficient government 
action to implicate the protections of the first amendment. Access 
channels are public fora that have been created by localities through 
contracts between franchising authorities and cable operators. 


a I I mn 


25 
10 establishes. First, Congress has specified that, in all instances, 
leased access programming must be blocked if it constitutes 
“indecent programming, as defined by Commission regulations.” 
Section 10(b) (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 532(jX(1)). This provision 
is an integral part of Section 10's system of censorship, it 
in placing restrictions on programming under the Act. As such it 
is direct state involvement that suffices to trigger first amendment 
scrutiny of the entire enactment.'' Further, Section 10(b) indicates 
that Congress viewed the censorship of cable programming as a 
function of the state, and its delegation of a part of that power to a 
private actor does not insulate the exercise of that power from 
constitutional scrutiny. See, e.g., Williams v. City of St. Louis, 783 
F.2d 114, 117 (8th Cir. 1986) (“This delegation under state law of 
powers possessed by virtue of state law and traditionally exercised 
by the City satisfies us that the City’s action here is under color of 
state law.”); Ancata v. Prison Health Servs. Inc., 769 F.2d 700, 
703 (11th Cir. 1985) (“Where a function which is traditionally the 
exclusive prerogative of the state .. . is performed by a private 
entity, state action is present.”). 

Second, it is Congress in all instances that has specified what 
type of programming an operator may refuse to carry over PEG or 
leased access, otherwise mandating that “a cable operator shall not 
exercise any editorial control” over the programming of these 
channels. 47 U.S.C. § 531(e) (PEG); 47 U.S.C. § 532(c)\(2) (leased 
access). This congressional specification of programming standards 
is not insulated from first amendment scrutiny merely because it is 
phrased in permissive terms, for it operates in tandem with Section 
10(d)'s imposition of liability on private censors if they fail to 
prohibit speech that “involves” obscenity. In other words, these 


provisions place the operator in peril of liability and prompt it to 


‘Because “[tJhe move relevant inquiry in evaluating severability is 
whether the statute will function in a manner consistent with the intent of 
Congress,” Alaska Airlines. Inc. vy. Brock, 480 U.S. 678, 685 (1987) 
(emphasis in original), the state action that adheres in the blocking 
provisions of subsection (b) cannot be severed from the rest of the statute. 


26 


restrict any programming that even remotely meets the permissive 
censorship standards set out in subsections (a) and (c) of Section 10, 
lest the speech also wander into the undefined grey area that 
“involves obscene material.” Cf. Bantam Books, Inc., v. Sullivan, 
372 U.S. 58, 67 (1963) (cautioning against elevating form over 
substance when determining whether censorship is occurring), 
Penthouse Int'l. Lid. v. McAuliffe, 610 F.2d 1353, 1360 (Sth Cir.) 
(same), cert. dismissed, 447 U.S. 931 (1980). 


This effect has already been felt. For example, as the 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Time Warner Cable 
(“TWC”) concluded in an affidavit that was submitted in litigation 
that brought a direct challenge to the 1992 Act: 


“The provision of Section 10(d) . . . injurfes] TWC by 
subjecting it to the risk of criminal and civil liability for 
programming created by others that it does not wish to carry 
but is required by law to carry. The provisions . . . of the 
Cable Act permitting TWC to prohibit or restrict obscene 
programming does not alleviate such injury in that they compel 
TWC to determine obscenity questions that even Federal courts 
regard as exceedingly difficult, and TWC remains exposed to 
iminal or civil liability if a court later disagrees with its 
determination.” Affidavit of Joseph J. Collins, 4 37, at 23 
(App., Exh. M). 


2 Of course, the threat of liability is sufficient for state action purposes; 
it need not be the case, as here, that such a threat has proven to be the 
direct cause of private conduct, Peterson v. City of Greenville, 373 U.S. 
244, 248 (1963) (finding state action “even assuming . . . that the manager 
would have acted as he did independently of the existence of the 
ordinance”); Carlin Communications, Inc. v. Mountain States Tel. & Tel. 
Co., 827 F.2d 1291, 1295 (9th Cir. 1987) (“Simply by ‘command]ing} a 
particular result,’ the state had so involved itself that it could not claim the 
conduct had actually occurred as a result of private choice.”), cert. denied. 
485 U.S. 1029 (1988). 


27 


Cable operators thus feel compelled by their possible liability to 
censor widely. 

Indeed, cable operators have for that reason already begun to 
institute censorship for programming that is sexually explicit but not 
even arguably indecent, out of fear that some such program might 
later be found to subject the operators to liability. As one cable 
operator wrote to the executive director of its local public access 
programmer, 

“all programming which contains sexual, excretory or other 

behavior or depictions, or language which potentially may be 

offensive to the citizens of Tucson [must] be sent to our system 
for screening before it is cablecast by TCCC over our cable 
system.” Letter from InterMedia Partners to Tucson 

Community Cable Corp. (Nov. 13, 1992) (App., Exh. N). 
Thus, not only is programming called in to question if it concerns 
sexual material of any nature, it is also subject to editorial scrutiny 
if it contains “potentially .. . offensive” language. Because of 
their unpredictable nature and potential to include such language, 
cable operators have specifically targeted live programming 
(including call-in shows): 

“Moreover, no live programming should be cablecast which 

contains such material. All such programming should be taped 

and sent to us for screening as outlined above.” /d. 


Recognizing the obvious dangers posed ty the threat of 
government-imposed liability on private censors, federal courts 
faced with similar schemes have not hesitated to recognize the state 
action that brings first amendment principles to bear. For example, 
in Carlin Communications, Inc. v. Mountain States Telephone & 
Telegraph Co., 827 F.2d 1291 (9th Cir. 1987). cert. denied, 485 
U.S. 1029 (1988) Arizona’s threat of criminal liability constituted 
sufficient state action to subject to first amendment scrutiny a 
telephone company’s decision to bar sexually explicit messages. 
“With this threat, Arizona ‘exercised coercive power’ over 
Mountain Bell and thereby converted its otherwise private conduct 
into state action... .” Id. at 1295 (quoting Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 


28 


U.S. 991, 1004 (1982))." Similarly, the threat of liability 
contained in Section 10(d) of the 1992 Act transforms the 
censorship standards of Sections 10(a) and (c), which are otherwise 
phrased in permissive terms, into state action. 


Indeed, the existence of subsection (d) nullifies the state action 
arguments advanced in the floor debates on Section 10. Subsection 
(d) was not a part of the enactment then being debated, but was 
later added as a “conforming amendment.” It is “conforming,” 
however, only in the sense that it requires cable operators to 
conform to censorship standards that are otherwise phrased in 
permissive terms. In later proposing the addition of subsection (d), 
Senator Helms specifically stated that its purpose was fo “put an 
end to the kind of things going on” access channels.'* Given this 
change in circumstances, it is not surprising to find inapposite the 
federal cases cited in the floor debate for the proposition that the 
example, Senator Helms pointed to Carlin Communication. Inc. v. 
Southern Bell Telephone & Telegraph. Inc., 802 F.2d 1352 (11th 
Cir. 1986), to support his contention that “it is permissible to allow 
a private company to make independent decisions to exclude certain 


The court went on to hold that any decision to ban speech made under 
threat of state-imposed liability “was unconstitutional state action” that 
violated the first amendment. 827 F.2d at 1296. 


In its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the Commission recognized the 
symbiotic relationship between the programming standards of subsections 
(a) and (c) and the imposition of liability contained in subsection (d). For 
example, Paragraph 13 first notes that subsection (c) “merely allows the 
cable operator the option” of censoring PEG. The next sentence 
immediately juxtaposes 

“As pointed out earlier, however, [subsection (d)] expressly provides 
that cable operators are no longer statutorily immune from liability for 
carriage of obscene materials on these channels.” 

However, we note that the legislative history of subsection (d) 
suggests that liability cannot be imposed on cable operators with respect 
to PEG. The scant floor debate was concerned wholly with leased access 
channels. 138 Cong. Rec. S652 (daily ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (statement of 
Sen. Helms). 


29 


objectionable material.” 138 Cong. Rec. $646 (daily ed. Jan. 30, 
1992) (emphasis added). As others have readily recognized, 
however, the threat of liability removes the independence of that 
decision and renders it subject to first amendment scrutiny. See, 
¢.g., Mountain States, 827 F.2d at 1295; id. at 1298 n.2 (Canby, 
J., dissenting in part) (“the presence of this coercion differentiates 
this case from Carlin v. Southern Bell”). 


B. PUBLIC FORUM 


Even were the censorial dictates of Section 10 not themselves 
state action, the first amendment would still apply. Because PEG 
and leased access constitute a quintessential public forum, a system 
of censorship is not insulated from the first amendment simply 
because Congress has vested private cable operators with the 
decision to prohibit speech in that forum. When the government 
destroys a public forum by empowering private actors to restrict 
speech, it must do so within the bounds of the first amendment. 


PEG and leased access certainly constitute such a public forum 
— one that is unique because of the widespread reliance on 
electronic communication. Congress recognized this status in the 
legislative history of the 1984 Act, which both recognized that local 
franchising authorities could provide for PEG in franchises and 
required them to establish leased access, See H.R. Rep. No. 934, 
98th Cong., 2d Sess. 30 (1984), reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 


4655, 4667 (quoted supra page 4). The legislative history of the 
1992 Act similarly recognizes that Congress has heretofore 
“requir[ed] cable operators to operate public and leased access 
channels as a public forum open to any and all speakers.” 138 
Cong. Rec. S648 (daily ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (letter from Mr. Peters): 
id. at S652 (statement of Sen. Helms) (“[Tyhe intent of the [1984] 
law, obviously, was to promote diversity in cable programming. 
The law required cable operators to carry anything that 
programmers brought along.”). In sum, “the underlying theory of 
leased access channels [is] to provide a forum for people to speak 
out on a diversity of issues.” /d. (statement of Sen. Thurmond). 
See also S. Rep. No. 381, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 46 (1990) (PEG 
and leased access constitute “a free market of ideas”). 


30 


Under generally applicable first amendment principles, 
therefore, localities that implement these provisions pursuant to 
their franchising authority have purposefully ‘“‘openfed] a 


Lee 112 S. Ct. 2701, 2706 (1992) (quoting Cornelius v. NAACP 
Legal Defense & Educ. Fund. Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 800, 802 
(1985))"*. The federal courts have thus recognized that PEG and 
leased access constitutes a public forum for purposes of first 
amendment analysis .'* 


Because of the recognition that access channels are a public- 
forum, as at least one commentator has noted, “for the access 


See also Southeastern Promotions, Lid. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. $46, 555 
(1975) (finding municipal auditorium a public forum); Cinevision Corp. v. 
City of Burbank, 745 F.2d 560, 570 (9h Cir. 1984) (same for 
amphitheater), cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1054 (1985); Yurkew v. Sinclair, 
495 F. Supp. 1248, 1252 n.5 (D. Minn. 1980) (state fair grounds); United 
States Labor Party v. Knox, 430 F. Supp. 1359, 1361-62 (D.N.C. 1977) 
(parking areas adjoining state-owned liquor stores). 


© See, eg., Quincy Cable TV. Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434, 1452 (D.C. 
Cir. 1985) (“access rules .. . serve countervailing First Amendment 
values by providing a forum for [the] public”), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 
1169 (1986); Muir v. Alabama Educ. Television Comm'n, 656 F.2d 1012, 
1022 & n.19 (Sth Cir. Unit B 1981); Erie Telecommunications, Inc. v. 
City of Erie, 659 F. Supp. 580, 598-600 (W.D. Pa. 1987) (“access 
requirements are intended to make cable channels available to the public 
on a first-come, first-served nondiscriminatory basis”). See also Berkshire 
Cablevision of Rhode Island, Inc. v. Burke, 571 F. Supp. 976, 987 (D.R.1. 
1983) (access rules “mandate that all individuals be given the opportunity 
to appear on cable television on a nondiscriminatory first-come, first- 
served basis”), vacated as moot, 773 F.2d 382 (ist Cir. 1985). 


31 


In a situation remarkably similar to that presented by Section 
10, it vas an access channel's status as a public forum that 
prompted a federal court to apply first amendment analysis to a 
scheme of permissive private censorship. Missouri Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan v. Kansas City, Mo., 723 F. Supp. 1347 (W.D. No. 
1989). The Kansas City case arose after members of a racist 
organization declared their intention to air a program over a public 
access channel. In reaction, the city council passed an ordinance 
that “permitted [the local cable operator] to delete the cable channel! 
if it so desired.” Jd. at 1350. In its stead, “a new channel would 
be created” that “would be subject to [the operator's} editorial 
control.” Jd. Recognizing that the introduction of permissive 
editorial control would have intruded upon a public forum, the 
court denied a motion for summary judgment that would have 
eliminated a first amendment claim. It held that “[a] state may only 
eliminate a designated public forum if it does so in a manner 
consistent with the First Amendment.” /d. at 1352." Because 


See also United States v. Grace, 461 U.S. 171, 180 (1983) (“the 
destruction of public forum status... is at least presumptively 
impermissible” under the first amendment). Cf United States Postal Serv. 
v. Council of Greenburgh Civic Ass'ns, 453 U.S. 114, 133 (1981) 
(“Congress, no more than a suburban township, may not by its own ipse 

(continued...) 


32 


Section 10 and the Commission's proposed regulations thereunder 
would similarly allow cable operators to impinge upon the PEG and 
leased access public forum, they are proper objects of scrutiny 
under the first amendment. 

C. FIRST AMENDMENT VIOLATIONS 


We have shown above that Section 10 does not escape first 
amendment scrutiny. Moreover, under standards applicable to 
content-based cable regulations, Section 10 is unconstitutional. As 
the Commission has recognized in this docket, see Notice q 7, at 4, 
differences in the characteristics of the various print and electronic 
media mandate different standards of first amendment protection 
against content-based regulation of expression pursued over each 
such medium. Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367, 
386 (1969). “Each method of communicating ideas is a ‘law unto 
itself and that law must reflect the ‘differing natures, values, 
abuses and dangers’ of each method.” Metromedia, Inc. v. City of 
San Diego, 453 U.S. 490, 501 (1981) (quoting Kovacs v. Cooper, 
336 U.S. 77, 97 (1949)). Attention to the peculiarities of each 
medium is therefore necessary when it comes to scrutinizing 
attempted government regulation of speech that, while not obscene, 
may be sexually explicit." 

Thus, while the legislative history of Section 10 discloses an 
intent to import content-based regulations that may be appropriate 
for other media into cable, see, ¢.g., 138 Cong. Rec. $646-47 
(daily ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (statement of Sen. Helms) (referring to 


"(...continued) 

dixit destroy the ‘public forum’ status of streets and parks which have 
historically been public forums.”). 

Compare FCC v. Pacifica Found., 438 U.S. 726, 748 (1978) 
(concerning indecency standards applicable to broadcast) with Sabie 
Communications v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 127 (1989) (“[t}he private 
commercial telephone communications at issue here are substantially 
different from the public radio broadcast at issue in Pacifica”) and Bolger 


v. Youngs Drug Prods. Corp., 463 U.S. 60, 74 (1983) (distinguishing 
receipt of sexually explicit mail from broadcast). 


33 


restrictions on telephone communications), such importation does 
of cable have allowed Congress to require that operators make 
lockboxes available, federal courts have found that federal law 
already mandates the least restrictive means available to effectively 
curbing the exposure of unsupervised children to sexually explicit, 
non-obscene cable programming. For that reason, Section 10's 
content-based restrictions violate the first amendment. 


First, unlike broadcast, cable does not involve a “captive 
audience” — precisely the basis on which the Supreme Court in 
Sable Communications v. FCC, 492 U.S. 1150, 127-28 (1989), 
distinguished the telephone communications it was concerned with 
from the broadcast at issue in Pacifica. It was also on this basis 
that federal courts have stricken local cable regulations that, like 
Section 10, seek to limit sexually explicit programming. Thus, in 
Community Television v. Roy City, 555 F. Supp. 1164 (D. Utah 
1982), the court invalidated a local ordinance that sought to regulate 


indecent cable programming, reasoning that all cable viewers must 
subscribe to the service and retain the power to cancel that 
subscription. The court held that cable subscribers must specifically 
choose to invite cable programming into their home, and it 
therefore found inapplicable the captive audience rationale that 
supports the regulation of broadcast indecency. /d. at 1168-69. It 
was in part on the same basis that the Eleventh Circuit declared a 
similar ordinance unconstitutional, finding that “[a] Cablevision 
subscriber must make the affirmative decision to bring Cablevision 
into his home.” Cruz v. Ferre, 755 F.2d 1415, 1419 (11th Cir. 
1985). See also Quincy Cable TV. Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434, 
1448 n.31 (D.C. Cir, 1985) (citing Cruz), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 
1169 (1986). 

even greater control over that service than they have over either 
broadcast or telephone. Cable is unique in offering subscribers the 
ability to lock out their children’s receipt of specific channels that 
might otherwise be objectionable, just as parents may place the 
liquor cabinet under lock and key. Indeed, federal law mandates 
that all cable operators make available to their subscribers just such 


34 


lock boxes. 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)A). Thus, in finding 
unconstitutional a local restriction on sexually explicit 
programming, the Eleventh Circuit made special note of the 
“parental manageability of cable television” afforded by “the ability 
to protect children” through the use of a “‘lockbox’ or ‘parental 
key"” available from Cablevision. Cruz, 755 F.2d at 1415, 1420. 
Set also Quincy Cable TV, 768 F.2d at 1448 n.31. 


Because cable subscribers are not a captive audience and may 
use lockboxes to further control access to their service, additional 
restrictions on non-obscene cable programming are unnecessary and 
therefore violative of the basic first amendment principle that any 
restriction on speech must be narrowly tailored to achieving a 
compelling government interest. See Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 
455, 461 (1980). See generally infra Section I]. It was on this 
basis that the court in Home Box Office, Inc. v. Wilkinson, 531 
F. Supp. 987 (D. Utah 1982), invalidated on first amendment 
grounds a Utah statute forbidding cable operators from knowingly 
distributing indecent programming, despite an asserted justification 
of the protection of minors. The court held that the regulation at 
issue would also have restricted the adult population to 
programming suitable for children. /d. at 997. 

Because of the unique nature of cable television, we strongly 
agree with the federal courts that have struck down content-based 
regulations that were similar to the indecency restrictions contained 
in Section 10. Federal law already mandates the least restrictive 
means for effectively curbing the exposure of unsupervised children 
to sexually explicit cable programming. Section 10 therefore 
contemplates an unnecessary additional burden on the first 
amendment rights of PEG and leased access programmers and 
viewers, and any final rule that mirrors the statute would itself be 

Even if some content-based regulation could pass muster, 
however, it is Clear that the one proposed by the Commission fails 
to meet constitutional minima. By parroting Section 10, the 
Proposed Rule incorporates all of the statute's constitutional 
infirmities. We now turn to an examination of the Commission's 
Proposed Rule 


Ee ee ce. 


35 


il, THE COMMISSION HAS FAILED TO CONSIDER 
LESS RESTRICTIVE MEANS TO IMPLEMENT 
RESTRICTIONS CONTAINED IN ITS PROPOSED RULE 


In order to comport with the first amendment, the content-based 
restrictions contained in the Commission's Proposed Rule must both 
further a governmental interest that is compelling and do so by the 
least restrictive means. Sable Communications v. FCC, 492 US 
115, 126 (1989), Gibson v. Florida Bar, 79% F.2d 1564, 1569 
(11th Cir, 1986). cert. dismissed, 112 S$. Ct. 633 (1991). The 
Commission has failed on both of these scores. It has not 


First, the Commission has failed to state on the record the 
compelling purpose that motivates the PEG restrictions contained in 
subsection (c) of its Proposed Rule. Such an articulation is of 
course a necessary predicate to determining “if it chooses the least 
restrictive means to further the articulated interest.” Sable. 492 
U.S. at 126. As for the leased access restrictions of subsection (a). 
the Commission mentions only in passing that it is concerned with 
“children’s exposure to indecent programs” over those channels 
Notice, 4 9, at 5. Even if that passing reference can be taken as a 


%6 


full statement of the governmental interest being pursued,'? the 
Commission has not developed any record evidence describing ‘he 
nature and extent of that exposure. Without such a fact findine. 
any means implemented cannot be considered the least restrict!V¢. 
because a reviewing court is left without a standard against which 
to judge the effectiveness of the various options. Burlington TT¥ck 
Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 167-68 (1962) (age™*y 
must make findings based on substantial evidence in order that Our" 
has something to review). See also Action for Children's Television 
v. FCC, 852 F.2d 1332, 1341-42 (D.C. Cir. 1988); of. Sable, 492 
U.S. at 126-27. . 


Second, no government interest can support the complete 
prohibition against sexually explicit programming on PEG 4m 
leased access, which the Proposed Rule allows. While the feder@! 
courts recognize that government may at times shield children f°O™ 
some sexually explicit material that is not obscene, that purpPOS* 
must be served by the least restrictive means towards its effect'V® 
implementation. Sable, 492 U.S. at 126. Schemes that use child 
protection as an excuse to keep such material away from Poth 
children and adults fall far short of this test. See, ¢.g., Butl#" ¥ 
Michigan, 352 U.S. 380, 383 (1957) (even when attempr!8 ‘© 
protect children, regulation cannot effectively reduce @dults to 
having “only what is fit for children”). Regardless of the medium 
involved, therefore, child protection has failed as ar ¢xCuse for total 
bans on sexually explicit material, including bevks. id., telephone 


” We contend that it cannot be the requisite full statement. In the 


to indecent material: the 60V€™ment does not propose to act in loco 
parentis to deny childrers § 800888 Contrary to parents’ wishes.” Action for 
Children's Television v. FCC, 852 F.2d 1332, 1643 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
‘< in origirll). ln any event, if the same as yet unarticulated 
(emphasis in origirl) = ue 
cablecast, lockWO*es present the supenor means of empowering parents to 
supervise the! Children however they so choose, as we discuss below 


37 


messages, Sable, 492 U.S. at 127-31, unsolicited mail, Bolger v 

., 463 U.S. 60 (1983), and radio and 
television broadcasts, Action for Children's Television v FCC. 932 
F.2d 1504, 1508-09 (D.C. Cir. 1991), cert, denied. 112 S$ Cr 
1281, and cert. denied, 112 S$. Ct. 1282 (1992). It is thus not 


excuse for previous attemmts to prohibit sexually explicit 
programming from being carried on cable See Cruz v. Ferre. 755 
F.2d 1415, 1420-21 (11 


i 
Z 
: 
§ 


ir ; 
, 997 (D. Utah 1982), Community 


In contrast to the approach adopted by the Commission's 
proposed rule, lockboxes present the least restrictive means of 


over” ap access channel. 47 USC. § S3i(c) (PEG) 47 USC 
§ 532(c2) (leased access). in order to keep the narrow amendments of 
Section 10 from swallowmg this larger purpose — the preservation of 2 
public forum — those amendments must be narrowly coastrued By failing 
to propose safeguards such as those discussed in text. therefore the 
Commussion has also acted contrary to the statute 


find inappropriate, as we show below.”' Moreover, cable operators 
are already required to make lockboxes available to all subscribers. 
47 U.S.C. § 544¢d)Q)(A). Without a finding that lockboxes are 
ineffective, therefore, the introduction of outside editorial control 
over PEG and leased access programming must be considered an 
unconstitutionally intrusive means of protecting unsupervised 
children from sexually explicit programming. 


The Commission in the current docket has acknowledged that 
lockboxes play a role in limiting children’s access to cablecast 
indecency. Notice ¢ 9. at 5 (lockboxes are available to subscribers 
to “control access to . . . cable services on the system [and] to limit 
access to [channels carrying indecency] to others in the 
household”). In other dockets, too, the Commission has spoken 
directly to the effectiveness of this technique. See, ¢.g., FCC 85- 
179, 1985 FCC Lexis 3475, 4 132, at 112-13 (Apr. 11, 1985) 
(“Indeed, we believe that the provision for lockboxes largely 
disposes of issues involving the Commission's standards for 
indecency, and would also be a significant factor in cases related to 
obscenity and similar offensive programming .”) (footnote omitted). 
Thus, when discussing techniques for reducing children’s exposure 
to broadcast indecency, the Commission specifically noted that: 

“Technical means are available to block children’s access to 

must provide a device such as a “lock-box" or ‘parental key’ 

that permits a subscriber to restrict access to selected 
programming .. . . [Lockboxes) can restrict access by children 
whether or not parents are physically presem and actively 

supervise.” FCC 90-264, 5 F.C.C.R. 5297, 5305 (1990). 

The Commission has not been alone im recognizing the 
effectiveness of lockboxes. Congress, too, has recognized both that 
lockboxes effectively screen indecency and that they do so without 
infringing on the first amendment nghts of programmers and adult 
viewers. See H.R. No. 934, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 70 (1984), 1984 


“Examples of several lockbox owner manuals are presented in the 
Appendix as Exhibu O-Q 


- a ee ea 


39 


U.S.C.C.A.N. at 4655, 4707 (quoted supra at 5). And the federal 
courts have similarly acknowledged that these devices are effective 
for protecting children without burdening programmers’ rights to 
speak. See cases cited supra Section 1.C. Indeed, lockboxes are 
considered superior to central blocking because they place 
“responsibility for making such choices .. . where our society has 
traditionally placed it — on the shoulders of the parent.” Fabulous 
Assocs. Inc. v. Pennsylvania Pub. Util. Comm'n, 896 F.2d 780, 
788 (3d Cir. 1990). See also Bolger, 463 U.S. at 73-74 (parental 
discretion controlling access to unsolicited contraceptive advertising 
is the preferred method of dealing with such material). 

In the face of this precedent, the Commission has simply failed 
to explain in any manner either why lockboxes are now no longer 
effective or why a more burdensome means of protecting children 
has become necessary.” Without record evidence that supports a 
restrictive option of central blocking cannot be implemented. Cf 
ACLU v. FCC, 823 F.2d 1554, 1579 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. 
denied, 485 U.S. 959 (1988). 


Ill. THE COMMISSION’S PROPOSED REGULATIONS 
ARE CONSTITUTIONALLY DEFICIENT BECAUSE 
THEY ARE UNDERINCLUSIVE 


Because the constitution will tolerate a content-based restriction 
on speech only when it “is necessary to serve a compelling state 
interest and. . . is narrowly drawn to achieve that end,” Perry 
Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 45 
(1983), the failure of such a restriction to address the entirety of a 
problem “undermine{s] [the] claim that the prohibition. . _ . can be 
justified by reference to the State's interest.” Carey v. Brown, 447 
U.S. 455, 465 (1980). Underinclusiveness thus stands as an 


= Nor has the Commission explored other alternatives that may be 
considered less restrictive than a ban or central blocking, such as a 
nighttime safe harbor. Cf Action for Children’s Television, 932 F 2d a 
1509 (concerning Commission promulgation of nighttime safe harbor for 
broadcast). 


funds); Community-Service Broadcasting v. FCC, 593 F.2d 1102, 
1122 (D.C. Cir. 1978) (en banc) (underinclusiveness as basis for 
broadcast stations retain audio recordings of broadcasts). 


i Ac ——_—_ 


ee 


41 


1.é€. tO prevent operators from prohibiting from access channels the 
same types of programming it carries on other of its channels. 
Because the Proposed Rule omits such a safeguard, the Commission 
would allow a cable operator to cablecast sexually explicit programs 
over non-access channels while it prohibited the same type of 
programming on access channels ” 


The underinclusiveness common to both the statute and the 
Proposed Rule is especially suspect because the legislative history 
of the Act demonstrates that Congress was aware that cable 
operators carry sexually explicit programming on channels other 
than leased access.“ For example, floor statements evidence a 
concern that the Playboy Channel had been carried over a leased 
access channel in Puerto Rico. 138 Cong. Rec. $646, S652 (daily 
ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (statement of Sen. Helms). While the 
Commission's proposed regulations might require that the Playboy 
Channel be scrambled on leased access, it places no similar 
restriction on its carriage over the other cable channels on which it 
far more typically appears. 

Section 15 of the Act, which concerns unsolicited sexually 
explicit “premium channel” programs, also demonstrates that 
Congress was aware of sexually explicit nonaccess programming 
Congress found that the problem was sufficiently resolved by 
allowing subscribers to request central blocking of the unsolicited 
premium channel — just as they can use lockboxes to block pre- 


® In dicta, the Supreme Court in R.A. V. v. City of St. Paul, Minn., 112 
S. Ct. 2538, 2545 (1992), stated that no fatal underinclusiveness is 
presented by “a State's prohibiting obscenity (and other forms of 
prescribable expression) only in certain media.” Because the 
Commission's Proposed Rule differentiates between cablecasts over the 
same media, however, the Court's dicta in this regard is inapposite. 
* Nor has the Commission in this docket developed any facts on the 
record tending to show that access programming is somehow a greater 
problem. 


42 


existing channels (including access channels) if sexually explicit 
programming on these channels was unwelcome. See generally 
supra Section II (discussing lockboxes). 


The narrow scope of Section 10 and the Commission's 
Proposed Rule is especially invidious in this context. The users of 
PEG and leased access channels have traditionally been those less 
powerful interests who otherwise have no access to the electronic 
media — a situation that is only reinforced by Section 9 of the Act, 
which specifically encourages the use of leased access by 
“programming source[s] which devote[ } substantially all of [their] 
programming to coverage of minority viewpoints, or to 
programming directed at members of minority groups.” Section 
%c) (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 532(i)). The Supreme Court's caution 
in Cornelius, vy. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. Fund. Inc., 473 
U.S. 788 (1985), is therefore particularly apt. When the 
“purported concern [is] to avoid controversy excited by particular 
groups,” warned the Court, distinctions “may conceal a bias against 
the viewpoint advanced by the excluded speakers.” /d. at 812. Cy. 
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, Minn., 112 S. Ct. 2538, 2547 (1992) 
(banning some types of words but not others presents a “realistic 
possibility that official suppression of ideas is afoot”).” 

In sum, Section 10 and the Commission's Proposed Rule do not 
pursue a compelling state interest, and the Commission cannot 
overcome the statute’s underinclusiveness by simply applying the 
scheme set out in Section 10 to all cable channels. Neither the 
1992 Act nor the 1984 Act affords the Commission any such 
sweeping authority, which would be unconstitutional in any event. 


= R.A.V, two, is especially apt with respect to the Commission's 
standards for censoring PEG. In an apparent attempt to cover all 
programming that might in any way be considered inappropriate for 
children, that standard allows the censoring of both indecency and 
“material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct.” Because the 
Proposed Rule does not, however, proscribe all but the enumerated forms 
of allegedly imappropriate speech, it must be considered as an 
unconstitutional attempt to “regulate use based on hostility — or favoritism 
— towards the underlying message expressed.” 112 S. Ct. at 2545. 


i Al I ee ~ 


43 


However, the use of regulations concerning lockboxes — which are 
authorized by statute — to implement the constraints of Section 10 
would permit the Commission to address Congress’s concern for 
protecting unprotected children from cable programming their 
parents find inappropriate, and to do so on an evenhanded basis that 
applies to all cablecasts. 


IV. THE STANDARDS FOR PROHIBITING SPEECH 
THAT ARE PROPOSED BY THE COMMISSION ARE 
OVERBROAD AND HENCE UNCONSTITUTIONAL 


The Commission's Proposed Rule is overbroad in two differ 
respects. First, the standard for prohibiting PEG programming 
intrudes upon protected speech. Second, the Commission has not 
given a narrowing construction to the liability standard contained in 
Section 10(d). 

First, while the federal courts have occasionally suffered the 
regulation of speech when it is the only way to protect children, 
they have more generally recognized that “minors are entitled to a 
significant measure of First Amendment protection, and only in 
relatively narrow and well-defined circumstances may government 
bar public dissemination of protected materials to them.” Erznoznik 
v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 212-13 (1975) (citations 
omitted). Far from being “narrow and well-defined,” however. 
subsection (c) of the Commission's Proposed Rule covers “materia! 
soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct,” a broad and vague 
expanse that renders the standard regarding PEG restrictions 
unconstitutionally overbroad. See ¢.g., Village of Shaumburg v. 
Citizens for a Better Env't, 444 U.S. 620, 633-39 (1980): Bigelow 
v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809, 815-18 (1975). 


producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce 
such action.” Hess v. Indiana, 414 U.S. 105, 108 (1973) (quoting 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444, 447 (1969)). See also Noto 
v. United States, 367 U.S. 290, 297-98 (1961) (“the mere abstract 
teaching . . . of the moral propriety or even moral necessity for a 


44 


resort to force and violence[ } is not the same as preparing a group 
for violent action and steeling it to such action”). To preserve our 
political system’s ability to change in the face of evolving notions 
of justice, the government cannot prevent the citizenry from 
advocating civil disobedience against unjust laws — e.g. , advocating 
for the underground railroad to fight slavery or advocating the 
refusal to sit at the back of the bus to fight segregation. 


Similar problems are posed by the PEG restriction on “sexually 
explicit conduct.” This standard omits provisions requiring either 
that the depiction be “patently offensive” or that it fail under a 
community standard. It thereby restricts far more speech that has 
ever been heretofore countenanced, even in protecting minors.” 


The Commission recognizes the overbreadth of these provisions 
when it suggests in its Notice that these terms would have to be 
narrowed. 4 13, at 6n.11. Subsection (c) of the Commission's 
Proposed Rule contains no such limiting construction, however, and 
it therefore remains overbroad. At the least, any final rate that the 
Commission may promulgate in this docket should explicitly narrow 
the PEG standard to obscenity, indecency as elsewhere defined, and 
soliciting prostitution.” 

Second, the Commission has also failed to offer a limiting 
construction of Section 10(d), which extends liability to cable 
operators who carry programming that “involves obscene material.” 
While it might be the case that liability could be imposed in the 


* Even were the Commission to limit “sexually explicit conduct” to 
indecency, we note that the indecency standard, too, raises serious first 
amendment concerns. See Action for Children’s Television v. FCC, 852 
F.2d 1332 (D.C. Cir. 1988). 


27 An avowal by the Commission that they would adhere to any limiting 
construction not contained in the final rule itself is insufficient in this 
regard for two reasons. First, because section (d) of subsection 10 is a 
waiver of a liability immunity, others besides the Commission will be 
making liability determinations. Second, even if the determination were 
to be made by the Commission, its avowal does not have the binding force 
of a rule. Bella Lewitzky Dance Found. v. Frohnmayer, 754 F. Supp. 
774, 782 (C.D. Cal. 1991). 


a - 


45 


proper circumstances — which would have to include procedural 
protections that are now absent (see infra Section V) — for carrying 
obscenity itself, in no case could it extend to carrying material that 
“involves” obscenity. Because the “involves” standard is an 
indefinite and nebulous term that fails to put cable operators on 
notice as to what programming may subject them to liability, 
Section 10(d) is unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. Cy. Bella 
Lewitzky Dance Found. v. Frohnmayer, 754 F. Supp. 774, 781 
(C.D. Cal. 1991) (finding unconstitutionally vague a standard 
concerning material which in the judgment of the NEA may be 
considered obscene). 


To survive first amendment scrutiny, a statute must be drafted 
with precision. See Hobbs v. Thompson, 448 F.2d 456, 460 (Sth 
Cir. 1971) (“The overbreadth doctrine, therefore, focuses directly 
on the need for precision in legislative draftsmanship to avoid 
conflict with First Amendment rights.”); of. Video Software Dealers 
Ass'n v. Webster, 773 F. Supp. 1275, 1280 (W.D. Mo. 1991) 
(statute regulating protected speech must have purpose articulated 
with great precision; where purpose of statute not clearly 
articulated, statute stricken as overbroad), aff'd, 968 F.2d 684 (8th 
Cir. 1992). Thus, words such as “involving” and “tending,” which 
foster indefiniteness, lead to imprecision and constitutional 
infirmity. For that reason, the Supreme Court in Gooding v. 
Wilson, 405 U.S. 518 (1972), found unconstitutional for vagueness 
and overbreadth a statute that outlawed speech “tending to a breach 
of the peace” because this standard was “‘infinitely more doubtful 
and uncertain’” than “breach of the peace.” Jd. at 427 (citations 
omitted). See also Gregory v. City of Chicago, 394 U.S. 111, 119 
(1969) (Black, J., concurring). Section 10(d)’s liability standard 
suffers from the same infirmity and, without a narrowing construct, 
cannot be considered constitutional. Cf. Grayned v. City of 
Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 111 (1972) (“tends to disturb” imprecise 
when not construed narrowly). 


46 


Vv. THE COMMISSION HAS PROPOSED PROCEDURES 
FOR PROHIBITING SPEECH THAT ARE 
CONSTITUTIONALLY DEFICIENT 


The Proposed Rule envisions denying programmers the ability 
to use PEG and leased access based on the sexually explicit or 
politically controversial nature of their message, thereby constituting 
a system of content-based prior restraints. See Ward v. Rock 
Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 795 n.5 (1989) (denial of the use of 
a forum prior to actual expression constitutes a prior restraint); 
Southeastern Promotions, Lid. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 553 
(1975) (same). “While [p]rior restraints are not unconstitutional per 
se... [aJny system of prior restraint ... comes .. . bearing a 
heavy presumption against its constitutional validity.’"” FW/PBS, 
Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215, 225 (1990) (quoting 
Southeastern Promotions, 420 U.S. at 558). See also Bantam 
Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S. 58, 70 (1963). 


The federal courts have long held that to survive this strict 
constitutional scrutiny, prior restraints must, at a minimum, “take[ ] 
place under procedural safeguards designed to obviate the dangers 
of a censorship system.” Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U.S. 51, 58 
(1965). The Proposed Rule that the Commission has issued in this 
docket omits any such procedural protection. For that reason alone, 
it is unconstitutional. 

With respect to only PEG, the Commission’s Notice does ask 
for comments regarding procedures “to govern disputes between the 
cable operator and programmer,” proposing that “any such disputes 
should be handled at the local level.” 414, at 7. As an initial 


28 As prior restraints, the proposed regulations stand in marked contrast 
to various “dial-a-porn” regulations that have been promulgated by the 
FCC and upheld by the Courts. Those regulations have no prior restraints 
because, rather than preventing the transmission of the sender's messages, 
they only hinder their receipt by minors. See Dial Info. Servs. Corp. v. 
Thornburgh, 938 F.2d 1535, 1543 (2d Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 
966 (1992); Information Providers’ Coalition v. FCC, 928 F.2d 866, 877- 
78 (9th Cir. 1991). It should be noted in this context that lockboxes, too, 
do not constitute prior restraints. 


47 


matter, even were this request to lead to some sort of dispute 
resolution mechanism, it would not extend to leased access 
programmers. Moreover, even if it did provide full coverage, no 
system of the type envisioned could provide sufficient protection for 
the constitutional rights that are at stake. An informal dispute 
resolution mechanism will not satisfy the first amendment’s 
requirement for procedural safeguards.” Rather, such safeguards 
must include at least three elements: 


“First, the burden of instituting judicial proceedings, and of 
proving that the material is unprotected, must rest on the 
censor. Second, any restraint prior to judicial review can 
be imposed only for a specified brief period and only for 
the purpose of preserving the status quo. Third, a prompt 
final judicial determination must be assured.” Southeastern 
Promotions, 420 U.S. at 560. 


Because these elements are absent from informal dispute resolution, 
the notice does not request comment on a constitutionally sufficient 
system of procedural protections. Rather, the only constitutionally 
permissible system of dispute resolution would require operators to 
go to court for an adjudication that a specific program is obscene 
before that program may be kept off the cable system. 


The Commission’s Proposed Rule is also procedurally defective 
with regard to the standard by which a cable operator may be held 
liable for carrying “material involving obscenity.” Liability for 
obscenity requires that the actor know the content of the material 
found obscene, Smith v. California, 361 U.S. 147, 152-54 (1959): 
Video Software Dealers Ass'n v. Webster, 968 F.2d 684, 690 (8th 
Cir. 1992) (“any statute that chills the exercise of First Amendment 
rights must contain a knowledge element”), but neither the statute 
nor the proposed Rule contains any such knowledge requirement. 


* Nor does the Commission propose procedures that will protect 
programmers from arbitrary decisions by operators, whose incentives are 
contrary to access channels. See supra pages 2-4 and 9-10. The Proposed 
Rule failed to include safeguards against delay, for example, or against 
invidious discrimination. 


48 


Given the present circumstances, the Commission should grant 
operators immunity from liability unless knowledge of obscenity is 
established through an operator’s awareness that the implicated 
program had been determined to be obscene in a prior judicial 
determination in the same community. Cf. Bella Lewitzky Dance 
Found. v. Frohnmayer, 754 F. Supp. 774, 783 (C.D. Cal. 1991) 
(chilling effect of vague statute requires judicially administered 
procedural protections). This would more fully implement the 
policies behind the knowledge element, which is required in order 
to circumscribe the chilling effect that will flow from imposing 
liability from speech. Ordinarily, the knowledge requirement works 
in tandem with the requirement that the provision specify the 
prescribable speech with particularity. Here, because Section 10(d) 
reaches programming that “involves obscene material,” that 
particularity is missing. By requiring that knowledge be established 
only by a prior judicial determination has declared a program 
obscene, the Commission will move towards restoring the proper 
first amendment balance.” 


VI. THE COMMISSION’S INSUFFICIENT NOTICE OF 
ITS PROPOSED REGULATIONS PREJUDICES 
INTERESTED PARTIES’ RIGHT TO COMMENT 


We have already demonstrated that, in a number of different 
ways, the Commission has failed to act according to the precepts of 
administrative law. First, it has failed to articulate the purposes 
that will be served by its Proposed Rule. See supra page 43. 
Second, it has failed to present record evidence concerning the 
existence of whatever problem its Proposed Rule is intended to 
solve. See supra page 44. Third, it has failed to present its 


w 


The Commission recognizes this knowledge requirement when it 
proposes to waive Section 10(d) for operators who have not been informed 
by programmers that their programming is obscene. As a matter of logical 
consistency, the Commission should also state in its final rule that an 
operator is not enabled to prohibit a program pursuant to Sections 10(b) 
and 10(c) when it has not been informed by a prior judicial determination 
that the program is obscene. 


a ' 


49 


reasoning as to the way that the Proposed rule would serve as a 
means of solving that problem. See supra pages 45-46. 


An additional administrative law problem pervades this docket. 
Section 553(b)(3) of the Administrative Procedures Act (the 
“APA”) requires an agency initiating a rulemaking to issue a notice 
that includes a complete description of either the terms of the 
proposed rule or the subjects and issues involved. 5 U.S.C. 
§ 553(b)(3). The Commission has failed in this regard in several 
different respects. 


With respect to PEG generally, the Notice is literally without 
standards. Paragraph 14 asks commenters to address “whether our 
regulations should provide for any additional matters not expressly 
addressed in the statute,” and it “invite[s] interested persons to 
comment on these and any other aspects that they believe would be 
germane to proper implementation of this provision.” This general 
request for comments fails to “describe the range of alternatives 
being considered with reasonable specificity.” See Small Refiner 
Lead Phase-Down Task Force v. EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 549 (D.C. 
Cir. 1983) (“interested parties [do] not know what to comment 
on”). 


The Notice also fails to speak concretely about several specific 
PEG proposals. For example, Paragraph 14 also invites comment 
on whether the Commission should require “certifications by users 
Or operators that no materials fitting into any of these statutory 
categories will be presented” on PEG. The Proposed Rule itself, 
however, makes no mention of such certification, despite the fact 
that it is clearly being contemplated by the Commission. It 
therefore runs afoul of the requirement of a detailed proposed rule, 
which “allows the parties to direct their comments toward concrete 
proposals, not amorphous subject areas. Such an approach is 
designed to generate a focused inquiry by both the agency and the 
parties.” National Tour Brokers Ass'n v. United States, 591 F.2d 
896, 901 (D.C. Cir. 1978). 


Similarly, the Proposed Rule omits any formulation for the 
Commission’s contemplated implementation of “specific procedures 
. . . to govern disputes between the cable operator and programmer 
of these [PEG] access channels.” Notice 414. This again 


50 


prejudices the right of parties to direct their comments towards 


concrete proposals. 


All of these exrors are replicated in the notice with respect to 
leased access. For example, Paragraph 12 contains the same 
problematic general invitation asking commenters “to bring to our 
attention any other matters not discussed in this notice” and 
“seek[ing] comment on any other requirements that should be 
adopted in order to effectuate the new law’s provisions.” In 
Paragraph 11, the Commission seeks comment on whether cable 
operators “can require program providers to certify that their 
programming is not obscene or indecent,” despite the fact that the 
Proposed Rule mentions nothing about the form, content or any 
other aspect of the proposed certification. Indeed, despite this 
absence, the Commission “assume[s]” that such certification is 
appropriate. 


Similarly, Paragraph 9 requests comment on “blocking 
mechanisms and procedures relating to subscriber access,” but none 
are contained in the Proposed Rule. And Paragraph 12 asks 
commenters to address two issues not the subject of the Proposed 
Rule itself: “whether a cable operator should be required to retain 
notifications for a prescribed period of time,” and (ironically, given 
the absence of this proposal from the Proposed Rule), “whether a 
cable operator should be held harmless from liability under our 
proposed rules if it does not receive any, or timely, notification 
from a programmer” [emphasis added]. 


These deficiencies present three related administrative law 
problems. First, Section 553(b) requires an agency giving notice 
to “make its views known to the public in a concrete and focused 
form so as to make criticism or formulation of alternatives 
possible.” Home Box Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 F.2d 9, 36 (D.C. 
Cir.), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 829 (1977). See also Florida Power 
& Light Co. v. United States, 846 F.2d 765, 771 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
(notice “must provide sufficient factual detail and rationale for the 
rule to permit interested parties to comment meaningfully”), cert. 
denied, 490 U.S. 1045 (1989); Connecticut Light & Power Co. v. 
NRC, 673 F.2d 525, 530 (D.C. Cir.) (“If the notice of proposed 
rule-making fails to provide an accurate picture of the reasoning 


51 


that has led the agency to the proposed rule, interested parties will 
not be able to comment meaningfully upon the agency's 
proposals.”), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 835 (1982). The 
Commission's numerous omissions fall far short of this standard, 
however. The final rule will necessarily “deviate | too sharply 
from the proposal, [and) affected parties will be deprived of notice 
and an opportunity to respond to the proposal.” Small Refiner, 705 
F.2d at 547. 


Second, by avoiding the promulgation of concrete proposals, the 
Commission has also avoided going into detail as to its reasoning 
behind offering the suggested items. As the federal courts have 
instructed, “the notice required by the APA must disclose in detail 
the thinking that has animated the form of a proposed rule and the 
data upon which that rule is based.” Home Box Office, 567 F.2d 
at 35 (emphasis added). Without this discipline, the quality of the 
final rulemaking suffer for want of the proposal being “tested by 
exposure to diverse public comment.” Small Refiner, 705 F.2d at 
547. See also National Ass'n of Home Health Agencies v. 
Schweiker, 690 F.2d 932, 949 (D.C. Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 
U.S. 1205 (1983); BASF Wyandotte Corp. v. Costle, 598 F.2d 637, 
641 (Ist Cir. 1979). cert. denied, 444 U.S. 1096 (1980). 


Third, without the agency's full reasoning and the exchange of 
views it engages from the public, a notice as insufficient as the 
Commission's compromises judicial review as well as. See Home 
Box Office, 567 F.2d at 35. Without precision concerning the 
contemplated agency action, commenters are deprived of their 
ability “to develop evidence in the record to support their 
objections,” which further compromises judicial review. Smail 
Refiner, 705 F.2d at 547.” 


*! See also McLouth Steel Prods. Corp. v. Thomas, 838 F.2d 1317, 1323 
(D.C. Cir. 1988) (an agency's consideration of comments, “no matter how 
careful,” cannot cure the defect of inadequate notice); AFL-CIO v. 
Donovan, 757 F.2d 330, 340 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (proper notice cannot be 
attributed to parties on the assumption that they monitor the comments of 
others); New Jersey v. EPA, 626 F.2d 1038, 1049 (D.C. Cir. 1983) 

(continued...) 


52 


We therefore urge that the Commission, in response to the 
instant comments and those submitted by other parties, issue a 
second proposed rulemaking and accept a second round of 
comments to allow for the full participation required by the APA 
We note in this regard that Section 10’s statutory deadlines for the 
promulgation of rules presents no hurdle to the Commission. The 
federal courts have recognized that a statutory deadline must yield 
to the requirements of the APA when, as here, “Congress gave no 
explicit indication that it intended to override the procedural 
safeguards of the APA.” Sharon Steel Corp. v. EPA, 597 F.2d 
377, 380 (3d Cir. 1979). See also New Jersey v. EPA, 626 F.2d 
1038, 1045 (D.C. Cir. 1980); United States Steel Corp. v. EPA, 
595 F.2d 207 (Sth Cir, 1979). 


CONCLUSION 


Where a government has intentionally opened a forum for 
discourse, it cannot simply authorize restrictions on speech in that 
forum either directly or through a private party acting with its 
authority. Rather, any restriction on speech must be carefully 
tailored to balance the interests of government against those who 
wish to speak. If those restrictions are not narrowly drawn, the 
restrictions are unconstitutional. 


*(.. continued) 
(permitting an agency to consider comments requested after publication of 
a final rule to substitute for proper notice would render the APA “virtually 
unenforceable”); Small Refiner, 705 F.2d at 549 (having failed to provide 
proper notice, an agency cannot “bootstrap” notice from a comment). 
Moreover, because proper notice is a prerequisite to proper rulemaking, 
a party's separate right to subsequently petition for amendment of a final 
rule does not obviate an agency’s duty to provide proper notice of a 
proposed rule in the first place. 
“§ U.S.C. § 553(b) requires notice before rulemaking, not after. 
The right of interested persons to petition for the issuance, 
amendment, or repeal of a rule, is neither a substitute for nor an 
alternative to compliance with the mandatory notice requirements 
of § 553(b).” National Tour Brokers, supra, 591 F.2d at 902. 


A i a CI le ats egy <a 


53 


The Commission has failed to undertake the appropriate 
balancing in the instant docket. Instead, it has simply reiterated the 
provisions of Section 10. The result is a Proposed Rule infected by 


Shea & Gardner 
1800 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20036 


(202) 828-2000 
Counsel for the Alliance for 
Community Media, the Alliance 
Se Sane american Civil Liberties Uni 
and People for the American Way 
Of Counsel: 
James N. Horwood Marjorie Heins 
Spiegel & McDiarmid American Civil Liberties Union 
1350 New York Ave., N.W. Foundation 
Washington, D.C. 20005 Arts Censorship Project 
(202) 879-4002 132 West 43rd Street 


Counsel for the Alliance for New York, New York 10036 
Community Media and the (212) 944-9800 

b4 . . ivi 
aaa | — =| "rcs berties Uni 


Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 232-4300 


Elliot Mincberg 

People for the American Way 
2000 M. Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20036 

(202) 467-4998 

Counsel for People for the 
American Way 


55 


CABLE TELEVISION AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST 


PATRICIA AUFDERHEIDE 


Made in United States of America 
Reprinted from Journal of Communication 
Vol 42, No. 1, Winter 1992 
© 1992 by Oxford University Press 


56 


* * * 


Public Access as a Public Space 


Access programs often have been, in the words of one tired 
access director, “programmed to fail.” This is less remarkable than 
the fact that they exist at all. Only canny, ceaseless, locality-by- 
locality citizen activism wrested access centers and channels in the 
franchise process in the first place (Engelman, 1990), and all such 
victories are temporary. The 1984 Act sabotaged some of those 
victories. It had capped localities’ franchise fees and required them 
to be unrestricted. It did not require access channels. Points of 
confusion in the law — particularly the definition of “service” — 
as well as restrictions on renewal procedures, among others, made 
it easy for cable operators to pay more attention to their bottom line 
and for franchisers to pay more attention to road paving than to 
cable access. (Meyerson, 1990; U.S. Senate, 1990a, pp. 453-490; 
Ingraham, 1990; Brenner, Price, & Myerson, 1990, sec. 6.04(3][c], 
6.04[4]). 


Even under starvation conditions, access has carved out a 
significant role in the minority communities where it exists. 
Currently 16.5% of systems have public access; 12.9% have 
educational access, and 10.7% have governmental access (Television 
and Cable Factbook, 1990, p. C-384). An abundance of local 
programming is produced in some 2,000 centers — about 10,000 
hours a week (Ingraham, 199%. ‘ar outstripping commercial 
production. The Hometown USA v .deo Festival, showcasing local 
origination and PEG channel production annually, in 1990 attracted 
2,100 entries from 360 cities in 41 states. 


These channels are often perceived to be valued community 
resources, using traditional measures. One multisite study shows 
that 47% of viewers watch community channels, a quarter of them 
at least three times in two weeks; 46% say it was “somewhat” to 
“very” important in deciding to subscribe to or remain with cable 
(Jamison, 1990). Another study, commissioned by Access 
Sacramento, showed that two-thirds of cable subscribers who knew 
about the channel watched it (Access Sacramento, 1991). Access 
centers provide resources and services typically valued at many 
times what they cost. Access Sacramento, for instance, estimates 


57 


a community value of its equipment, training, and consultation at 
$4.5 million, ten times its budget (Access Sacramento, 1990), an 
estimate corroborated by the experience of access cable in Nashville 
and Tucson. 


But the most useful measure is not, and should not be, numbers 
of viewers or positive poll results, but the ability of access to make 
a difference in community life. Access cable should not function 
like American public television does. Public television offers a 
more substantial, thoughtful, challenging, or uplifting individual 
viewing experience than a commercial channel. Access needs to be 
a site for communication among and between members of the public 
as the public, about issues of public importance. 


Beyond a basic technical level of quality, the entertainment 
value of such programming comes far secondary to its value as a 
piece of a larger civic project, whether it is citizen input into 
actions the local city council is making, or discussions of school 
reform, or a labor union's donation of services to low-income 
residents, or the viewpoints of physically challenged people on 
issues affecting them. This is because viewers are not watching it 
as individual consumers, but as citizens who are responding to a 
controversy. In each case, the program — unlike a commercial 
broadcast or cable service — is not the end point, but only a means 
towards the continuing process of building community ties. 


In small and incremental ways, the access cable channel acts as 
a public space, strengthening the public sphere. In Tampa, Florida, 
for instance, public access cable provided the primary informational 
vehicle for citizens concerned abut a county tax that was 
inadequately justified. Major local media, whose directors shared 
the interests of politicians, had failed to raise accountability issues. 
The tax was defeated in a record voter turnout. Also in Tampa, the 
educational cable access system’s airing of school board meetings 
has resulted in vastly increased public contact with school board 
members and a children’s summer reading program in which 
libraries’, schools’, and the access center’s work together has 


58 


resulted in the committee members, officers of 13 different 
institutions, finding other common interests.’ 


Access does not need to win popularity contests to play a useful 
role in the community. It is not surprising if people do not watch 
most of the time. (Indeed, given the treatment access gets by cable 
operators, it is a kind of miracle that viewers find the channel at 
all.) It is indicative of its peculiar function that people find the 
channel of unique value when they do use it. Different kinds of 
access are used for very different purposes. Government and 
educational channels may feature such programming as the city 
council meeting, the school board meeting, the local high school’s 
basketball game, religious programming or rummage-sale 
announcements on a community billboard. Some colleges have 
sponsored oral history sessions that illuminate immigrant history 
(Agosta, Rogoff, & Norman, 1990; Nicholson, 1990). 


Public access channels, run on a “first-come, first-served” 
basis, are responsible for much of access cable’s negative image, 
and some of its most improbable successes. There is often a strong 
element of the personalist and quixotic in the programming. Public 
access channels are sometimes a source of scandal and legal 
controversy, as for instance when the Ku Klux Kian started 
circulating national programs for local viewing (Shapiro, 1990, pp. 
409f: Brenner et al., 1990, sec. 604[7]). Less reported is that often 
the Klan programs spurred civil liberties and ethnic minorities 
organizations to use the access service for their own local needs, 
and these groups have continued to do so. Voluntary associations 


| Interviews with the following people between September 1990 and 
August 1991 informed the analysis of access cable: Andrew Blau, then 
communications-policy analyst, United Church of Christ Office of 
Communication, New York; Alan Bushong, executive director, Capital 
Community TV, Salem, OR; Gerry Field, executive director, 
Somerville Community Access Television, Somerville, MA; Ann Flynn, 
Tampa Educational Cable Consortium; Nicholas Miller, lawyer, Miller 
and Holbrooke, Washington, D.C.; Elliott Mitchell, ex-executive 
director, Nashville Community Access TV, TN; Randy Van Dalsen, 
Access Sacramento, CA. 


59 


— for instance, the Humane Society’s adopt-a-pet program in 
Fayetteville, Arkansas — and a musical education series sponsored 
by the Los Angeles Jazz Society (Nicholson, 1990), also use public 
access. In some places — for instance, New York City, where 
Paper Tiger television regularly produces sharply critical programs 
on the media; or Austin, Texas, home of one of access cable’s 
oldest talk shows — public access has become an established 
alternative voice in public affairs. Public access is host to 
viewpoints as diverse as those of leftist critics of the Gulf War (in 
Deep Dish TV’s national series) and those of conservative Rep. 
Newt Gingrich (R-GA), who hosts half-hour shows produced by the 
Washington, DC-based American Citizens’ Television (ACTV). 


Thus access has a history of fulfilling a role of community 
service and has been recognized in law as performing a useful First 
Amendment function. Access cable could, in every locality, 
provide an unduplicated, local public forum for public issues. 


Public Access under Assault 


Since the 1984 act, however, access cable has been under 
relentless assault, both by cable companies and by cities under 
financial pressure to use nontargeted franchise fees (Ingraham, 
1990). In municipalities such as Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Portland, Oregon; cable companies 
immediately rescinded or renegotiated franchise terms regarding 
cable access, once the act went into effect. 


Even when access was established or reestablished, the cost was 
significant. For instance, in Austin, Texas, the Time-owned 
company announced that it could not afford to meet its franchise 
obligations — especially its $400,000-a-year funds for access 
television and the provision of eight channels — only two weeks 
after deregulation went into effect. It took 11 months of civic 
Organization and city council pressure, and some $800,000, to 
restore the provisions. 


In localities beset with fiscal crisis — a widespread problem, 
since in the 1980s many costs of government were shifted 
downwards — revenues once designated to access have gone into 
general revenues. For instance, when Nashville found itself in a 


60 


budget crisis in 1988, a program by a gay and lesbian alliance on 
public access triggered a city council debate. The cable company, 
a Viacom operator, a supported city council members trying to 
rechannel access funds into genera! operating funds. The upshot 
was near-total defunding of the access center. In Eugene, Oregon; 
and Wyoming, Michigan; among others, municipalities have 
drastically cut or eliminated access budgets in favor of other city 
projects. 

Cable policy in the public interest might well improve the 
dismal legal situation for access, as well as define clearly its role as 
a site where the public sphere can be strengthened. Policy could go 
further still, creating new mechanisms for use of the medium as an 
electronic public space. So far, legislative reform proposals have 
been virtually silent on access, much less on any as yet untested 
mechanisms to create new public spaces. 


. * * 


61 


THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY 


Washington, D.C. 


PUBLIC ACCESS CABLE PROGRAMMING, 
CONTROVERSIAL SPEECH, 
AND FREE EXPRESSION 


By Patricia Aufderheide 


nie, ee 


December 1992 


Patricia Aufderheide is an assistant professor in the School 
Communication at The American University. 


© copyright 1992 Patricia Aufderheide 


School of Communication 


4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW... 


Washington D.C. 20016-8017 
(202) 885-2060 


62 


Access cable—the channels variously known as public, 
educational and governmental (or PEG) and offered as part of basic 
cable wherever they have been called for in franchises — is that 
rare site on cable where public interest comes before profit 
(Aufderheide, 1992). Its past is embattled; it was created in uphill 
struggles by local community activists, and survived only where 
constantly defended — in perhaps 15 percent of cable systems 
nationwide. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 
USC, 521-559), which dramatically reduced the power of local 
authorities to regulate through franchising and furthermore sapped 
access’ funding mechanisms, weakened access’ relationships with 
both local authorities and with cable companies. 

Its present is no better. The Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 did nothing to repair earlier 
damage and, indeed, added language that may complicate access’ 
function further. One provision of the Act in fact could challenge 
the fundamental purpose of public access and rob it of its unique 
function within cable television: to permit speakers open access to 
the community of viewers without censorship. That provision says, 
first, that a cable operator may prohibit on PEG channels “obscene 
material, sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or 
promoting unlawful conduct.” It also creates liability for cable 
operators in the case of obscene material (U.S. House of 
Representatives, 1992, 29). 


Public access cable’s free speech function is central to defining 
its social importance. Congress intended it to serve as “the video 
equivalent of the speaker's soap box or the electronic parallel to the 
printed leaflet” (U.S. House of Representatives, 1984, 21-22). 
Public access’ mandate is thus linked to the implications of the first 
amendment; it is a public forum, a facilitator of public 
conversation. 


Public access in protected in the 1984 act, which requires cable 
operators to carry it without interference, making speakers 
responsible for their own speech. The Act provides for viewer 
control over potentially offensive material by mandating lockboxes 
or channel blocking options. However, public access’ first-come 
first-serve, open access principle is complicated in practice, not 


Oe ee ee ee 


ee ee ee 


63 


least by the interest that local governments and cable companies 
have in the performance of these channels but also by practical 
questions of scheduling and handling demand on the service on the 
part of access managers (Meyerson, 1987-88, 189-91). 


This study explores the social function of public access, as seen 
in programming that is or is seen as potentially controversial—the 
programming that could be in jeopardy with the 1992 Act. The 
study's objectives were to identify such programming and incidents 
of prohibiting such programming, and to estimate how editorial 
responsibility would alter the function and purpose of access, as 
perceived by access directors. 


Some 31 access directors—chosen through their participation in 
the Alliance for Community Media, which represents the interests 
of cable access — were interviewed by telephone. Most (20) hextd 
independent nonprofit entities; the rest were functionaries of Jocal 
government (9) or the cable company (2). The majority (21) came 
from smaller communities, while 10 worked in major cities or state 
capitals. The sample was regionally diverse, with 13 from the East, 
seven from the Midwest, three from the South, and eight from the 
West. Roughly speaking, this diversity was typical of the 
population of the Alliance, and probably of access nationwide 
(although this phenomenon is dispersed and localized enough to lack 
dependable national statistics).' 


The study was further bolstered by analysis of preliminary 
results of a mail survey asking the same questions, sent to access 
directors on the mailing list of the Alliance for Community Media. 
Among the 30 mail survey respondents, 21 headed nonprofit 
entities. Three centers were run by the city, and three by the cable 
company (two gave no information). Twenty-one were from 
smaller communities; nine were from major cities or state capitals. 
Thirteen came from the East, nine from the Midwest, one from the 
South, and seven from the West.” 


PROGRAMMING THAT TESTS THE LIMITS 


Access programming varies dramatically from locality to 
locality; what may be acceptable in Cambridge, MA is 
unimaginable in Defiance, OH or Olympia, WA. Access directors 


64 


typically believe that if production usually reflects a concern 
somewhere in that community. “If it has an audience,” said 
director Deb Vinsel in Olympia, WA, “it’s part of your community, 
even if you wish it were not.” 


Public access often provides a unique venue in electronic media 
for unpopular opinions, minority viewpoints or expressions of 
minority culture. Access directors, when asked to consider 
recorded programming that a cautious programmer might reject for 
fear of being interpreted as containing “obscene material, sexually 
explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful 
conduct,” almost universally cited several examples. Those fell 
into several categories: 


—sex education, particularly AIDS education. Series such as 
Fairfax (VA) Cable Access Corporation’s Gay Fairfax, Grand 
Rapids (MI) Community Media Center's The Lambda Report, 
Tucson (AZ) Community Cable Corporation’s Empty Closet would 
all be suspect for “sexually explicit conduct” related to AIDS 
education. So would be single programs such as Cambridge (MA) 
Community TV’s Truth or Consequences: A Guide to Safe Sex at 
MIT, AIDS, a documentary cablecast at Spring Point Community 
television Center in South Portland, ME; and an AIDS prevention 
special involving role playing at Kalamazoo (MI) Community 
Access Center. 


—health education. In Amherst (MA), a video of a home birth 
might have fallen under scrutiny. Desperately Seeking Susan, a 
program in Olympia, WA, hosted by a therapist, has featured 
delicate subjects, including one program on non-orgasmic women, 
with frank discussion of sexual behavior. 


—opinions at the political margins, for potentially soliciting or 
promoting unlawful conduct. Libertarians, anarchists, rightists and 
leftists all variously use cable access to promote political opinion 
slighted by gatekeepers in mainstream media. As well, passionate 
believers in particular political issues, such as abortion or 
homosexual rights, look to this venue. 


For instance, in Grand Rapids producers of a regular series Lies 
of Our Times have at times endorsed sanctuary for Latin American 


0 ed re A PE 


65 


refugees and encouraged blockades of government offices in protest 
of various official positions. In Sacramento, Libertarian Conspiracy 
producers, in accord with their minimalist approach to government, 
decry the criminalizing of marijuana. Tucson access center director 
Sam Behrend notes that both Libertarian Review and Time for 
Hemp, a regular series by supporters of legalization of marijuana, 
might become suspect programs; similarly a one-time program in 
Kalamazoo (MI), Cannabis, might not have run. A Fort Wayne 
late night weekly program, Ganymedian Slime Mold, produced by 
an idiosyncratic leftist, might not be acceptable simply for its 
unpredictability, according to access director Greg Vawter; another 
local program American Atheists might become suspect, he believes, 
simply for not conforming to mainstream behavior. In at least one 
case in a regular program in Portland, OR, a speaker recommended 
direct and illegal action to protect old timber growth. 


Several access centers (Forest Park, OH; Fort Wayne, IN; 
Sacramento, CA; Kalamazoo, MI; Portland, OR; Dayton, OH: 
South Portland, ME) reported either local or imported programs 

ing sborticn, by O —- which eit 
encourage blocking of access to abortion clinics or include graphic, 
possibly offensive images or both. These programs would be 
suspect under a gatekeeping arrangement. 


In Oregon during election season 1992, ballot measure 9, which 
would have criminalized some homosexual behavior, was hotly 
debated on access cable. Oregon access center directors in Portland 
and Salem both reported extensive use, both in live and taped 
programs, of access by opposing sides. Both sides incorporated 
material that might have been perceived as sexually explicit. 


Another topical instance was the Gulf War, where access cable 
was a rare site of dissent, including a series of programs by Deep 
Dish TV, which packages programs for cable access and transmits 
them by satellite. This programming was typically controversial. 
For instance, in Winsted, CT, the Mad River TV access service 
weathered demands to remove anti-Gulf War programming while it 
was being cablecast. A production group in Portland, OR, The 
Flying Focus Video Collective, has taken controversial stands on 
issues ranging from the Gulf War to local environmental issues. 


66 


—programs reflecting the point of view of cultural minorities. 
For instance, young people eagerly use access cable both to speak 


Se ee A program wildly popular 
comedy 


Mayhem, accounts for both a passionate teen audience and also the 
bulk of the occasional complaints to the service. In Grand Rapids, 
MI, Blackwatch focuses on the language and images of inner city 
youth. Malden, MA's public access has weathered controversy 
over youthful productions marked by vulgar language. 


—programs that experiment with the form and otherwise stake 
a claim to art. Such programs have become controversial in 
Sacramento, Amberst, Davis, CA, Arlington, VA, and on 
Washington, D.C.’s DCTV system, and have been a perennial 
source of contention in public access. 

In general, then, taped programming regularly appears on 
public access in ways that simultaneously serve the central mandate 
of the service and also offend some sensibilities. 


LIVE PROGRAMMING 


Live programming on public access reveals the social utility of 
potentially offensive programming in sometimes dramatic ways. 
Live programming can only be halted with a delay system beyond 
the budget of most access centers; it can only be dependably safe if 
both subject and participants can be counted on to avoid the 
extremes of opinion that presently characterize public access. 


Most centers surveyed offer live and interactive programming. 
and find it draws eager participation from viewers. Access center 
directors highlighted various kinds of programming demonstrating 


67 


the role of access cable an a public forum, which might be in 
jeopardy under a gatekeeping arrangement: 
—sexual and health education. This is an area where live 
programming often draws an engaged, often young audience. In 
Chicago, AIDS Call-in Live receives phone calls four-fifths of which 
come from African-American youth, according to director Barbara 
Popovic. Typical of the kind of interchange was the phone call of 
one 17-year-old girl who wanted to know how to respond to a 
boyfriend who assured her they need not use condoms because he 
was “loyal” to her. The conversation was frank and colloquial on 
well, on air, speakers hold up items such as condoms and dental 
dams, and explain their use. On public access cable in Austin, TX, 
a program called Midnight Whispers frankly encourages viewers to 
call in to share their sexual fantasies, so that an on-air nurse can 
respond to them and discuss safe sex practices. The Portland, OR 
“AIDS Forum Live” similarly might raise concern. A Tucson 
program, Bridges, by and for the disabled, has featured AIDS 
education involving anatomical models. In Sacramento, the 
monthly “Health in America” program on alternative and holistic 


Defiance, OH, center (which also carries government and 
educational programming) even wonders what might happen to city 
council meetings if, for instance, anti-pornography groups appear. 

—topical call-in programs. For instance, in Sacramento within 
hours of the Rodney King verdict a special edition of the weekly 
Live Wire community call-in program was airing, with scores of 
viewers, most apparently African-American, responding to a host 
known in the community for his success in working with alienated 
youth. Although the staff found that the discussion was less raw 
than expected, it was also a volatile moment. Programs such as 
Fort Wayne, IN’s program Speak Out and Tucson's You're the 
Expert touch on controversial local issues ranging from street signs 
to police behavior, without any way of predicting how callers might 
behave. NDC community TV in West St. Paul aired a series Facts 
not Friends around 1992 electoral politics, which the access director 


68 


saw as expanding the debate. In South Portland, ME, during the 
Gulf War, participants suggested illegal actions as protest. 


—minority cultures. The Fort Wayne, IN program Coalition 
for Unlearning Racism, a live twice-a-month program, deals with 
topics on which, as access manager Rick Hayes puts it, “people are 
already irate,” and has been the site of heated discussion about 
racism. Hayes values it not because he thinks it changes the minds 
of extremists, but because public dialogue, including with 
extremists, educates the community. Also on the same system is a 
program Message to the Black Man, a black nationalist program 
that purveys a distinctly minoritarian view in Fort Wayne. In 
Tucson, teenagers produce a live program called The Forbidden 
Zone, in which they talk in the slang and curse-laden jargon of their 
peers, involving sexually explicit language and sometimes 
addressing illegal activities such as drug use. It is also a rare public 
forum for this cohort; teenagers are far more likely to be the targets 
of mass media and advertisers’ attention than they are to be 
producers. Similarly, the live teen show Active Butch/Pensive Willy 
in Newton Highlands, MA, has with its raw language in call-ins 
roused the ire of a board member. 


Access directors often singled out live programming as of 
particular interest to their audience. “Live material like AJDS Call- 
in Live is what’s best in access,” said Chicago director Barbara 
Popovic. “If this can't be on, then it’s the baby and the 
bathwater.” 


PRESCREEING AND BANNING PROGRAMMING 


Most access centers surveyed do not prescreen at all, except, as 
in the case of Washington, D.C. and Dayton (OH) Access 
Television, a high speed run-through for technical quality. In fact, 
in one case, that of Somerville (MA) Community Access TV, the 
present community-run nonprofit began in response to outrage over 
the cable-run access center’s prescreening of tapes. A few do 
In these cases (e.g., Prince George’s Community Television, 
Landover, MD; Pittsburgh Community Television, Pittsburgh, PA) 
estimates of time it now takes to do prescreening range from 10 to 


69 


18 hours a week; however, this prescreening is not currently done 
under the constraints of the new law. 


Exceptions demonstrate a balancing of concern for family 
viewing hours with the service’s open access policy. In Fairfax, 
VA, the center prescreens to decide on when to schedule. In Vail, 
CO, director Suzanne Silverthorn watches “anything that might be 
in question,” while in Amherst Myra Lenburg looks at unsolicited 
material. Since this kind of prescreening does not need to be 
comprehensive, it is also a light administrative burden. In 
Olympia, WA, as in several other access centers including 
Somerville, there was no prescreening, but producers were given 
information on guidelines developed in conjunction with the city or 
cable operator, to place potentially offensive programs on late at 
night. Many access centers have guidelines and require producers 
to read guidelines and certify that they abide by them. 


Public access directors do become adept at dealing with 
complaints from viewers, and from city and cable officials. But 
rarely, in these interviews, had complaints resulted in prohibition 
of programming, and then usually after it had already run at least 
once. 


Among several reported incidents of attempted programming 
intervention, two point up the importance of an independent public 
forum on controversial political issues. For instance, one 
Cincinnati channel accepted a tape from one political party in 1991 
local elections; the other party promptly obtained a restraining 
order, although it had the right to air a program, and furthermore 
center staff had volunteered to help produce one. Ultimately, the 
complaining party lost in court, and the tape was aired. In the 
small town of Defiance, Ohio, several years ago town officials 
attempted — again, unsuccessfully — to block a program criticizing 
the town’s plan to privatize emergency medical services. 

The two other reported cases involve questions of taste and 
decency. In Columbus, Ohio, in Sept 1992 the city, which controls 
transmission from the independent nonprofit center, responded to 
complaints about frontal nudity in a program on gays and AIDS by 
dropping the program after it had run. Upon legal consultation, 


70 


however, the city reversed its decision because the program could 
not be considered pornography. 


In an ongoing case in Sacramento, the incident appears part of 
a larger struggle between the center, the city, and the cable 
company. The cable company representative has seized upon a 
viewer complaint about a videoplay, Dinosaurs, and eagerly argued 
for shutting down the independently-run center to the city, which 
allocates its funds. Written and produced by a young local man, 
the play involved scenes of nudity and sexual aggression as part of 
the author’s social critique. (The center’s attorney advised the 
center the piece was not obscene.) Center director Ron Cooper 
recalls that the local cable operator, long a grudging supporter of 
the service, recently warned him that he would “shut you down” 
and that he had the approval of the multi-system owner to take the 
case to court. 


EXPANDING SPEECH 


Calls for banning sometimes result in reasoned accommodation 
such as the guidelines devised by the aldermanic and cable boards 
in Somerville, MA. Those guidelines then are given directly to 
producers. Sometimes, they can act as a powerful threat. When a 
program by and for teenagers, Streetwatch, ran on Columbus 
Community Cable Access several years ago and frank sexual 
language offended city officials enough to pull the program from 
rotation briefly, the board was badly shaken. “When government 
taps you on the shoulder and tries to crush it at the same time, you 
take notice,” recalled center director Carl Kucharski. He notes that 
several board members, whose corporations did business with the 
city, felt particularly vulnerable to official discontent. The board 
contemplated over a period of months ways to prescreen 
programming, but could not find a workable arrangement. 

Currently access center directors confront controversy by 
encouraging more speech, not only by allowing all voices a hearing 
but also by encouraging complainants to make use of training and 


production assistance, and by explaining the philosophy of the 
access center. This process appears to expand the forum for 
speech, not only for producers but for viewers, who may call in. 


71 


At Malden (MA) Access TV, director Rika Walsh recalled a 
program made by local youths in summer 1992 with “what was to 
my taste and probably yours an excessive amount of profanity.” 
After the program, the center scheduled a two hour call-in, which 
was vigorously used. For Walsh, “That’s what public access is al] 
about—creating that public space. It allows the community to speak 
to issues; it’s not just about the programming itself.” 

At Waycross Community TV in Forest Park, Ohio, director 
Greg Vawtar pointed to response to a racial hate text message 
posted on a nearby suburban system. Several of his access center’s 
board members composed and aired passionate arguments against 
intolerance, part of a community-wide electronic conversation. 
Director Rick Hayes of the Fort Wayne, IN library system's public 
access channel noted that a well-established twice-weekly program, 
Coalition for Unlearning Racism, supported by the local NAACP 
and Urban League among others, began as a response to the 
possibility of carrying the Ku Klux Klan’s Race and Reason (which 
never did run). Making the program also brought together nine 
groups that hitherto had not worked jointly. 


COST OF PRESCREENING 


The provisions on prohibition of programming and liability for 
obscene material in the 1992 Act would change the terms of PEG 
access dramatically. Implementing prohibitions such as the law 
now permits might involve, as the Federal Communications 
Commission has suggested (U.S. FCC 1992, Pp. 7), certifications to 
the operator. These would seem to necessitate some kind of 
prescreening or pre-emptive judgment on the safety of certain kinds 
of programming. 

Aside from the question of mandate, in practical terms how 
would a requirement to certify and thus prescreen programming 
affect the current practice of access centers? Access center 
directors estimated typically that between a day a week and two 
full-time staff jobs would be required to prescreen and assess 
programming for the channel. (Some systems generate more than 
3,500 program hours a year.) All but one estimated it would delay 
programming. No directors suggested it was possible to increase 
budgets in a difficult economic period, and all suggested that the 


72 


job would be done by someone at or near the top, usually 
themselves. Hap Haasch of Ann Arbor Community Access TV 
noted, “The real cost is not having staff available for almost a third 
of the work week.” 


The cost would thus be measured in terms of lost production 
assistance, training, and community outreach—in short, a crippling 
of the service itself. One director in Fitchburg, MA, called the 
time required “devastating to our already busy schedule.” 


In nine cases (Anderson Community TV, Cincinnati, OH; 
Winthrop, MA; Salina, KS; Holland, MI; Turner’s Falls, MA; Ann 
Arbor, MI; Grand Rapids, MI; Fort Wayne, IN; Forest Park, OH; 
Glenview, IL) directors said they would probably have to drop all 
live programming. In others, such as Cincinnati Community 
Video, some live programming would be eliminated. 


“There is not enough staff to supervise call-in lines or audio, 
control guests on ‘programs or distinguish between ‘safe’ and 
‘dangerous’ programs,” wrote the director for Winthrop (MA) 
Community Access TV. Thus, he noted, programs of indisputable 
value might be lost. For instance, on October 30, 1991, when a 
terrible storm swept the area, the cable service provided seven 
hours of live coverage, giving information about street closings, 
flooding, evacuation routes and emergency shelters. Such 
programming, he suggested, would be eliminated along with all 
other live programming under certification or prescreening 
arrangements. 


In Cincinnati, OH, Intercommunity Cable Regulatory 
Commission official Patricia Havlik said, “We’d probably have to 
drop the public access program—we can’t afford to prescreen, we 
have no facilities or staff for it.” 


Access directors have evolved a variety of mechanisms to deal 
with first-amendment rights conflicts, which appear to have worked 
fairly well. The process has renewed their commitment to public 
access as a broad public forum, open even to repugnant speech. 
Several access directors, when asked to estimate the cost of 
implementing some screening process, initially refused to entertain 
the idea, responding with remarks like “I'd quit first.” and “I'd go 


73 


into another line of work.” The access director for Mad River TV, 
of Winsted, CT, wrote in answer to a question about the cost of 
prescreening, “Impossible to budget—we just wouldn’t do it.” 
Their attitudes appear reinforced by the record of broadly diverse 
programming that has a unique venue in public access. 


The 1984 Act provides for viewers who reject such a forum. 
Lock boxes or the consumer option of blocking the channel was 
required by the Act, for access as well as for commercial channels, 
and would appear, from this survey, to be widely available. In the 
31 interviews conducted, all but one person, who did not know, 
said the system had the capacity. In two cases, directors 
interviewed said that the company either appeared unwilling to 
block the channel or simply did not make public the ability to do 
so. In the 30 written surveys, 24 reported lockboxes available, 
although one said that they were not available for public access. By 
contrast, introducing editorial control over public access could, on 
the basis of access center directors’ experience, violate the central 
concept of access cable. 


74 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT ) 
COMPANY, L.P., 
Plaintiff, 


-against- Civ. No. 


COMMISSION, 
and 
UNITED STATES 

OF AMERICA, 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS ) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
__ Defendants ._ ) 


AFFIDAVIT OF JOSEPH J. COLLINS 


STATE OF CONNECTICUT ) 
) ss: 
COUNTY OF FAIRFIELD ) 


Joseph J. Collins, being duly sworn, deposes and states as 
follows: 


1. I am Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Time 
Warner Cable (“TWC”), an unincorporated division of Time 
Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. (“TWE”). 


28. Section 612 of the 1984 Cable Act (codified at 47 
U.S.C. § 532) requires Cable operators to set aside a substantial 
portion—up to 15 percent—of their channels for lease to unaffiliated 
programmers (the “leased access provisions”). Section 612 also 
provides inter alia, that “a cable operator shall not exercise any 
editorial control over any video programming provided pursuant to 


this section”. 


75 


29. As originally enacted, Section 638 of the 1984 Cable 
Act exempted cable operators from criminal and civil liability with 
respect to obscene matters that they were compelled to carry on 
PEG or leased access channels. Section 10(d) of the 1992 Cable 
Act amends Section 638 so as to eliminate this exemption from 
criminal and civil liability if a program “involves obscene 
material”. 

30. Thus, under Section 638 as amended, a cable operator 
is exposed to criminal prosecution or civil liability as to obscene 
programming created by others that the PEG and leased access 
provisions require the operator to carry. Section 10(a) of the 1992 
Cable Act purports to resolve this problem with respect to leased 
access programming by amending § 612(h) of the 1984 Act to 
permit a cable operator to prohibit or restrict indecent matter on 
leased access channels. This power does not extend to PEG 
programming. As to leased access programming, it requires the 
cable operator to risk civil liability to an aggrieved leased access 
programmer, or criminal or civil liability under obscenity laws, if 
its decisions on obscenity should later be determined to have been 
incorrect. As to PEG programming the operator cannot even 
attempt to protect itself from such liability. 


31. Neither the 1992 Cable Act nor any other law imposes 
leased access requirements upon SMATV or MMDS systems, DBS 
operators or other providers of video programming. 


7 . * 


35. In addition, by subjecting providers of DBS service to 
far less stringent PEG requirements than cable operators are 
subjected to under the 1984 Cable Act, the 1992 Cable Act causes 
irreparable injury to TWC’s cable systems by placing them at a 
competitive disadvantage by favoring DBS speech over TWC’S. 
TWC is also placed at a competitive disadvantage because neither 
the 1992 Cable Act, the 1984 Cable Act, nor any other law requires 
other providers of video programming, including SMATV and 
MMDS systems and broadcast television stations, to provide PEG 
channels. 


76 


36. The leased access provisions compel TWC to publish 
the speech of others. These provisions expressly abrogate the 
editorial discretion of TWC’s cable systems and force TWC to be 
identified with messages it does not wish to convey. 


37. The provision of Section 10(d) of the 1992 Cable Act 
which repeals the immunity from criminal and civil liability with 
respect to obscene programming carried on PEG and leased access 
channels causes irreparable injury to TWC by subjecting it to the 
risk of criminal and civil liability for programming created by 
others that it does not wish to carry but is required by law to carry. 
The Provisions of Section 612(h) of the Cable Act permitting TWC 
to prohibit or restrict obscene programming does not alleviate such 
injury in that they compel TWC to determine obscenity questions 
that even Federal courts regard as exceedingly difficult, and TWC 
remains exposed to criminal or civil liability if a court later 
disagrees with its determination. Further, these provisions provide 
no protection whatever as to obscene programming TWC may be 
required to carry on PEG channels. At least one TWC cable 
system has already been obligated to hire employees to screen 
programs for obscenity, even though it did not choose to offer these 
programs, and would prefer not to do so. 


38. By compelling TWC to yield control of a substantial 
portioa of its capacity to unaffiliated programmers, the leased 
access provisions irreparably injure TWC by impairing its ability to 
offer programming created by others or by itself that it would 
prefer to convey and that TWC believes its viewers would prefer 
and by limiting its ability to offer its own programming. 


David G. Rozzelle 
General Partner 


November 13, 1992 


Sam Behrend 

Executive Director 

Tucson Community Cable Corp. 
124 East Broadway 

Tucson, AZ 85702 


Dear Sam: 


Pursuant to Section 10 of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection And Competition Act of 1992, the immunity conferred 
on Tucson CableVision by Section 638 of the Communications Act 
for the carriage of obscene programming on public, educational and 
governmental access channels will be repealed as of December 4, 
1992. Accordingly, our lawyers advise us that we face potential 
civil and criminal liability for any obscene material carried on 
Channel 12. 


Therefore, I must reluctantly request that all programming 
which contains sexual, excretory or other behavior or depictions, or 
language which potentially may be offensive to the citizens of 
Tucson be sent to our system for screening before it is cablecast by 
TCCC over our cable system. Moreover, no live programming 
should be cablecast which contains such material. All such 
programming should be taped and sent to us for screening as 
outlined above. Failure to adhere to this request will result in legal 
action by us seeking to prevent reoccurrence. 


I personally believe that the present arrangement between the 
City, TCCC and the system is the best way to operate a public 


78 


access channel. That view is clearly not shared by our elected 
representatives and Tucson CableVision cannot permit itself to be 
liable for program content which is the exclusive province of a third 
party. I am hopeful you will understand the conundrum in which 
we find ourselves. 


I will be in Tucson the week of December 7. I would like to 
meet with you during the week if you have the time. 


Very truly yours 


David G. Rozzelle 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Cable Operations 


cc: Clayton Hamilton 
Brad Detrick, Esq. 
Alan Mutter 
Wendell Owen 


CUSTOMER 
HANDBOOK 


Jerrold IMPULSE 7000 


Model DP71**, DPV72** and 
DPBB73** 
Addressable Converters 


CGFNFRAI 


et ee ee 
<< ated an bono of Commenter 


WARMING: TO PREVENT FIRE OR SHOCK 
HAZARD, DO NOT EXPOSE THIS 
APPLIANCE TO RAIN OR MOIS- 
TURE. 


The hgheneng Mash oath srrowhead 
symbol when an equelmers! trang 
le intended to olert the weer to te 
presence of eainewinted dangerous 
vokege wate Ge products cacto 
wore het may be of elites ogee 
twde  comseete « risk of clectrik 
ext to perenne 


RI 


IMPORTANT 


SAFEGUARDS 


| READ INSTRUCTIONS — AS tee miery and 
ie et ee ae 7 
8 operemed 


2 RETAIN INSTRUCTIONS — The mfery and 
eg ares deed & ceased br emer 
ree 


5 HEED WARNINGS — AS warmmg os te 
olen amd ote ope eony eee ee teed 
= ered wo 


4 FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS — AS operating 
ee eee te eed, 


3S CLEAMING — Ungiag Ge vuteo prodect bom 
he wel cutis beers Geening Do oct coe Equid 
Geener o: serosal cieemen Use s @mamp chat for 


—, 


6 ATTACHMENTS — Do oot ae eaacheees 
9 oenied of Gey aeey Comme beach 


7 WATER AND MOSSTURE — Deo on ox 
— omemet ene wer kx chamgie ecw 
° ech went toe Lactose et or ieemtiry 
oe, 6 wet Reset, or seer 6 ewieming pont, 
i ee he 


& ACCESSORIES — Do amt piace Gis vito 
ne on ee emetic meet ep beck 
ete The etme proche ary tel cong ere 
ry ond eres demege © Ge epplinece Use 
oy wR 6 cor, aed, wiped, beck, @ te 
mind by Gr ements oad web 
eewmre Noy qumummng of @r pete tom 
tow Oh eames | sere and toned 
—~) <n SCCOy scomememdied by Ge 
me one 


, VENTILATION — Show and cpemngs i te 
Se at prownied ts reece end © omer 
ett opereecs of Ge cqaepee eed © cee) 
© fom owertemumg The apemeng tomkt are 


Oe ee Red by piecemg Get mete proche) om te 
to othe es ete | epee 
eeve be pieced ee a ower 6 radian oF bem 
gee, @ & 6 tele eee oct @ « 
tome of ek ante prope wembemoe 5 


ee pig (0 ping hewing cone bine 
wider hen Gee ether} This gig wl & ine te 


pows cute: cuty one wey The © 2 etery heme 
© yow ore enable w ieet Ge ghe hey ie Ge 
oui, wy covering Ge gig © Ge gig etd 
8 ef © & cee oe deetis © ape 
jew eke cota De on Geet Ge miey 


perpor of Ge poterund ping 
ALTERNATE WARPGNOS — Ths — 
mo) equa wah 6) wer groumting “yp 


we ont) © ems pountngeyp powes ont 
The © 0 enlety eeeee © you ore ennbie te leet 
pg ee Ge oe mes oe tee 
© <tr pow otek onde (fm a Gee 
ary pepe of Ge pemmtng “ype ping . 


12 POWERCORD PROTECTION — Powe 
oe Goel er cut © Ge ry we - 
ty © Ue wethed on or pected by Gree piece 
— = eee ee ey ree ee 
© ere 6 peg cower cxptete oe 
ten Or oe bom oe eee 


82 


Pure rot 
CRAMP. E OF anTénms GROUND 


4) OUTDOOR ANTENNA GROUNDING 

ee cwmade entreme oF cathe vywrm © connected 
wo te cpmpement be vere thee semcmne on Cable 57 sere 
9 premented 1 ws to provide some preaectam agers 
~hage merge ond beb-ap max chergn Saws 
010 of ee Metone! Ekecarcel Code, ANSI/NFPA 
me 701984 growers mformsuce wah rage ©) 
prope: growndang of the iead @ wer to an sntcnne 


14 LIGHTNING == Fr added presecuon ke he 
Cpepeee Garg 6 hgheeng worm oF whee «© 
fet emoneried ae) ememed bor tong pervect of weer 
engteg ¢ from the wall othe: ond dmcomerc! ier 
aecnne o cobte space The wil peeve demagr 
& the vadew procknt dur to kgheneng ond power: 
lel ai 


83 


1S POWLRUINTS An cual enemas syne 
en) me be bested the vamety of overhead 
Prwer lene on where « con lel emo such power 
bene cw wets Whee auaafleng 90 instemlr setemne 
Sytem. extreme core thuhd be hen to herp bom 
wan heng tanh perwer hemes us CCS os Comte 
wah them may be tetel 


16 OVERLOADING tho me overhead wall 
outils end crmee ork & he coe cet in 
eo rak of bee oe ceesl det 


17 ORJECT AMD LIQUED ENTRY - Mew 
Pet Oye ul sey hand ete the cypeepene ns the mag 
Open a they ey nant dangers mage panes 
c= ew met parts thet contd remat o  lee or cece 
weet Newer spel inged uf emy hend on the wadew 
prove 


18 SERVICING —= Du ee seme to serve he 
pepe puerta upeneng oF remu~reg aren 
may cape yuu © dengerom: wultage oF other 
hese ecler of servicing © qualified service 
perenne! 


19 DAMAGE REQUIRING SERVICE — 
Unpteg the cqeepeem (rum the wall cutie! ond 
refer servacing tw qualified service persomac! 
omic ee deme eng Comite 


& Whee the power-supply cond o pig & 
domaged 


Se en ee 
oo he Opepere 


© 0 the eqeepeeet bee bee coped we roe 
weet 


W the eqguepment dacs mt operate murmall) | 
bdbewing the operating mmireinm Alp 
onty ume comma that are covered by » 
PT eg ee tee 88 lp pe! od 
mem of ther commds may pew m= dom. 
ond will chien require cxtemive wort b) 
qeetihed secant am w revere the equepe. 
we 0) ermal uperete 


0 he Cpepeness hes teen deupped on the Cah 
he tees deomeged 

When te cpempemem ci hdben 9 eaten) (thee 
© performance. edmstrg nord for server 


20 REPLACEMENT PARTS — Whee repin. 
ment pers ort roqueed. be awe Ge cerws 


« 


venet whee cece uch oo othe: beserde 


21. SAFETY CHECK — Upon compiction af ov 
ever GF eepees to Ge wakes prod oct of. 


84 


TABLE OF 
CONTENTS 


Operating Suggestions ............ccceeeeeeeeenes | 
COBVOMEE ccccccccccccccccccccccccccscoccoccceees 3 
Converter Controls . 2.2.2.6. 6c cccccceceeeeeeveees 4 
Converter Indicators ..... 6.666 c ccc ecceeeeseeees 5 
Remote Control and Channel Selection ............ 6 
Favorite Channel Operation ............6-0eeeeees 7 
Sleep Timer Feature ..........6.cececceeeeeeeeeee 8 
Remote Control and Volume Control .............. 9 
Parental Control - Deactivation ...............6+++ 10 
Parental Control - Channel Selection .............. it 
Parental Control - Activation .............0.eee05: 12 
Parental Control - Choosing a Code ............... 13 
Parental Control - Changing a Code .............. 15 
Time Controlled Programming .............+.+++- 16 
Purchasing a Future Program or Event ............ 19 
Time Controlled Programming - Operating Notes 

and Suggestions ........ 66. eccccececcceeeeeeenees 20 
Remote Control and Battery Replacement ......... 23 
Accessing Impulse Services ............00cceceeees 24 
Purchasing a Current Program or Service .......... 25 
The Purchase Code ...... 0.0. 0ccccccccseseeeeees 26 
Entering a Purchase Code ............-.000eeeeees 27 
Changing a Purchase Code .......... 00. .6eceeeeee 28 
Erasing a Purchase Code ........ 2.6.60. ceccceeees 29 
Responding to an Opinion Poll ............-.--+4+: 30 
Beses CaRES cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccsees 31 

The material in this mublicatinn is for infrmatiom ~-wpos-- 


—_— nae aad iCaumiect i Francs wittiinn nntire 


85 


These instructions were Prepared to acquaint an 
with the operation of IMPULSE 7000. Please read 
this information carefully. it will help you to get the 


86 


OPERATING 
SUGGESTIONS 


Be sure the TV set is tuned to the 
converter channel (CH 2, 3 or 4) 


a” nk 
= ae a 
—. 


87 


OPERATING 
SUGGESTIONS 


Place the converter on a smooth, 4 
flat surface Air should circulate ™ 
- © 4 


freely under and around the con- U 
verter. DO NOT place anything a 
on top of the converter. eu 


Mf the display flickers and the con- at 
en Cela dasa, are 
unplug the converter from the | 17 — At oS 
Vac wall outlet, wait ten seconds yp 
or longer plug the converter in 

again and press the ON/OFF key 
to turn the converter on again. 


| 
| 
/ 


if channets can be changed with 

the converter buttons, but not 

with the remote control, check the 
. If the battery is weak or 
replace it 


88 


CONVERTER 


The IMPULSE 7000 converter has been provided by your 
cable operator to enhance your cable viewing pleasure. it 
contains a number of features to give you greater conve- 
nience in home entertainment. 


Among the many features are remote control capability, 
parental contrul, favorite channel programming. last chan- 
nel recall, and attractive styling that is sure to match any 
decor. Twenty butions are provided on the top of the 
converter and corresponding butions are included on the 
handheld unit so you have the optiun of direct or remote 
channel entry. 


Be sure to read this customer handbovk , noting the use of 
all the features of your new IMPULSE 7000 converter and 
its remote control. 


89 


CONVERTER 
CONTROLS 


obooboces 
4 5 s 


The keys on the convericr keypad control the same 
functions as the like keys on the remuae control unit. Refer to 
the following pages for details. 


90 


CONVERTER 
INDICATORS 


CHANNEL INDICATOR 
Shows cable channe! selected. 


Do aot block or place objects in front of this area. 


PARENTAL CONTROL INDICATOR 


Lights when channel currently tuned is selected for parental 
control. 


CABLE INDICATOR 

(Only applicable when unit is equipped with an A/B switch ) 
if the unit is equipped with an A/B switch, thas indicator leghts 
when cable B is selected; & docs not light when cable A & 
selected. in 2 dual cable system, & will light when cable B 
ss selected. In 2 mangle cable system, it will laght when an shernste 
source is selected. 


| 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
CHANNEL SELECTION 


6/6 A/6 


ts «| 
NUMERIC KEYS ON/OFF a Cable System 
Press iwo keys. Press once to turn ems to switch 
one at a time, to converter on. Press between cables. 
select channe! again to turn off wate opten 
snengten: 06 aa converter 
at ‘and VCR (if 
FC “ applicable) 
CH coe 
FAVORITE =[==|o: 
CHANNEL _ we pada 
RECALL 7 / 8 
pet CHANNEL UP 
through vorue 'a% 
channels Press and sclease 
ay to select next 
| higher chanac! 
Press and hold to 
Lc scan upward. 
Ces) 
LAST CHANNEL CHAN 
Press once to recall ae 
last chanac! tuned CHANNEL DOWN 
te pe et = Press and reicase 
to select next 
lower channci 


92 


FAVORITE CHANNEL 
OPERATION 


TO ADD 
A CHANNEL 4 ee 
1 | Tune to the 


BR Tune to the | channel dese! 
Press DELETE 


Press PRGM. 
The channel is no 
longer a favorite 


The channel 
is now a 
favorite channel 


REMOVE 
ALL FAVORITE 
CHANNELS 


93 


SLEEP TIMER 
FEATURE 


This feature allows the subscriber to program the converter wo turn-off alter o 
selected time interval has capired. Using the ‘F’ and ‘PROM’ keys, the sub- 
scribes Can program the converter to shut off after a sleep-timer interval of 30. 
60, of 9O minutes a3 described below. 


ws 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
VOLUME CONTROL 


Mode! DP71** does not offer volume control. Check uader- 
side of converter for mode! name. 


VOL 
_. 
VOLUME UP 
Press to rame 
sound bevel. m= 
MUTE 
Press once to 
ture soued off. 
Press again to 
ture sound oa 
VOL 
VOLUME DOWN 
Press to lower 
sound bevel. 
NOTES 
To set volume control level insially: 
1 | Press “F” then “mute” on Raise TV volume to 
ee ate ee ng EE) sound volume can auw be 
separation on a stereo signal adjusted to any desired bevel 


a ae — - a 


95 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
DEACTIVATION 


Sence the unit ts automatically placed into parental control when turned-on. 
parental control must first be deactivated be hore selecting parental control 
channels of behwe programming a parental cuntrol code 


ACTION CONVERTER 
DISPLAY 


4. 


XY 


EB ren F co F | 


ann s || (PE 
(Mashing) 


; (if code is act programmed in, go 3 a 
; directly to step 4. See page 12 for 
. programming ) 
EE res ENTER fo 12] 
The channel sumber will appearon | | “Pim message Thrvs ensectersal 


96 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
CHANNEL SELECTION 


When un is turned on, parental contro! ts 
automatically activated la order to select 
channels for parental control, the control must 
fst be deactivated. See page 10. 


ACTION CONVERTER 


DISPLAY 


@ 


yy 
Cie 


2) 


The Finer hye} 


: 97 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
ACTIVATION 


The unit can be locked by either turning the unit off and then on or by 
following the insiructions below: 
Select channels to be controlled (see page 11). 


ACTION CONVERTER 
7 DISPLAY 


©) 


& 
ER Pres F ging F | 
waa = IP c | 


Converter diaplay will alternate between 
PC and the channel selected 1.2. This | 12] 


| — (flashing) 


98 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
CHOOSING PARENTAL 
CONTROL CODE 


scriber to “teach” the converter a code which then must be 


ENTER PARENTAL CONTROL CODE 


ACTION CONVERTER 
. DISPLAY 
@ 
Pres LEARN = iL E | 
rnc [LP 


( onnnecd 


: | 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
CODE 


ACTION CONVERTER 
ai DISPLAY 
4, 


Wy 


Pres ENTER ‘2 LP 

(flashing) 

co LP} 
(remains flashing) 


EX mesenter 


(Selected channel is displayed ) lf 2 
Any break in the above sequence will : 


Cause the converter to revert to the 


current channel display 


The code you select can be any number from 0 to 9999 but 
Cannot exceed four digits If the code selected exceeds four 
digits. the converter will recognize only the last four digits 
— — | forget. pare ~ GR... 2, €8..-,.~ 


100 


PARENTAL CONTROL 


CHANGING PARENTAL 
CONTROL CODE 
seron | | SmRE 

ams || (LE) 

anm 5 || (LP 
= LP) 
anems |) LE 
wane || EE 


(selected channel is displayed ) 
Any entry error in the above sequence le 
i | ~~ - to “+ o> outa 


os el 


101 


TIME CONTROLLED 
PROGRAMMING 


This feature allows the subscriber to program the 
converter for unattended VCR recording. The unit can 
be programmed to switch to a predetermined channel! 
at a predetermined time and date. Once the unit has 
been programmed it need not be turned on prior to lea ving 
the home. However, the unit MUST be plugged into 
a wall outlet; do not plug into a switched outlet. 


— 


In the following example, the converter will bef. > 


programmed for: WY} 
2, 
Time: 12:30 p.m. 
Channel: 32 Z 
TO PROGRAM 
ACTION CONVERTER | COMMENT 


DISPLAY 


1? { d = Day of Month 
— 1 = First event 
Ener dateof a 2 | 
event (ic. 28th 
of month). See a 


Continued 


> 


102 


ACTION _—|CONVERTER| COMMENT 
y DISPLAY | 
' © iS , 
| B| & 
arom 5! (ht) | EE. 
4 | onendue £ V 
to be programmed. 44 12) 

Switch between Without P 
cme, =| (t, 2) | rome 
arom S| (nt) | F 
BD twwnne L- 3) 

~| 30 


a ee 


i Ci Na ti. ~ ml tacts 


103 
Continucd 
> ACTION CONVERTER |. COMMENT 
ae DISPLAY 
‘ 4 me 
: VY; Ley (3 
° ~ 
C9 8: 
Unit is now 
programmed for 
12:30 PM on the 
EY} pressenver £93 C | 2h 
c = channel 
1 = first event 
Enter channel 
of event a 3 
2 B ON = B cable 


Switch between Co 
A and B cable 2 
Via A/B button =—=§—— 
Notice B indicator 

on display. 


at 
riAS 


B OFF = A cable 


Unit is now 
programmed to 
switch to channel! 
32 at 12:30 PM on 
the 28th of the 
month. 

d = day of month 
2 = second event 


11] At this point, the 
above steps are repeated 
for events 2 - 8. 


= 


To exit Time 
Controlled Programming 
Press TCP 


Current channacl 


104 


PURCHASING A FUTURE 
PROGRAM OR EVENT 


Use the following sequence to program the converter for purchasing 


an event with unattended recording. 
08 DISPLAY 
é ° 
: Oe & » 
‘i YY 
at “— 
EB) press SELECT a o Indicates EVENT 
programming. 
Enter your PUR- 
CHASE CODE (if 
code is not pro- Display changes in 
grammed, go directly E -— intensity with each 
to step 9c. See page digit entered. 
27 for programming a 
code.) 
Chaane! number 
should be flashing. 
Press ENTER 4 Pa if a ts est Bashing 
(flashing) the purchase was 
mn allowed. 
Prepurchase vi 
TCP has been pro- 
10} Press ENTER again 4 2| grammed. 
Continue with neat 
event programming 
TCP made 


es 


105 


TIME CONTROLLED 
PROGRAMMING 


TCP 
OPERATING NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS 


GENERAL, INFORMATION 
All single-digit entries must be preceded by a0. That is, channel 6 is entered as 
06, the 7th of the month is entered as 07. 


While in TCP mode, depressing anything other than a NUMBER, SELECT or 
ENTER will cause the TCP mode to be aborted without retaining programming 
for this particular slot. If this occurs, simply re-enter the TCP mode via the 
TCP button and step back to desired programming via the ENTER bution, or 
the + of — button. 


If nv entry is made while in the TCP programming mode within 40 seconds, the 
TCP mode will be aborted and the user will be returned to nurmal converter 
operation. 


No parameters are entered into memory until the ENTER bution has been 
depressed and the next prompt has been displayed. 


The subscriber can, at any time, review the TCP entries by pressing TCP then 
pressing ENTER or + of — in order to step through and review the currently 
programmed TCP parameters. Pressing TCP again will return the subscriber to 
normal operation without affecting the TCP entries. 


A single-day entry which has been programmed into the TCP memory will be 
erased from the TCP memory after it has been executed. For this reason TCP 
will not be activated the same day of the next month unless the unit is 
reprogrammed to do so. 


After » TCP slot has been programmed for a future event purchase, the 
SELECT and ENTER sequence must be repeated if any changes are made in 
the event programming entries. 


To cancel an event from TCP, simply press DELETE afier calling up the event 
prompt (d!, d2, etc.) on the display. 


106 


PARENTAL CONTROL AND TCP 

If the subscriber attempts to program a channel currently Parentally Controlled 
inte TCP the converter will display ‘PL’. This means the channel the sub- 
scriber has chosen to program into TCP is currently locked-out via Parental 
Control. In order to program this channel into TCP the subscriber must first exit 
TCP by pressing the ‘TCP’ Button. Once TCP has been exited the subscriber 
can deactivate Parental Control by following the instructions on page 9. 


Now that the converter is unlocked the subscriber can reenter TCP by pressing © 
the ‘TCP’ Button and program the unit with the desired information. 


Now that the unit is programmed and TCP has been exited the subscriber can 
reluck all Parental Control Channels by following the instructions on Page 10. 


NOTE: Even though the converter is now in Parental Control Lock Mode, all 
Parentally Controlled channels programmed into TCP will become viewable at 
the time and date programmed into that particular TCP sk. To prevent viewing 
of Parentally Controlled Channels after an event, program the converier to 
turn off using the instructions under “Convenieace Outlet Programming” on 
page 22. 


DISABLING REMOTE ON CONVERTER 

If the subscriber is using two converters, one for normal iclevision viewing and 
the other for VCR recording, he may wish to disable the remote control 
capability on the recording converter. By doing so the subscriber can operate 
the viewing converter with the remote control without affecting the recording 
converter. 


The subscriber can disable the remote control capability by pressing LEARN 
then @/O, being careful to sim the remote control at the converter to be 
disabled; LO will appear on the converter display to indicate lock out. To 
restore the remote control capability, the subscriber again presses LEARN and 
@/0: the LO indication will disappear from the display and the wnit will be in 
the normal operating mode. Any set-top key depression also disables LO. . 


AUDIO QUALITY 

To assure quality sudio during TCP recording, press F then MUTE (V) before 
turning the converter off. When the F button is pressed the letter F will be 
displayed on the converter. When the MUTE button is pressed the display will 
indicate the current channel. The audio is now set for maximum recording 
quality. 


Cuntinurd 


107 


EVERYDAY PROGRAMMING 


Any single programming sha can be programmed ty activate everyday fe S< 
tune to channel } everyday at 2 00 PM). enter OO how the day 


Day OO Cann be entered when setting up a luture event purchase (a PS error 
code will be divplayed) 


CONVENIENCE OUTLET PROGRAMMING 

The convenience outlet on the rear of the converter can be programmed to 
switch on and off through TCP When the subscriber wishes to du this they 
simply program in the date and time they wish the converter outlet to turn on or 
otf, The subscriber then uses the @/O bution in the channel slot to toggle 
between vutlet un and outlet of f The on oF off condition is designated by a “on” 
of “of” on the converter display. 


CONVERTER PARAMETERS 

in the following, # refers tw any particular TCP program slot. All entry slots 
have an upper and lower limit If the entry attempted falls outside of these 
limitations, the terminal will prompt the user again with the appropriate 
symbul (i.¢., if a day outside of the range 00 - 31 is attempted and the user 
depresses ENTER. the d# symbul will reappear prompting the user to again 
atiempt the entry). 


Dar “ =. @ « every dy 
= emeed vhs 

howe ae ow. 

MInvuTE of wn 

CHANNEL << Vermmenal de pe mde mt 


REMOTE CONTROL 
AND BATTERY 
REPLACEMENT 


108 


MODEL MODEL 
RC-550 MRC-550 
The battery used is The MRC-550 uses 2. 
9- volt. rectangular two |.5-volt, IEC S 
buttery. NEDA type type ROS (AAA) 
1604 of equivalent. batieries or 
Available at mun equivalent. Available 
retail seowes. @ mosi retail stores. | 
EER Siide the banrery 
Compartment cover 
in the direction of 
the arrow. 
1 | Sqyuecve and lilt the 
hacking tab to Remove old batterses 
rene hatiery and replace wah 
Compariment cover new ones. 
2 
2 | Remove old battery Align benery 
Snap new battery Compartment cover in 


109 


ACCESSING 
IMPULSE SERVICES 


Jerrold 
Impulse 7000 Series 


STARFONE™ and STARVUE™ 
Two-way Converters 


The instructions on the following pages are for accessing Impulse ser- 
vices. They pertain to subscribers who have been supplied by their cable 
system operators with a converter that includes a two-way module. If you 


are not sure thet your converter has such a module. contact your cable 
operator 


110 


PURCHASING A CURRENT 
PROGRAM OR SERVICE 


Purchasing 
Program or Event See Page 16. 


Whee a channel carrying # special program or event which must 
be purchased separately is selected. an ~E~ will blink shernately 
with the channe! number on the cunverter display. The TV will 
diplay either a preview of the program selected. if that bb in 
progress. or a barker channel message. until s purchase is made 
To perchase the progrem: — 


/ 


oO Press and rebeese the 
SELECT® key 


NOTE 
Omit step 2 if you are aut esing & purchase code 


Entering 88 invalid purchase code causes s “PI” message to be 
displayed on the converter until smather key entry mh made Three 
seccessive abe of emseccessiul attempts to eater a velrd pur havc 
code will disable the EVENT key be fifteen minutes and divplay 
the “P72” message. See page J! he error codes. 


111 


THE 
PURCHASE CODE 


The PURCHASE CODE is any number of your choiwe 
from | to 9999 


The number is your secret code and it is optional. 


The purpose of the code is tu deny (as for example to minor 
children) the ability to purchase programs without your 
authorization 


Se ein a 


You “teach” your converter your chosen code and the 
converter stores it in memory. You may: — 


Enter your code in your converter 


A te lt ym 


Change a previously entered code to a new 
code. 


Erase a previously entered code and purchase 
programs without a code. 


REMEMBER YOU CAN IGNORE 
THE PURCHASE CODE IF YOU WISH 


112 


ENTERING 
A PURCHASE CODE 


To emter your PURCHASE CODE: — 


BA Press and release the 
ENTER key and notice the 
“LE” message blinking. The 
converter is ready to accept 
your code. 


1 Press and release the 
LEARN key and notice the 
message “LE” on the 
converter display 


EE] ress and retease the 
numeric keys to enter your 
code (1 to 9999). If more 
than fowr digits are emcred 
the comverter 
only the lest four 


EY ress and retense the 
ENTER key and notice the 
“LE” message disappears. 
Your code is sow stored in 
the comverter memory. 


NOTE 

if the “LE” message fails to blink. s code cannot be entered. If in 
step 4 the “LE™ fails to disappear, your code has act been stored in 
the converter and you showld try again. 


113 


CHANGING 
A PURCHASE CODE 


lo change 2 PURCHASE CODE. — 


1 | Press and release the 
LEARN key and muiwe the 
“LE” message on the 
cuaverter display 


NOTE 


Press and release the 
mumeric keys te enter your 
presem code. 


-»A Press and release the 
ENTER key and notice the 
“LE” message is blinking 
Converter is ready to accept 
a new code. 


the 
numeric keys to enter your 
new code. 


EFF press and release the 
ENTER key and nutice the 
“LE” message disappears A 
new code is now sored in 


the cunverter memory 


Three successive fale of unsuccessful attempts to change the 


purchase code displays the message “P2" and disables the 
LEARN key for fifteen minutes 


114 


ERASING 
A PURCHASE CODE 


To erase a PURCHASE CODE:— 


1 | Press and release the 
LEARN key and notice the 
“LE™ message on the 
converter display. 


NOTE 

Three successive false or unsuccessful attempts to 
chase code disables the LEARN key for fifteen 
displays the message “P2™. 


per 

and 
If you have lost or cannot remember your purchase code , yow may 
call your cable company and ask to have your code erased. This 


li 


1 Entering 8 number 


115 


RESPONDING TO AN 
OPINION POLL 


When you have tuned to a channel on which an opinion pull is in 
progress, you may choose to participate. When & response tu 8 
question is requested, an “1” message blinks to indicate that the 
converter is ready to accept a response. You respond by: — 


B22] Press and retease the ENTER 


between | and 255. key and observe 
f 
on display 


is 


Mf more than thew» digits are entered, the converter recognizes the 
last three digits only. If the response is valid the “1” 
disappears, that the response has been accepted. If « 
aumber larger than 255 is entered, the response is invalid and the 
“r"” message contiqucs to blink. 


Pressing any key other than s numeric key or the ENTER key, 
while the “r™ message is blinking will: 
1. Remove the “r™ message from the display. 


2. Nullify any response im progress. 
3. Cawse the converter to respond to the new commend and 


terminate your participation im Current opinion pol! 


116 


ERROR 
CODES 


When entry errors have been made or you have selected 8 dis 
allowed [uaction, an error code appears on your converter display. 
These codes and the message they convey arc: — 


Pi Wrong secret code 


P2 Select or Learn key disabled 
(penalty timer running) 


P3 Everyday prepurchase by TCP 
not allowed 


P4 Credit limit exceeded 
Transaction table full 

Not used 
Credit limit is zero 

Valid time stamp not received 
Event cannot be purchased 


32328 


MOTICE . 
Converters equipped with the STAR FONE option are con- 
nected to your telephone line. If you don't hear the dia! 
tone over your telephone try the following tests: hang up 
and try again in a few seconds; disconnect the coeverter 
cable connecting to the telephone wall outlet and try 
again. If there is still no dial tone contact your telephone 
company. If you are assured by the telephone company 
that their service is normal and still cannot get 2 dial tone, 
contact your cable company and report s defective 


117 


CUSTOMER HANDBOOK 


Jerrold STARCOM® VI 


Model DPY5-°* 
Addressable Converter 
With Volume Control 


‘ 
Py ge * 


"ee Dake REP TS meee igo COR 
L. bi “ Aa Phe. ME banat ~~ 


118 


NaN 


Caution 


10 REOUCE THE AISA OF ELEC TMC SHOCR 
00 *O!T AE MOVE COVER OF Gacy 
WO USER SERVICEASLE PARTS wrSIOE 


ALFER SE RWICING TO QUAL HED SERVICE PERSONNEL 


Geaphecal symiuss and supplemental warning marking 


ha ated on better of convener 


WARNING: TO PREVENT FIRE OR SHOCK 
HAZARD, DO NOT EXPOSE THIS 
APPLIANCE TO RAIN OR MOIS- 
TURE. 


The fightmng flash with arrowhead 
symibd, within an equilateral triangle. 
is intended to alert the user to the 
presence of uninsulated “dangerous 
voltage’ within the product's eaclo- 
sure that may be of sufficiemt magni 
tude to constitute # risk of electric 
shock to persons. 


Tue exclamstion powt within an equi 
lateral triangle ts imended to sien the 
o 


This installation should be made by 2 qualified service person 
and showid conform to all loca! codes. 


REPAIR: Uf you find the enit in need of repair, contact your 
cable system operstor for repew or replacement 


NOTE TO CATV SYSTEM INSTALLER: 
This reminder is provided to call the CATV system 
installer’s attention to Article 820-22 of the NEC thet 
provides guidelines for proper grounding and, ie 
particular, specifies that the cable ground shall be 
connected to the grounding system of the building. ss 
close to the poim of cable entry as practical. 


119 


Your new STARCOM VI features the latest 

applicable to cable TV viewing. These instructions 
were prepared to acquaint you with the operation of 
STARCOM VI. Please read this information . 
Wi will hep you to get the maximum enjoyment from 
this product and will give you » betier understanding of 
as application to your cable TV system and your home 
video and audio system needs. 


Soeweaw Owe ww = 


= —_— — 
ww = 


120 


OPERATING SUGGESTIONS 


@ Aim the remote control directly ot the converter. Be sure there are no 
obsirections between the remote control and the comvericr. 


@ Press and release butions one ot s time, firmly and delibersicly. 


@ Be sure the TV set is tuned to the converter channel (CH 2, 3, of 4). Your 
cable installer will tell you which chanaci to tunc. 


®@ Place the converter on a smooth, flat surface. Air should circulate freely 
under and sround the converter. DO NOT place anything on top of the 
converter: Adequate cuoting requires that the top of the convener be clear. 


@ I the display Nickers and the convener will not change chenacts, unplug 
the converter from the 117 Vac wall outlet, wait ten seconds or longer, plug 
the converter in again, and press the ON/OFF key to turn the converter on 
again. 

@ i channchs can be changed with the converter buttuns, but act with the 
remmese comred, check the battery. I the battery is weak of dead, 
replace the battery. 


121 


CONVERTER 


TTL 


Lee) —= 


The STARCOM® Vi Model DPVS-* convener has been provided by your 
cable operator to enhance your cable viewing pleasure ht comains 8 number of 
features to give you greater comvemence im hue enieniaimment 


Among the many features are remote control capability, parental control 
favorite channel programming. last channel recall, and attractive styling 
that is sure to match any decor Nincicen buttons are provided on the top of the 
Converter and corresponding buttons are inc headed on the handheld wna $0 you 
have the option of direct ur remote channel entry 


Be sure to read this customer handbook , noting the use of all the features of 
your new STARCOM VI converter and its remote control. 


122 


Press two keys. one Exampies 10 
#8 time, to select os 
channe! 

6/0 (ON/OFF) 


Dual Cable Syneem: 
Press to swach 
«between cables. 
Sengie Cable System 
Press to swach 
between coeverter ° 
and VCR (if applicable). 
% ——_ ais 1%) 
+t- 
= —s + (CHANNEL UP) 
Sao || 
Ss 5 : higher chenne!. 
22ers . Press end hold to 
xan epwerd 
So 
Press amd reiease 
fo sebect meat 
bower Chane! 
Press and hold to 


123 


CONVERTER INDICATORS 


| 


Lights when cable B 


— is selected. Dues ast 
loght whee cable An 
pe ey sctected fe 2 dusi 
| ‘ently tuned Cable sywem thes 
| setected for will hg whee cabie 
| perema! comrcl B is selected. tn « 
sengte cable sywecm 
the will light whee 
the VOR is selected 


(00 appt aii ) 


124 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
CHANNEL SELECTION 


NUMERIC KEYS 


Prevs two keys. one #f Press once to tern 
a time. w sctect converter on Press 
channet agam to ture off 
a 2 \ 
\ 
* PARENTAL \ 
cont = [|oaas 
channels for perc mal oobch 
cumarod Seen 
+ dhe 
(LAST CHANNEL = 
——_—™ jf 
at chanel Sss5 
agem to retere N ee A 
to currem channct 
oft BB 
L J 

EVENT/LEARN/ENTER 

(Seown sheaded ) 

Used with Jerroid’s 

STARFONE and STARVUE 

adapters Pressing 


125 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
VOLUME CONTROL 


é(—)—1—1— I 2 
oabbs 
S445 
A‘WOLUME UP) Saag “enen 
an |) 
473 S85 Press again to 
[SSS85|| = 
V (VOLUME DOWN) —__ 
Press to lower 
sound bevel 
ol Eh 
UV J 
NOTE 
To set wolume control level mitally 
| Raise converter vodume to meacimuem 
with remene comred 
2 Raise TV vedume tor metionam «confer 
level 
Scand volume can mw be adjusted 1 any 


de ured level from the remae control uni 


126 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
SELECTION 


127 


PARENTAL CONTROL 


ACTIVATION 


Type 


Plunger 


128 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
DELETION 
Plunger Type 


(1) 
Remove padlock 
and check that ber 
on rear pane! is 
retracted imo 
converter. (Only 
one hole is exposed.) 
(2) 
Tune channci ® indicator will 
which is to be be ha 
uncon rolled | 
(3) 
Press @ to deselect 
channe! for 
parental contro! 
* indicator 
will go out. 
ee & | 
wu chy & 
: _—— & indicator will 
555 | Gonnchs which 
ere setected for 
paremal com rot 


129 


PARENTAL CONTROL 


ACTIVATION 
Clasp Type 
a 
~ 
: th Oy 
(2) "ay ; 
Pa: Covenon e 
Btn 


130 


NN 


PARENTAL CONTROL 
DELETION 


(3) 
Press @ to deselect 
channe! for 
peremal control 
& indicator 
will go out. 
+t: 
a fo nn ga 
ere selected for 
peremal com rol 


131 


FAVORITE CHANNEL 
OPERATION 


TO SCAN 
FAVORITE 
CHANNELS 
Press # to step TO REMOVE 
— — : A CHANNEL 
| in 
Tune to the 
TO ADD channei 
A CHANNEL \ FY 
a 6éf—)—1—!1—1 2 eee 
Tune to the foes [ome os J ome) a) 
(2) S465), bantee 
Press PROM. a favorne 
FY HS = chao 
The channe! ce 
is now 8 as cea a TO REMOVE ALL 
(avortec . mee WE 4 FAVORITE 
Naren | CHANNELS 
(Funcnon available 
on some models 
only } 
(1) 
Press F. 
et BE 
J 
Press DELETE 
(3) 
There are 
wader 


132 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
BATTERY REPLACEMENT 


CUSTOMER 
HANDBOOK 


Jerrold STARCOM? 7 


Model DQN7-* 
Digital Plain Converter 


134 


10 ME OUCE IE OtSe OF CLEC TOC BHOCE. 
MOUSER SERWIC EAGLE PARTS erEeOE 


MEF ER BE RHC ee 10 CUAL WHO SERWICE PERSONNE. 


Gragin af symieds end supplemental warming marking 
ka sted un butum of cunvener 


WARNING: TO PREVENT FIRE OR SHOCK 
HAZARD, DO NOT EXPOSE THIS 
APPLIANCE TO RAIN OR MOIS- 
TURE. 


The lightang Mash wath srrowhead 
symtud wathen on equelateral iriangic. 
is wntended to alert the wser to the 
presence of wnimealated “dangerous 
voltage when the product's em lo- 
sure that may be of weffkient magn 
tude w constitute s risk of clectrx 
sunt to perms 


The cactemetem puss wither sn equi 

lateral tangle ts mcaded to alert the 
| weer to the presence of important 

operstng and mamicnaace (servicing) 
e mstructons im the inerature accumpe 
eying the epphame 


Thes evstalistion shuuld be made by « qualified servne perce 
and vusid conform w ofl locel codes 


REPAIR: 1 you fund the ent im need of repaw. Coma! pour 
cable syveem apermor for repew of replacemen 


NOTE TO CATV SYSTEM INSTALLER: 
This reminder is provided to call the CATY system 
installers attention to Anicte §20-22 of the NEC tha 
provides guidelines for proper grownding end 
particular, specifies that the cable grownd shall be 
connected to the grounding system of the Dutkding os 
chne w the poi af cable entry os practwal 


135 


IMPORTANT 
SAFEGUARDS 


| READ INSTRUCTIONS — Al te whety ond 
OPersung watructons thowkd be vend before the 
Spphence 6 ope: send 


2 RETAIN INSTRUCTIONS — Vine watery amd 
OPTISNG emirates thowkd be retnined few tetere 
referer 


3 WEED WARNINGS - Al warmng om the 
epphence omd m the opersing wutrectins thou 
be adhered ww 


4 FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS — Al opersumg 
ond we mmarectnwe vunshd be lofhowed 


5 CLEANING Unptag the vadew proche from 
the wall cutie: behwe chemmeng Deo ect war tngued 
Ceener, on scrum d tear Une o deep chuth tor 
ey 


& ATTACHMENTS .- (hy me ee om hemrees 
™“s commmended @ they mey come hacer 


rovmmmemied by the manuieceerc: ot utd wah 
opapmee Any mmm of the opphence dhol 
thre the menudacterer) merectiom, sad undid 
— ) eng sme) commend by the 
en ere 


* VENTE ATION She sad opemngs = the 
cotenet ere prowaied for vention end to cmere 
rohatte operate of the Cympement sed fo proses 
* fee cvevhestng The cpeming: showhd acver 


be Mouted by placing the video product on + bed. 
sot, rg, oF other simmer mertnce Exquigpenent dhoukd 
mover be placed meer or over & eadinte or hem 
reper, or ee bee ielintin mech oe 5 
uohcee oF rect ontem prope: wemudemm « 
prowwted 


© POWER SOURCES — The wedeo proces 
tend be cpereted only hom the type of power 
sewer endicoeed on the marking tebe W you ar 
me mee of the type of power mupptid to you 
home, comet your luce! power company Fa 
opepmen inemded % operate fom battery prwer. 
© other sowwom, refer to the opereting mutrectoms 


The © 0 mlety fetes © yow ore enntte ww meer 
(he pg mo the omit come? Ree ctwe ee 
© replace poms otedrer castes De at detes: te 
salen) perpunr of the growmiing +ype ping 


ee a ee 
NS eg oe 


ne ee eee ee ew te 
ows Caen (ee ae 


ee ge ee rem ee 
mee em ee me me 
ee eo 


1) CRT ANTENNA CRUOUNTRM, 14 LTTE he ahied prearntmee be te 
is ees Bee 
ee geass te eee ier smtreme ce cotir perm kA emamrmhy cmd ome be bang pee ch fee 
= greene” © te peewee eee preeceee agers enpteg 6 fee ee weal cats sed deren Oe 
cage ange eed beep ae charge Seem 9 seteeee oe cate spire The 0 prewret demapr 
B00 od ee Meee! f tern (Cake ANSON PA ote te wade pevchat deer fy ghee ct pereer 
Nee FOI prewnin hee eat eet bee eee 

a ee 

ee 

ba me «we deter at Cane > 

pring cha mek ced eqeeceree be 

ee ee | a 


137 


1S POWER I INES Ae nmal means |r 
enh) me te becmed we the vwinty of overhead 
mroet ines oe whew & con fell inee sch gomer 
hor os corm When enasting se cutkde snarene 


revue 
Ss VV ie {he ee ceermnge te server then 


'% DAMAGE REQUIRING SERVICE — 
Unpheg thm cqppenens imum the wall cute: ened 
crt cervacing © quatthed service perenne! ender 
Og rnen en 


‘ Whee te precrsepely cord or ging 


» 1 ingen) hes bees peli ow cbgrte hee lefties 
Ree 


at SAPETY CHP Ue cmmptre 4 sey 
er oe pe fe Re wel pees ot he 
rene chant i peviwm sslety ches te 
ere Get he vale pees me peer 
oe omine 


138 


Your new STARCOM 7 features the latest technology 
applicable to cable TV viewing. These instructions 
were prepared to acquaint you with the operation of 
STARCOM 7. Piease read this information carefully. 
lt will help you to get the maximum enjoyment from 
this product and will give you a better understanding 
of its application for your cable TV system and your 
home video and audio sysiem needs. 


139 


The material in this publication is for information purposes 
Only and is subject to change without notice 


140 


OPERATING 


Place the converter on a 
smooth, flat surface. Air 
should circulate freely under 
and around the converter. DO 
NOT place anything on top of 
the converter. Adequate cool- 
ing requires that the top of the 
converter be clear. 


Aim the remote control 
directly at the converter. Be 
sure there are no obstructions 
between the remote control 
and the converter. 


Press and release butions one 
at a time, firmly and deliber- 
ately. 


~~ 
. 


E 


14] 


OPERATING 


SUGGESTIONS 


Be sure the TV set is tuned tw _—«? 


the converter channel (CH 2,3 | Ty 


of 4). Your cable installer will 
tell you which channel to tune. 


If the di flickers and the Pre 
converte? will not change lisa * ; ] 
‘ 


channels, unplug the converter a 
from the 117 Vac walll outlet, | 


wail ten seconds or longer. , KI | 
plug the converter in again and 


press the ON/OFF key to turn 
the converter on again. 


If channels can be changed 
with the converter butions, but 
not with the remote control, 


check the battery. If the bat- 


tery is weak or dead, 
replace it. 


if & power outage should occur, or if the converter is 
unplugged. the converter memory will not “forget” which 
channels have been designated favorite channels and 
parental control channels. The converter will come back 
on to the last channel viewed. 


142 


The STARCOM® 7 Model DQN?7-* converter has been 
provided by your cable operator to enhance your cable 
viewing pleasure. It contains a number of features to give 
you greater convenience in home entertainment. 


Among the many features are remote control capability. 
parental control, favorite channel programming, last chan- 
ne! recall, and attractive styling that is sure to match any 
decor. Four butions are provided on the top of the con- 
verter and corresponding buttons are included on the 
remote control unit so you have the option of direct or 
remote control of the converter. The remote control wnit 
also provides for control of additional features which can- 
not be controlled from the buttons on the converter. 


Be sure to read this customer handbook , noting the use of 
all the features to your new STARCOM 7 converter and its 
remote control. 


143 


CONVERTER 


CONTROLS 


Press and release to select 
next higher channel. 


Press and hold to scan 
upward. 


——— 


a 
CHANNEL DOWN 


Press and release to select 
neat lower channel. 


Press and hold to scan 
downward. 


— 


eo 
ON/OFF 


Press once to turn convertér on. 


Press again to turn converter off. 


—— 


ale 
Alb 


Dual Cable Sysiem: 
Press to switch between cables. 


Single Cable System: 
Press to switch between cunverter 


and VCR (if applicable). 


| 44 


Do not block or place objects in front of this arcs. 


PARENTAL CONTROL INDICATOR “P” 


0. ———————— 


CABLE MIDICATOR “8” 
(Onty applicable when unit is equipped with an A/B swich | 
I . If the unit is equipped with an A/B switch, this indicator 
lights whee cable B is selected; it docs not light when 

a cable A is selected. in 2 dual cable system, it will light 

whea cable B is selected. In 2 single cable system. it will 

light whee an shernste source is selected 


_ 


145 


REMOTE CONTROL AND 
CHANNEL SELECTION 


6/0 enten 


WRN KEYS =) oe 
Vress two keys, FAVORITE U 
one ats tome, ON/OFF ne cel 
c 
— — aaa Press once tw turn memory bor 
oye me > 4 CALL converter on Paremal Cuatrul 
a — — Press again tw turn Overnde 
cia ome converter off a 
ae 
ian — 
Deal Cable System: Press and elease 
Press to swiich 4 ae 
between cables higher : 
Single Cable System: pe 
Press to switch ees 
between convericr cman 
and VCR iif 
appl able) KA 
uc C . 
He | — 
LAST CHANNEL or 
to select next 
RECALL lower chanac! 
aon - Press and hold to 
recall last channe! — 
tuned Press again ’ 
to return to current 
Used to set secret 
code for Parental 
245 Control Overnde and 
to enfuock for 
PARENTAL override 
CONTROL ror O€LETE 
Used to select oe = 
Se Used to add s Used to remove a 
emtal Cumrol Favurite Chanac! Fevurne Channac! 


NOTE: The SELECT, VOL. MUTE. TCP. sad LEARN buttom 
have so effect on your converter mode! DQN7.* 


146 


FAVORITE CHANNEL 
TION 


OPERA 


TO SCAN 
FAVORITE 


CHANNELS ge ee Re 
nt aa $a al 


next higher favorite 
channel. 


147 


PARENTAL CONTROL- 
CHANNEL SELECTION 


a Remove the padlock 
(if already attached) 
from the bracket on 
the rear panel of 
the converter, and O 
place the switch ie . -- o 
the unlocked —~ 
position. i: 

UNLOCK 

Tune the channel Press PC/PM to 
which is to be select channel for 
parentally parental control. 
controlled. 

4 | P indicator on con- Repeat steps 2, 3, 
verter display will and 4 for all 
light. desired parenially 

' controlled 


| @ (IS pr | aaa 


NOTE This portion of the procedure simply identifies the 
channels to be parentally controlled; it dues not lock them 
out. See next page for activation of parental control 
feature. 


148 


PARENTAL CONTROL- 
ACTIVATION 


NOTE: The user provides a pedioct with a shackle 
diameter Y-inch or smaller. 


After selecting the 
channels to be con- 


trolled (see 

previous page). ») 
push the switch on . 
the rear pancl to LOCK 


the locked 


Pass the shackle of 
the padlock 
through the (wo 
holes in the 
bracket, and close 
the pediock. 


149 


0-0: 


DOI0-0- 


4 | The P indicator 
will go owt. The P 
indicator will be on 
only for those 
channels which are 
selected for paren 
tal contro! 


150 


2 | Press the F bution 


The channel indi- 
cation “— —”" will 
display 


Press the numbered 
buttons to select 
your secret parents! 
control override 
code. Up to four 
digits may be wsed 
for this code. If 
more than four dig 
its are pressed. 
only the lest fowr 


digits will be wsed 
for this code_ 


If you are slow in entering your code (more than five seconds between num- 
bers). or if you press a button which is sot s number, the converter will return to 
normal operation. IF YOU PRESS “ENTER™ AFTER PRESSING “F~, WITH- 
OUT SELECTING A SECRET CODE, NO CODE WILL BE ENTERED. TO 
ENTER A CODE, BEGIN THIS PROCEDURE AGAIN. 


5 | Push the switch on 
the rear pane! to 
the locked posi- 
tion 


6 | Pass the shackle of 
the padlock 
through the two 


_¥ 


holes om the 
bracket, and close 
the padlock 


_euVCGQ_aq__—_— 


iow 


151 


The parental control override feature allows you to view 
those channels designated for parental control without 
removing the padluck Tu override the parental control 
kx kout, follow these instructions: 


NOTE: You have three tries to enter the correct secret 
code. If the wrong code is entered three times in a row, the 
converter will not accept override codes for fifteen min- 
utes. On the fourth attempt when you press the F bution. 
the converter will display “ES™ for 2 seconds. However, if 
you chose not to wait fifteen minutes. you can remove the 
padiock to unlock the parental control. 


152 


The battery used is « 

9- volt, rectangular 
battery. NEDA type 1604 
or equivalent 


1 | Squeeze and lift tab to 


Jerroid SRC Ii 


KEY EQUIVALENTS 


Jerrold RC 550 


154 


10h 0 
14-400 OD 


1-000 niu 

| [000-0 0-00 |; 

il-|+|<|>]>|- |-lolg}f 
Lon 

ANCA aT 

UUUEVUUU 

alalel-oel5[glels|§]u 


1-0-0-0:0 Roll 


1-0-0-0 @-Bel}}-0 


L 
of] 


155 


FCC Caption Omitted 


COMMENTS OF 
Ann Arbor Community Access Television 


Ann Arbor Community Access Television (AACAT) submits these 
comments in response to the above captioned proceeding and in 
support of the comments filed in this proceeding by the Alliance for 
Community Media, Alliance for Communications Democracy, 
American Civil Liberties Union and the People for the American 
Way. 

In particular, AACAT agrees that the provisions of Sections 10(c) 
and 10(d) and the proposed rules all will be unconstitutional. 
Assuming that the Commission decides to adopt rules to implement 
either Section 10 (c) or 10(d): 

a. The rules should be specific and as narrowly drawn as 
possible, and must contain limitations that prevent cable operators 
from hampering use of access channels by those who wish to 
produce live or cablecast taped programming under the guise of 
applying the rules. For example, would FCC rules prohibit a 
program such as “Sexy Minutes”, which is produced by a 
University of Michigan professor with the intent of providing 
critical answers to questions of human sexuality in a “live call-in” 
format? This would undoubtably be a detriment to the community! 


b. Access centers have very limited resources. The FCC rules 
should make it clear that any actions taken by an operator under 
Section 10 must be undertaken at the operator’s own expense. 


c. Approximately 240 hours of video and 240 hours text 
programming are cablecast each week on the (3) access channels in 
my community. Much of the programming is produced by 
volunteers, and experience shows that it must be as easy as possible 
for these volunteers to use. The rules must recognize that any 
roadblocks that are placed in the way for rroduction will result in 
a reduction in speech. 


156 


We believe that the rules must be developed in a manner that 
the first amendment rights of our volunteer community producers 
are not abridged. The issue of prior restraint and the appropriate 
legal remedies should also be addressed in this proceeding. 


Respectfully submitted, 
/s/ 


Harry S. Haasch 
Cable Administrator 
City of Ann Arbor, Michigan 


DATE: December 7, 1992 


BLADE COMMUNICATIONS, INC. 
MULTIVISION CABLE TV CORP. 
PARCABLE, INC. 

PROVIDENCE JOURNAL COMPANY 
SAMMONS COMMUNICATIONS, INC. 


The Commission’s Notice of Proposed Rule Making seeks 
comment on proposed regulations implemented pursuant to the 
provisions of The Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 that restrict access by children to indecent 
programming on leased access channels and enable cable operators 
to prohibit the use of “PEG” access channels for obscene 
programming. While the Companies commenting herein firmly 
believe that these statutory provisions do not pass constitutional 
muster, the Commission must nonetheless ensure that the proposed 
regulations are workable and fair. Accordingly, the Commission 
should adopt the following recommendations: 


¢ define the relevant “community” for determining 
standards of indecency as consisting only of cable 
subscribers, or, in some cases, subscribers to a 
particular channel or tier. 


+ allow operators who “sequester” indecent programming 
on a single leased access channel to count that channel 
toward the allotment of channels that must be dedicated 
to leased access and require the programmer to bear 


158 


any cost of blocking the channel. 


* require programmers to notify operators whether or not 
programming contains indecent material in advance of 
channel use and in a specified written format. 

+ define how an operator’s written indecency policy is 
published, and permit operators to require appropriate 
indemnification and insurance from programmers. 

+ establish as grounds for an operator's “reasonable 
belief” that programming contains indecent material 
either a programmer's certification to that effect or a 
programmer's refusal to so certify. 

+ limit liability for operators who comply with the 
prescribed regulatory steps for obtaining programmer 

. require programmers seeking to air programs on 
“PEG” access channels to certify whether or not the 
program contains obscene material and limit operator 


+ state that operators need not air a leased access program 
found indecent or obscene by a governmental body. 


FCC Caption Omitted 


JOINT COMMENTS 


Blade Communications, Inc., MultiVision Cable TV Corp.. 
ParCable. Inc., Providence Journal Company,’ and Sammons 
Communications, Inc. (hereinafter “Companies”), by their 
attorneys, hereby submit their Joint Comments in response to the 
above-captioned Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“Notice”). Each 


Providence Journal Company conducts its cable television operations 
through its subsidianes Colony Communications, Inc. and King Videocable 
Company. 


159 


of the Joint Parties is an owner and operator of cable television 
systems and, accordingly, will be directly affected by the outcome 
of this proceeding. 

A. Introduction 

The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 required cable 
operators to set aside certain channels for use by nonaffiliated 
programmers through noncommercial “PEG” access or commercial 
leased access.’ These provisions, always of questionable status 
under the First Amendment’, force cable system operators to carry 
programming against their own editorial judgment and without 
regard to the wishes or interests of cable subscribers. 


The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act 
of 1992, P.L. 102-385 (the “1992 Act”), grafts new requirements 
on the 1984 access provisions for the purpose of restricting the 
distribution of “indecent”, “obscene” and other material over the 
access channels. The new provisions run even further afoul of the 
First Amendment, trampling not only on the rights of the operator, 
as before, but also now on the rights of the access programmer. 

Despite the fundamental constitutional infirmities of the access 
provisions, the cable industry heretofore has accepted the obligation 
of providing access as part of its public interest responsibilities. 
These new requirements will make the burden of complying so 
difficult and the risk of liability so serious that the industry can no 
longer acquiesce in what has always been a highly questionable 
scheme. That the new statutory provisions raise significant new 
risks and burdens is evidenced by the fact that they were almost 


47 U.S.C. §§ 531 and 532 (1988). 


’ The status of cable systems as first amendment speakers akin to 
newspapers is well recognized by the courts See Leathers v. Medlock. 
111 S. Ct. 1438, 1442 (1991); City of Los Angeles v. Preferred 
Communications, Inc., 476 U.S. 488, 494 (1986); and FCC v. Midwest 
Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689, 707 (1979) Thus, the fundamental concept of 
mandatory access is constitutionally suspect. See Miami Herald Publishing 
Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241, 258 (1974) and see also Century Federal, 
Inc. v. City of Palo Alto, 710 F.Supp 1552, 1554 (N.D. Cal. 1987). 


160 


immediately challenged in the courts.‘ 


Meanwhile, the Commission faces the perplexing task of 
adopting regulations to implement these difficult and legally 
precarious provisions. Until the statutory provisions that require 
these rules are declared unconstitutional — which the Companies 

are confident they will be — the Commission has no choice but to 
attempt to make something operable of a flawed and unfortunate 
situation. 


* - = 


The Commission already recognizes that cable subscribers need 
far less protection from obscene or indecent programming than do 
members of the general public.* Unlike programs broadcast on 
“free” TV or radio, which permeate the airwaves and often come 
into the home unexpectedly, cable programming must be 
affirmatively invited into the home through the viewer’s act of 
subscribing to cable service. In addition, the subscriber has the 
option of buying only basic cable programming and foregoing other 
tiers, channels or even individual programs that might contain 
programming he or she considers objectionable. Furthermore, there 
already is federal legislation that requires cable operators to furnish 
cable subscribers with “parental control devices” or “lock boxes” 
to block off or restrict viewing of certain channels in their own 
homes. See 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A); 47 C.F.R. § 76.11; 50 
Fed. Reg. 18,655 (1985). Finally, a cable subscriber who finds 
cable programming in general “patently offensive” can cancel the 
subscription and still receive television programming off-air or 
through other delivery systems. 


» * bd 


* See Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. v. FCC and United 
States, Civil Action No. 92-2494 (D.D.C. filed Nov. 5, 1992); Discovery 
Channel v. United States, Civil Action No. 92-2558 (D.D.C. filed 
Nov. 13, 1992). 


* See Report of the Commission in MM Docket No. 89-494, 67 RR2d 
1714, 1726 (1990) and Notice of Inquiry in MM Docket No. 89-494, 4 
FCC Red 8358, 8364 (1989). 


161 
Respectfully submitted, 


BLADE COMMUNICATIONS, INC. 
MULTIVISION CABLE TV CORP. 
PARCABLE, INC. 

PROVIDENCE JOURNAL COMPANY 
SAMMONS COMMUNICATIONS, INC. 


By: _/s/_ 
Donna C. Gregg 


/s/ 
Michael K. Baker 


Their Attorneys 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 


December 7, 1992 


162 


COMMENTS OF THE 
BOSTON COMMUNITY ACCESS 
AND PROGRAMMING FOUNDATION 


The Boston Community Access and Programming Foundation 
is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation established in 1982 to provide 
public access and community programming to Boston residents. 
We operate two channels, known as the Boston Neighborhood 
Network (BNN), on the Boston cable system. Our primary funding 
comes from Cablevision of Boston. 


BNN’s access operation provides training and production 
facilities to Boston residents and institutions wishing to produce 
programs. We also present staff-produced programming, most 
notably a daily half-hour neighborhood news program. During our 
last fiscal year, BNN cablecast 1,326 original access programs, plus 
713 original Foundation-produced programs. Including repeats, we 
cablecast 2,797 programs, or 2,319 hours of programming. 


We work hard to involve ethnic, racial, and linguistic minorities 
in program production in order to serve the many diverse audiences 
that comprise our city. Our goal is to make the channel as rich in 
diversity as the city itself. 


We wish to specifically comment on the Commission’s proposed 
regulation, paragraph (d), which would enable a cable operator to 
prohibit certain types of programming on public, educational and 
governmental access channels. 


A Solution in Search of a Problem 


Before promulgating a rule as far-reaching as the one the 
Commission proposes, the Commission should first establish that 
there is a problem that needs to be solved. In fact, neither the FCC 
nor Congress has shown that any problem exists. The Commission, 
in its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, gives no information at all 
about whether or not any programming actually exists on access 


163 


Channels that it feels is inappropriate. Congress, in its debate, 
provided a single example: Senator Fowler asserted that access 
channels are used to solicit prostitution through shams such as 
escort services and fantasy parties, and Senator Wirth stated that he 
had seen this material in New York City. Cong. Rec., Jan. 30, 
1992, S649-5S0 (daily ed.). (Even this one example is questionable, 


There are 250 access systems in Massachusetts alone, and 
literally thousands across the country. To subject all of these 


Programming Foundation has operated one of the nation’s largest 
and most ethnically diverse public access operations. Over this 
time, we are not aware of any programs that would fall into the 
Categories of prohibited material under the proposed FCC rule, as 
we understand the rule. 


To be sure, we have had programs that were controversial. 
including some that have offended viewers. We have responded to 
the issue of “offensive” programming in a way that we feel 
addresses the legitimate needs of three separate groups (1) parents 
who do not want their children exposed to particular programs, (2) 
adult viewers who would like the opportunity to view a diversity of 
programs, and (3) producers who are exercising their First 
Amendment right of free speech. 


The process we have devised is as follows: First, we require 
Producers to inform the Foundation, when requesting cablecast 
time, if a program may be offensive to some audiences or is of a 
mature nature. The Foundation may require producers to place an 
appropriate viewer warning at the beginning of these programs. 
Depending on the nature of the program, the Foundation may also 
require that the program be cablecast after 10 p.m. or after 11 p.m 


164 


A producer who disagrees with staff decisions on these matters may 
appeal to a Grievance Committee consisting of three Trustees and 
two producers. 


In fact, there have been few disputes, since staff and producers 
are usually in agreement about the most appropriate time for a 
program. On two occasions over the past year, the Grievance 
Committee was asked to decide whether programs were too 
“offensive” for 10 p.m. time slots. One was a program by an 
African-American producer of “uncensored” rap music, containing 
repeated use of an offensive word. The other program was a gay 
drama, suggesting phone fantasies as the ultimate form of “safe 
sex.” As our most risqué programs, these are the types that would 
be in jeopardy under the Commission’s proposed rule. It is 
interesting that the programs that would be endangered are 
programs by and for minority communities— A frican-Americans and 
gays. 

In Boston, through a community process, we have already 


Proposed Rule is Overbroad 

from the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act to 
prohibit “any programming that contains obscene material, sexually 
explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful 
conduct.” Obscenity has been defined by the courts over the years. 
The public therefore has at least some idea what it means. But the 
term “sexually explicit” appears to be a new term, never before 
defined. 


In note 11 of its Notice, the Commission hints that “sexually 
explicit” might mean the types of “indecent” programming that the 
Act says may be prohibited by cable operators over leased access 
channels, specifically programming that “describes or depicts sexual 


165 


OF excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner as 
measured by contemporary community standards for the cable 
medium.” 


This interpretation is flawed. The courts have repeatedly ruled 
that the First Amendment does not permit a 24-hour-per-day ban on 
material that is indecent but not obscene. The Commission has an 
obligation to interpret the law in accordance with the Constitution. 
The Commission must interpret the law to say that “sexually 
explicit” programming means exactly the same as “obscenity.” 

Courts have faced the issue of indecent communications in 
television, and telephones. In Cruz v. Ferre, 755 F.2d 1415 (11th 
Cir. 1985), the Court of Appeals overturned a City of Miami 
ordinance prohibiting indecent material on the city’s cable system. 
In Action for Children’s Television v. FCC, 932 F.2d 1504 (D.C. 
Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 1281 (1992), the Court of 
Appeals struck down the FCC's 24-hour-per-day ban on indecent 
broadcasts over radio and television. In Sable Communications v 
FCC, 492 U.S. 115 (1989), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the 
FCC could not place a total ban on indecent commercial messages 
(known as “dial-a-porn”) over interstate telephone lines. The 
definition of “indecency” in all three cases was similar to the 

iti that the Commission apparently believes applies to cable 
access. 

The Supreme Court in Sable summed up the constitutional 
requirement: 

Sexual expression which is indecent but not obscene is 

protected by the First Amendment... The Government 

may, however, regulate the content of constitutionally 
protected speech in order to promote a compelling interest 
if it chooses the least restrictive means to further the 


Sable at 126 (emphasis added). The Court agreed that there was a 
compelling interest in protecting the physical and psychological 
well-being of minors. However, a 24-hour-a-day ban on indecent 
material was not a permissible way to achieve that end, since such 


166 


a blanket prohibition would deprive adults of their ability to receive 
Constitutionally protected speech. The Court cited Butler v. 
Michigan, 352 U.S. 380 (1957), where a law was found to be too 
restrictive when it “denied adults their free speech rights by 
allowing them to read only what was acceptable for children. As 
Justice Frankfurter said in that case, ‘Surely this is to burn the 
house to roast the pig.”” Sable at 126, citing Butler at 383. 

The proposed FCC rule, as its applies to cable access, does not 
pass either of the two Sable tests. First, it does not “promote a 
compelling interest,” since there is no evidence to indicate that any 
material even exists on cable access from which minors need 
protection. Second, it does not use the “least restrictive means to 
further the articulated interest.” As the Court already ruled in 
Sable, a 24-hour ban does not meet this test. 

The Commission is indeed proposing to “burn the house to 
roast the pig”—yet in this case the pig does not even exist. 

Less Restrictive Means Are Available 


If the Commission determines that there exists an abundance of 
indecent programs on access television from which children need 
protection, then there are ways to accomplish this objective that are 
less intrusive than the Commission’s proposal. 

Most simply, the problem could be addressed at the local level. 
The procedure described above for Boston is one such approach. 
Other access operations may have their own procedures that work 
equally well. 


Additionally, parents who do not want their children exposed 
to programming on an access channel could use the parental “local- 
box,” which is required to be provided by all cable operators under 
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 §624(d)(2)(A), 47 
USC §544(d)(2)(A). A lock-box is defined as “a device by which 
the subscriber can prohibit viewing of a particular cable service 
during periods selected by that subscriber.” 

Finally, a subscriber has the option of terminating cable service. 

The FCC was given a limited power to regulate “indecency” on 
radio and television because the broadcast media had established a 


167 


“uniquely pervasive presence” and was “uniquely accessible to 
children,” FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726 at 748-49 
(1978). The Court in Cruz v. Ferre, 755 F.2d at 1420, stated that 
Pacifica did not apply to cable television, because cable subscribers 
have many options—including lock boxes and disconnecting 
service—to control program viewing by children. 

Rule’s Vagueness Will Lead to Uneven Enforcement 


The wording of the proposed rule does not give cable operators, 
access channel operators, or access producers a clear sense of what 
programming is allowed and what is not. While the courts have 
stated that the FCC definition of “indecency” is not vague when 
applied to broadcasting, they did so in the context of a single 
enforcement agency —the FCC—which has over the years developed 
an elaborate series or policy statements and precedents. This is far 
different from the case of cable access prohibitions, where 
determination of whether a program is “sexually explicit” would be 
made by literally thousands of individual cable system managers. 
based not only on different corporate philosophies, but on the 
beliefs and prejudices of each individual general manager. 

It is almost certain that some over-zealous cable operators will 
misinterpret the Commission’s concept of sexually explicit conduct. 
The burden will be on public access speakers, who will be required 
to seek court relief to obtain their First Amendment rights. Most 
public access producers simply have no funds to hire lawyers, and 
will lose their Constitutional rights for lack of funds. 

What is most disturbing is that the types of programming that 
cable operators are today most eager to eliminate are precisely the 
types that the First Amendment was created to protect—programs 
by gays and others with unpopular lifestyles, rap artists and others 
with “offensive” manners of speech, and “hate” groups and other 


168 


Regulations Would Impose Unfair Burden on Access Producers 
and Organizations 

The “Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis” attached to the 
Commission’s Notice notes that the regulations would impose new 
burdens on cable operators—but fails to mention the far greater 


burdens that would be imposed on nonprofit access organizations, 
institutional access producers, and individual access producers. 


The Commission suggests only one idea for a process to 
actually carry out its proposed rule. In paragraph 14 of its Notice, 
the Commission proposes that producers and access organizations 
would need to “certify” that every program that was cablecast did 
Although not stated by the Commission, the certification would 
apparently be submitted to the cable operator, who would 
apparently have the right to intercept and black-out any programs 
that were not so certified. In order to make this certification, 
independent nonprofit organizations that operate access channels 
would need to pre-screen all tapes prior to cablecast. In Boston, we 
would need to allocate staff time to view and evaluate each of the 
1,326 individual access programs we cablecast per year, and would 
need to file a certification with the cable operator for each of them. 
This imposes a huge new burden of staff work and paperwork on 
organizations such as ours, which, by their very nature, are already 
grossly understaffed and overworked. 


Furthermore, if the necessary paperwork were not filed for a 
particular program in a timely fashion, the cable operator might 
decide to delete that program from cablecast. There are very few, 
if any, access programs that actually contain material prohibited by 
the proposed rule. For every program that the cable operator takes 
off the air for reasons of program content, a far greater number will 
be taken off for failure to file necessary paperwork. 

What will happen to live programming, such as call-in 
programs, political debates, or coverage of city council meetings? 
Since the cable operator can never be certain what live 


programming will contain, will all live programming be banned? 
Such a blanket prohibition seems a case of prior restraint. 


169 


It would be ironic if one of the final actions of the Reagan-Bush 
FCC—a Commission dedicated to removing unnecessary 
government regulations—would be to impose a burdensome, vague, 
and overbroad regulation that addresses a problem that does not 
exist. 


Recommendations 

The Commission should rewrite its proposed rule to eliminate 
the category of “sexually explicit” programming, since 
category must be interpreted to mean “obscene” programming. 

Individual access producers should have the responsibility of 
determining whether their programming is obscene or promotes 
illegal activity, but should nor be required to complete unnecessary 
paperwork in cases where programs are acceptable. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ 
Martin Kessel, Clerk 
Boston Community Access 
and Programming Foundation 
8 Park Plaza, Suite 2240 
Boston, Massachusetts 02116 


December 4, 1992 


170 


FCC Caption Omitted 


COMMENTS OF 
Roxie Lee Cole, Citizen 


Roxie Lee Cole submits these comments in response to the above 
captioned proceeding and in support of the comments filed in this 
proceeding by the Alliance for Community Media, Alliance for 
Communications Democracy, American Civil Liberties Union and 
the People for the American Way. 

in particular, Roxie Lee Cole agrees that the provisions of Sections 
\Ovc) and 10(d) will be unconstitutional, however they are 
implemented. However, assuming that the Commission decides to 
adopt rules to implement either Section 10(c) or 10(d): 


a) The rules should be specific and as narrowly drawn as 
possible, and must contain limitations that prevent cable operators 
from hampering use of access channels by those who wish to 
produce live or cablecast taped programming under the guise of 
applying the rules. The public access operation | was involved with 
for over thirteen (13) years did live programing of community 
events that ranged from professional entertainers to the very 
nexperienced performer. We have live discussions that ranged 
from very serious health problems to neighborhood street widenings 
— al! with no problem nor need for censorship. 


b) The 1984 Cable Act limited much of the support access 
centers had been receiving from cable companies previously. The 
access center resources are very limited and the FCC rules should 
make it clear that any actions taken by an operator under Section 10 
cnust be undertaken at the operator’s own expense. The 1992 Cable 
Aci was intended to cut cost to the consumer; however, these new 
rules will in fact increase the consumer bill. 


c) More than 100 hours are video and text programming are 
-ablecast each week on the access channel in my community. The 
majority of the programming is produced by volunteers, and 


171 


experience shows that it must be as easy as possible for these 
volunteers to use. Many neighborhood meetings are done with a 
single camera and taped and run gavel to gavel. Any rules must 
recognize that any roadbloacks that are placed in the way for 
production will result in a reduction in speech. 

During my 13 years of experience, many times the cable 
operator and/or City representatives would have limited speech of 
some citizens if they could have legally. 1 am greatly concerned for 
the many citizens who now freely speak will lose this right because 
of the proposed rule changes. 


Respectfully submitted 


/s/ 
Roxie Lee Cole 


1145 Bishop Drive, Apt F 
Dayton, Ohio - 45449 


December 7, 1992 


172 


COMMENTS OF 
Columbus Community Cable Access, Inc. (ACTV 21) 


Columbus Community Cable Access (ACTV 21) submits these 
comments in response to the above captioned proceeding and in 
support of the comments filed in this proceeding by the Alliance for 
Community Media, Alliance for Communications Democracy, 
American Civil Liberties Union and the People for the American 
Way. 


In particular, ACTV 21 agrees that the provisions of Sections 10(c) 
and 10(d) will be unconstitutional, however they are implemented. 
However, assuming that the Commission decides to adopt rules to 
implement either Section 10(c) or 10(d): 


a. The rules should be specific and as narrowly drawn as 
possible, and must contain limitations that prevent cable operators 
from hampering use of access channels by those who wish to 
produce live or cablecast taped programming under the guise of 
applying the rules. 


b. Access centers have very limited resources. It could cost 
as much as $35,000.00 per year to implement the Commission's 
rules for the 5,824 hours of programming which is transmitted 
yearly on the public access channel alone. There are, also, an 
educational access channel and a government access channel in 
Columbus, each with an equivalent number of annual hours of 
programming. The FCC rules should make it clear that any actions 
taken by an operator under Section 10 must be undertaken at the 
operator's Own expense. 


c. Approximately 112 hours of video and text programming 
are cablecast each week on the public access channel in our 
community . Much of the programming is produced by volunteers, 
and experience shows that it must be as easy as possible for these 
volunteers to use the access channel. Any rules must recognize that 


173 


any roadblocks that are placed in the way of production will result 
in a reduction in speech. 

ACTV 21 is a nonprofit organization which operates the public 
access channel serving more than 225,000 cable subscribers in 
Franklin County, Ohio. ACTV is funded, in part, through the 3% 
franchise fee from the City of Columbus. 


The services provided by ACTV 21 include video training, 
equipment and facility usage, program scheduling and promotion, 
and a volunteer corps. The public access channel is operated as a 
public forum on a first-come, first-served basis. During the last 
eight years, ACTV 21 has trained 5,514 local citizens in video 
production. Those individuals, community organizations and 
nonprofit organizations have produced 14,892 Original programs. 
The community volunteers have put in nearly 30,000 hours of 
volunteer work to assist other citizens in speaking on the public 
access channel. 


More than 150 community organizations, nonprofits and churches 
used ACTV’s services in 1991 alone. These organizations represent 
a variety of local interests such as: The John Birch Society, The 
Columbus Urban League, The Afro-American Center, Hispanic 
Alliance of Central Ohio, National Organization for Women, The 
Boy Scouts, United Way of Franklin County, Ohio Special 
Olympics, the Columbus Area Chamber of Commerce, BalletMet 
and the Native American Indian Center. 


Any rules which the Commission may adopt must consider the 
affect of those rules on the current and potential speakers on public 
access channels who, often, represent unique and underrepresented 
points of view in our democracy. 


Respectfully Submitted, 


/s/ 
Carl Kucharski, Executive Director 
Columbus Community Cable Access, Inc. (ACTV 21) 
394 Oak Street 
Columbus, Ohio 43215 DATE: December 7, 1992 


The Community Antenna Television Association, Inc, 
(“CATA”), is a trade association representing owners and operators 
of cable television systems serving approximately 80 percent of the 
nation’s more than 60 million cable television subscribers, CATA 
files these “Comments” on behalf of its members who will be 
directly affected by the Commission’s action. 


INTRODUCTION 


This proceeding is in response to the mandate of Section 10 of 
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
1992 (“Cable Act”), that the Commission adopt rules and 
regulations implementing the provisions of that section. Essentially, 
Section 10 is intended to restrict the availability of programming 
deemed to be indecent or obscene on cable television access 
channels. First, it permits cable operators to voluntarily prohibit 
indecent programming on leased channels on their systems. 
Second, it requires the Commission to adopt rules that will limit 
access by children to indecent programming on leased channels by 
requiring operators to place all indecent programming on a single 
channel whose reception is blocked except upon a written request 
for it by the subscriber. Third, it permits operators to prohibit the 
use of public, educational, and government access channels (“PEG 
channels”) for programming that contains “obscene material, 
sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting 
unlawful conduct.” Finally, Section 10 removes the operator’s 


175 


Statutory immunity from liability for obscene material on any access 
channel. 


CATA submits that the provisions of Section 10 of the Cable 
Act are both unconstitutional and from a practical viewpoint, 
unworkable. Nevertheless, we understand that the Commission 
must attempt to carry out its mandate and we offer comments of a 
constructive nature designed to help the Commission make the best 
of a bad predicament. 


I. THE INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY PROVISIONS 
ARE UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND UNWORKABLE 


CATA would be more than remiss if it did not preface its 
“Comments” by firmly asserting that the provisions of Section 10 
of the Cable Act are an unconstitutional infringement on the rights 
of cable operators, their subscribers and access programmers. We 
will not go through the legal rationale supporting our allegation in 
this proceeding because it already is well stated in the court 
challenge to the Cable Act filed by Time Warner (Time Warner 
Entertainment Company v. FCC) in U.S. District Court, where the 
issue will be decided. Suffice it to say that these provisions restrict 
the editorial control over the content and packaging of the cable 
operator’s product and constitute a taking of the operator’s property 
without just compensation in violation of the Constitution. The 
provisions of Section 10 put cable operators in the untenable 
position of requiring them to do what the government cannot do by 
acting as censors of programming. We will await the outcome of 
the Time Warner challenge to settle this issue. 


From a more practical point of view, especially for smaller 
cable systems, which constitute a significant portion of CATA’s 
membership, the indecency and obscenity provisions are 
unworkable. As proposed, the rules for both leased access and 
PEG access channels put the burden of determining whether a 
program violates the statute on the operator with respect to systems 
that choose to adopt a policy restricting the specified “indecent” or 
“illegal” programming respectfully. This virtually eliminates any 
live access programming as operators concerned about their liability 
will need to review each program before allowing it on the access 
channel. 


176 


Moreover, the provisions will require an inordinate commitment 
of manpower to review all access programming. It is the system 
operator who must review every program before it is carried on a 
leased access channel to determine whether it is “indecent,” and 
every program before it is carried on a PEG access channel to 
determine whether it contains “obscene material, sexually explicit 
conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct.” 
Smaller systems will be particularly hard hit because of their limited 
personnel. It is not unusual for these systems to have a small staff 
performing a variety of duties often in a number of communities, 
at one time. The end result we suggest, is a disincentive for 
operators to adopt policies restricting indecent programming on 
leased and PEG access channels. 


Other practical problems exist with respect to the requirement 
that all indecent programming on leased access channels be put on 
a single, “blocked” channel. What happens if the channel becomes 
filled? How many additional channels must the operator make 
available? If none, which programmer’s programs are to be carried? 
And what if the programs certified by the programmer as 
“indecent” really are not, but instead constitute an effort by an 
individual or group to prevent the carriage of any “indecent” 
programming by occupying all the time on the only channel 
available for that purpose? 


The numerous constitutional and practical concerns serve to 
underscore the necessity of leaving control of access channels in the 
hands of the cable operator. 


Il. SUGGESTIONS FOR MAKING THE REGULATORY 
SCHEME MORE MANAGEABLE 


CATA recognizes that the Commission is required to implement 
the provisions of Section 10 of the Cable Act despite their 
unconstitutional and unwieldy nature. Therefore, it offers the 
following constructive suggestions that should help make the 
regulatory scheme more manageable. 


177 


A. Operators should be given a “safety zone” within which 
they will not be held liable for the carriage of indecent or 
obscene programming. 

CATA suggests that the model used for the single blocked 
channel, i.e., where the burden is on the programmer to notify the 
Operator when a program is deemed to be indecent, be extended to 
cover other leased and PEG channels in situations where the 
operator has adopted a restrictive policy as contemplated by the 
Statute. If an operator chooses to adopt a restrictive policy, he 
should be allowed to require and rely upon certifications from 
programmers that their programs do not violate the policy. If the 
operator adopts and follows an established procedure of requiring 
certifications from programmers, he will fall within a “safety zone” 
Protecting him from liability for carriage of indecent programs on 
the leased channels or the prohibited programming on the PEG 


Using this approach, the Commission will protect the operator 
from the unintended situation where he is more vulnerable to 
liability for having adopted a policy against carriage of indecent or 


CATA suggests that the same model be used in determining 
liability for carriage of obscene programming as well. If the 
operator can demonstrate an established procedure of requiring 
certifications that programming is not obscene, he should be entitled 
to the protection of the “safe zone” and not be held liable. At the 
very least, it should entitle the operator to a presumption that he did 


178 


not have the requisite element of intent to be liable for carriage of 
obscene programming. 
B. “Indecency” should be defined in the context of cable 


programming selected by the subscriber and only upon request and 
payment of a monthly fee. Even after delivery the subscriber 
continues to maintain a high degree of control over the availability 
of the programming. Lockboxes may be secured (and in fact, must 
be provided by the operator upon request) that enable subscribers 


Cable programming is not omnipresent like a television or radio 
signal. It is not likely to be stumbled upon by unwary viewers. It 
must be invited into the subscriber's home and specific programs as 
well as whole channels of programs, can be specifically uninvited. 
Thus. the term “indecent” should be defined narrowly when used 
in the context of programming on cable television systems. 

S. Costs incurred in complying with these provisions must be 

accounted for in determining the system's basic service 
rates. 


vine with the ind ar sions of Secti 
10 are to be accounted for in setting the basic service rate. 

As we noted above, the new requirements will impose 
burdensome administrative obligations on many systems 
necessitating employment of additional personnel as they may be 
required to pre-screen all access programming before allowing it to 


D. Cable operators need at least 60 days notice that 

programming will be “indecent.” 

The provisions of Section 10 require suppliers of leased access 
programming to notify the cable operator when a program is 
indecent and therefore required to be carried on the designated 
single blocked channel. A period of at least 60 days is essential. 


must be designed to be sensitive to the various difficulties. costs and 
Jeopardy they impose on system operators, and particularly smaller 


180 


_ We offer the above proposals as constructive suggestions 
for making the best of a bad situation. 


Respectfully submitted, 


THE COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION 
ASSOCIATION, INC. 


181 


Continental Cablevision, Inc. (“Continental”) submits these 
comments to assist the Commission in its effort to implement 
Section 10 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (“Act”). We raise three primary points. 


First, in adopting rules to permit cable operators to prohibit 
obscene and indecent programming on public, educational, or 
governmental (“PEG”) and leased access channels, the Commission 
must balance the cable operator's potential liability for obscene 
programs against the desire to minimize editorial intrusion into PEG 
and leased access channels. To this end, the Commission should 
permit cable operators to rely on certifications by programmers and 
should further provide that such reliance constitutes an affirmative 
defense to liability. If the Commission does not provide such a 
defense, cable operators must be permitted to make their own 
determination regarding the possible obscene nature of programs 
carried on leased and PEG channels. 


Second, the Commission should clarify that all state and local 
franchise authority regulations, as well as specific franchise 
Third, when structuring the single channel requirement for 
leased access channels, the Commission must adopt regulations that 
will preserve the local cable operator’s choice to prohibit or restrict 
indecent programming. If the regulations are unreasonable, unduly 


182 


FCC Caption Omitted 


: ILEVISION, LS 

Pursuant to the Commission’s Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(“NPRM”), Continental Cablevision, Inc. (“Continental”) submits 
these comments on the proposed regulations implementing the 
provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (“Act”) relating to indecent and obscene 
programming . 


INTRODUCTION 
Continental, founded in 1963, is the third largest multiple cable 
system operator and the largest privately owned cable company in 
the United States. It serves nearly 2.9 million basic subscribers in 
600 communities in 16 states, or roughly 5.5% of the nation’s cable 
television households. Public, educational, or governmental access 
(“PEG”) channels are utilized in many of the communities 


183 


Continental serves. Leased access channels are also available for 
commercial use. 

Continental operates in a decentralized manner, permitting its 

: - iderable di lon and in ing 


comments to assist the Commission in its effort to implement 
Section 10 of the Act in a manner that will avoid 

logistical and practical problems for operators and subscribers. 
Adoption of rules that recognize these problems could help prevent 
transforming this provision into a de facto ban on indecent 
programs. 

Before discussing these practical problems, we address two 
threshold issues in these comments. First, because of cable 
operators’ potential liability for obscene programming on PEG and 
leased access channels, already in effect as of December 4, 1992, 
we urge the Commission to adopt a regulatory scheme that 
minimizes cable operators’ editorial intrusion in access 
programming so long as their liability is corresponding ly 
minimized. Second, we ask the Commiss ion to clarify that all 
inconsistent franchise agreement provisions and local regulations are 
preempted. 


184 


sromoting unlawful conduct.”' Within 60 days of passage of the 
sect ¢ . as of December 4), cable operators are subject to liability 
- carriage of obscene materials on the PEG channels.’ In the 
“PRM. the Commission seeks comment on how cable operators can 
_ategones of programming on PEG channels and on additional 
.cues the Commission should consider.’ 


Phere are a number of issues the Commission should consider. 
© est the Commission should clarify that the Act permits operators 
prohibit some. but not all, of the types of programs listed in 
section 10kc) of the Act. Nothing in the language of the Act, for 
-xample. prevents an operator from excluding only a subset of the 
~road categories included in Section 10(c) from its PEG channels. 


Second. Continental views as essential the Commission’s 
.egestion that cable operators should be permitted to require 
--, fications from PEG programmers that no materials falling into 

‘ the statutory objectionable categories will be presented on 


The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
4) Pub. L. No. 102-385, § 10(c), 106 Stat. 1460, 1486 (1992) (to be 
fed as amended at 47 U.S.C. § 532) (hereinafter “Act”). 


4« the Commission noted in its NPRM, the amendment to Section 638 
f the Act, which eliminates cable operators’ immunity for leased access 
od PEG channels, is self-implementing and therefore effective 
4 1992 NPRM at 4 2. Until such time as the Commission adopts rules 
permtting cable operators to prohibit obscene programs from their PEG 
nannels, therefore, cable operators are subject to liability for obscene 
srogramming on PEG channels without any corresponding authority to 
-xclude such programming from the PEG channels. This raises substantial 


- est the Commission think that sexually explicit programming on PEG 
-hannels s never an issue, we note by way of example that public access 
srograms on one Continental system have included a program in which an 
sceess user, frontally nude, urinated on a photograph of the President of 
he United States and another concerning safe sex that involved a graphic 
4S munute demonstration of how to use a condom. 


185 


the PEG channels.‘ Certification would minimize both the 
operator's editorial intrusion and operational burden. But these 
certifications can be relied on by the operator only if the 
Commission also makes clear that a cable operator who relies on 
such a certification has an affirmative defense to liability if material 
is later found to fall within a prohibited category, notwithstanding 
the programmer's prior certification to the contrary. 


If the Commission does not provide for programmer 
certification and permit those certifications to be an affirmative 
defense to liability, the cable operator must be permitted to 
(1) make its own determination, notwithstanding any certification, 
that material is obscene and should be excluded, (2) word its 
certification request in whatever form it desires — é.g., all sexually 
explicit material, and (3) be held harmless for decisions to exclude 
material the operator reasonably believes to be obscene. If the 
cable operator is going to be held liable — potentially criminally 
liable — for obscene programming on the PEG channels even if a 
programmer certifies there is no such programming, then the 
operator must be afforded the discretion to exclude material that the 
operator reasonably believes to be obscene. And the operator must 
be permitted to ask for certification regarding a broader category of 
programming than obscenity — “sexually explicit” material, for 


. In the NPRM, the Commission states that certification by “users or 
operators” could be sought. NPRM at 414. Continental assumes the 
Commission intended to mean programmers and program providers. 


* Such a procedure would be consistent with the Commission’s decision 
involving obscene or indecent programming carried on multipoint 
distribution service (MDS) systems, in which the Commission concluded 
that “there must be a high degree of involvement or actual notice of an 
illegal use and failure to take steps to prevent such transmissions before 
any liability is likely to attach.” Enforcement of Prohibitions Against the 
Use of Common Carriers for the Transmission of Obscene Materials, 
Memorandum Opinion, Declaratory Ruling and Order, Docket No. 83- 
989, 2 FCC Red. 2819, 2820 (1987). 


186 


example — so that the operator can review the sexually explicit 
programs to decide if it reasonably believes any of it is obscene.° 


Finally, the Commission should extend its rules governing a 
cable operator's ability to prohibit these kinds of programs on 
leased access channels. Specifically, cable operators should be 
expressly permitted to exclude from leased access channels obscene 
programs only and, if they so choose, to rely on certifications (with 
a defense against liability) to enforce such a policy. 


Il. THE COMMISSION SHOULD CLARIFY THAT ALL 
STATUTES OR REGULATIONS OF ANY STATE, 
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY OR OTHER LOCAL 
GOVERNING BODY THAT ARE INCONSISTENT 
WITH THE ACT AND COMMISSION’S 
REGULATIONS ARE PREEMPTED 


Many state and local franchise authority regulations, as well as 
specific franchise agreement provisions, will be directly affected by 
the substantial alterations in the Act and the FCC’s rules on 
indecent and obscene cable television programming on leased access 
and PEG channels. Many existing franchise agreements, for 
example, prohibit cable companies from exercising editorial control 
over the content of programming on these channels.’ Because 
those franchise provisions are inconsistent with the provisions in the 
Act authorizing cable operators to prohibit or restrict certain types 
of programming on PEG and leased access channels, the 
Commission should clarify in its order that all inconsistent 
provisions in franchise agreements and state or local regulations are 
preempted by the new federal statutory provisions and implementing 


* Although, as the Commission notes, these disputes involving PEG 
channels are frequently resolved at the local level, NPRM at { 14, it is the 
Commission that has been directed to establish the regulatory framework. 


The franchise agreement between Continental's Greater Dayton (Ohio) 
system and the Miami (Ohio) Valley cable Council provides, for example, 
that the cable operator “shall exercise no control over program content on 
any of the access channels.” 


187 


regulations, pursuant to the Section 656 of the Communications 
Act, 47 U.S.C. § 556. 


There is a related issue the Commission should clarify. 
Pursuant to the enabling regulations of the local franchising 
authority (or in franchise agreements), many cable operators have 
entered into arrangements with independent access corporations 
whereby the operators sign over editorial control for programming 
on cable channels.’ Frequently, the access corporations transmit 
live programs directly from their studios onto dedicated PEG 
channels. Many access agreements contain a provision 
indemnifying the cable operator for liability stemming from the 
actions of the corporation. These indemnification provisions, 
however, would not appear to (nor could they) protect the operator 
from criminal liability for airing obscene material under the new 
liability provisions of the Act. Thus, the Commission should also 
provide that any contractual arrangements with independent access 
corporations, to the extent these provisions limit a cable operator's 
control over obscene or indecent programming, are also preempted 
by the Act. 


iil. THE COMMISSION MUST ADOPT 


The Act grants cable operators the choice of either: 
(1) prohibiting all indecent programming on leased access channels. 
or (2) restricting indecent (but not obscene) programming, pursuant 
to the regulations adopted by the commission. to a single leased 
channel and restricting access to the indecent programming unless 


* The franchise agreement between Continental Cablevision of 
Brockton, Inc, and the Brockton, Massachusetts, nonprofit access 
Corporation, for example, provides that the access corporation “shall have 
sole responsibility for determining access and scheduling of time on the 
allocated channels.” 


188 


the subscriber requests access in writing.’ Continental urges the 
Commission to adopt regulations that will in fact (not just in theory) 
preserve the local cable operator's choice to either prohibit or 
restrict such programming. If the Commission adopts regulations 
that are unreasonable, unduly cumbersome or costly, the result will 
be a de facto ban, which would be contrary to Congress’ intent'® 
and a clear violation of the Constitution." 


The Commission should, therefore, adopt rules that (1) permit 
cable operators to fully recover the costs of complying with the 
single channel requirement, (2) define single channel in a manner 
that maximizes efficient channel usage, (3) delay implementation of 
the single channel requirement for 120 days so that cable operators 
have sufficient lead time to equip themselves and their customers so 
that they can comply with the requirements, (4) provide a 
reasonable notification period by program producers to allow cable 
operators time to restrict access to indecent programs, and 
(5) require a 30-day advance, written notice of a subscriber's desire 
to change access to indecent programming. 


Act at § 10. 


© See 138 Cong. Rec. $646,649 (daily ed. January 30, 1992). In 
discussing the provision of the Act permitting cable operators to prohibit 
indecent programming on leased access channels, the sponsor, Senator 
Jesse Helms, stated: “The pending amendment merely gives cable 
operators the legal right to make that decision. The amendment does not 
require cable operators to do anything. Therefore, let me say it again, this 
amendment does not in any way propose censorship.” Id. at § 646. 


See Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. Federal 
Communications Commission, 492 U.S. 115 (1989) (statutory ban on 
indecent telephone messages violates the First Amendment); Action for 
Children’s Television v. Federal Communications Commission, 932 F.2d 
1504 (D.C. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 1281 (1992) (ban on all 
radio and television broadcasts of indecent material violates the First 
Amendment). 


189 
A. The Commission Must Permit Cable Operators To Recover 


Restricting indecent programming on leased access channels to 
a single channel and scrambling such programming to prevent 
reception unless the subscriber has affirmatively requested access 
will impose significant costs on the cable operator. If operators are 
not permitted to recover these costs in full, they will be forced, as 
a practical matter, to adopt instead a policy prohibiting all such 
programming. The single channel requirement would thereby be 
converted into a de facto ban. Although the Commission does not 
seek comment on the magnitude — or recovery — of costs in this 
proceeding, these costs must be recoverable. We therefore describe 
these costs here, while recognizing that they may need to be 
considered in the ratemaking proceeding as well. '” 


The costs the cable operator will incur to comply with the single 
channel requirement are substantial. For example, if a system 
carries any indecent leased access programming, the operator will 
be required to purchase an additional scrambler at each head end 
and install positive traps for each subscriber wishing to receive the 
scrambled leased access channel containing indecent programming. 
Aside from the actual costs of the scramblers and traps, there are 
the additional costs of installation, maintenance. inventory, and 
service. Perhaps the greatest cost will result from the possible need 
to provide a separate channel dedicated solely to indecent leased 
access programming. This change would in many cases also have 
a domino effect on other channels. requiring a number of other 
channel realignments. In addition to all of the costs related to 
subscriber notification, channel realignment could require the 
replacement (or reprogramming) of the tens of thousands of traps 
currently in place in non-addressable systems. 


* Additionally, in the ratemaking proceeding the Commission should 
consider the costs of prohibiting indecent and obscene programming (on 
both leased access and PEG channels), including the costs of monitoring 
programming and/or obtaining certifications from programmers. 


190 


B. The Commission Should Define “Single Channel” 
in A Manner That Maximizes Efficient Use Of 
Channel Capacity _ 


The Act clearly mandates the Commission to require a cable 
operator to aggregate all indecent leased access programs on a 
“single channel.”"? The Act does not, however, mandate that the 
Commission require the rest of that “single channel” be warehoused 
for indecent programming. The costs described above that would 
result from warehousing an entire channel could be mitigated if the 
Commission defines “single channel” in a manner that requires 
indecent programs to be carried (and scrambled) on a single channel 
but permits the operator to use the remainder of the channel for 
non-indecent (and non-scrambled) leased access programs. This is 
a far more reasonable solution that still meets the mandate of 
protecting children. 


Most of Continental's systems have few, if any, leased access 
program hours per year — let alone per week or per day. If those 
systems were required to set aside an entire channel in order to 
carry a few hours of indecent programming each year, no one could 
afford to choose the single channel option and incur the associated 
disruptions and costs. Further, with channel space at a premium, 
cable operators cannot afford to devote two channels to leased 
access programming that would otherwise fit on a single leased 
access channel. Despite the proliferation of recent press articles 
concerning future promises of digital compression and other 
technologies, today’s reality is that channel capacity for most cable 
systems is extremely limited and in high demand. Without the 
flexibility to scramble part of a “single channel,” cable systems 
either would be forced to ban such programs or would encounter 
overwhelming economic costs and greatly disserve their subscribers, 
who would otherwise be able to receive an additional program 
service. 


The Commission can mitigate the costs and burdens of 
restricting access by permitting the operator to aggregate and 


e 
> Act at 10(b). 


191 


scramble all indecent leased access programming on a single 
channel, while  *ill providing non-scrambled leased access 
programming the rest of the day on that same channel. Nothing in 
the Act or legislative history prevents the Commission from 
defining “single channel” to permit this flexibility. Indeed, to 
define it in a way that would require unnecessarily inefficient use 
of channel capacity would essentially ensure that cable operators 
would have no choice but to opt for a prohibition, thereby 
converting the option into a de facto ban in direct contravention of 
congressional intent and constitutional mandates. 
. The Commission Should Delay The Effective Date Of The 
Rules Relating To The Single Channel Requirement To 
Permit Imp ; 


In light of the technical changes that will need to be made. both 
at the cable head end to scramble the signal and at the customers’ 
premises to replace and provide properly programmed traps, cable 
Operators must be afforded sufficient lead time to implement the 
single channel requirement. Continental requests that the 
Commission exercise its authority under the Act and delay the 
effective date of the regulations related to the single leased access 
channel for 120 days after the final regulations are adopted “ 
During this tume, the cable operators will be able to purchase and 
install the necessary equipment in order to comply with the 
regulations, as well as to engage in consumer education to inform 
subscribers of the changes in cable operations. 

Given the enormous changes that must be made to cable 
systems to umplement the single channel requirement, a 120-day 
implementation period should be provided. Continental Cablevision 
of Greater Dayton (Ohio) is a typical non-addressable system. In 
order to meet the single channel requirement, the Greater Dayton 
system would first have to identify a separate channel for indecent 


- Unlike other provisions of the Act, the provisions governing single 
access chanel restrictions are not self-executing. While Congress 
Provided that the Commission must enact regulations within 120 days of 
passage of the Act, it did not specify the date by which time the 
regulations must become effective. 


192 


leased access programming, which would also likely entail channel 
repositioning. It would then need to scramble that channel, order 
technicians to install those positive traps in all homes in which 
subscribers affirmatively requested the programming. 

Even in addressable systems, a 120-day implementation period 
is needed. Because virtually no currently installed addressable cable 
converter scrambles the audio portion of the television signal, 
addressable systems would still need to purchase a jamming type of 
scrambler and install positive traps. Indeed, in some fashion the 
burden in addressable systems would be greater. Having invested 
in advanced addressable technology precisely to avoid the expense 
of buying and physically installing traps, systems with addressable 
technology would now have to purchase test equipment and traps 
solely for the purpose of scrambling indecent leased access 
programming. 

The operator's ability to take these implementation steps, in 
both addressable and non-addressable systems, within the 120-day 
period will depend in large part on factors beyond its control, e.g. 
the volume of subscribers who want to receive the indecent 
programs and the availability of scramblers and traps for purchase. 
Given these uncertainties, Continental urges the Commission to 
adopt a 120-day effective date, with provisions for a waiver upon 
a showing of good cause that the implementation period, on a case- 
by-case basis, must be extended. 


Without such a lead time, cable operators will be unable to 
comply with the single channel requiremeni and will have no choice 
but to prohibit all indecent programs. The result, in violation of the 
Act and the Constitution, would be a de facto ban. 


193 


D. The Commission Should Impose A  45-Day 
Notification Requirement By Leased Access Programmers 


Under the Act, programmers are required to inform cable 
operators if the material to be presented on the leased channel 
contains indecent material." The Commission requests comment 
on “what would be a reasonable time frame for the required 
notification by a program provider to the cable operator. .”"* 
In the proposed regulations, however, the Commission, without any 
explanation, proposes seven days as a “reasonable timeframe” for 
the requisite notice to the cable operator.'” 

Quite simply, seven days is not a reasonable or sufficient 
amount of time for the cable operators to receive notification of 
indecent programming and arrange to move such programming to 
a single channel and scramble it pursuant to a programmer's 
notification. For example, even if a program is certified as 
indecent, operators may still need to review it to be certain there is 
no obscene material. See supra at 4-6. Furthermore, in certain 
communities such as University City, Missouri, Continental 
provides government authorities with a monthly guide to the next 
month’s leased and PEG access programming. This guide is 
published as much as one month prior to some access 
programming, requiring ‘substantial advance notice from 
programmers. 

The Commission also asks “whether such notification should be 
made in writing.”"* Continental urges the Commission to require 
programmers to provide such notification in writing to the local 
cable system. By so doing, there will be less likelihood of 
miscommunications. Further, in Continental's view it is essential 
that a cable operator “be held harmless from liability _ _ if it does 


'S Act at § 100d). 
‘* NPRM at ¢ 12. 
"NPRM at Appendix A, Part 76 2(c) 
* NPRM at ¢ 12. 


194 


not receive any, or timely, notification from a programmer.”'’ 
Any other rule would be grossly unfair in light of the Commission's 
conclusion that “[uJnder Section 10 it is the program provider, not 
the cable operator, who must determine if a program is indecent 
and, hence, must be provided on the blocked channel.”” 


E. The Commission Should Require A 30-Day 
Advance Written Notice Of A Subscriber's 
Desire To Ch ) To Ind P 


A final issue the Commission should address concerns the 
timing and form of the notice subscribers must give to the cable 
operator if subscribers wish to change the status of their access to 
indecent programming on leased access channels. In particular, 
cable operators must have sufficient time to comply with a 
subscriber’s request to block access to the indecent programming 
that had previously been transmitted to the subscriber's home 
pursuant to the subscriber's consent. In the absence of such a rule, 
an operator could be held liable for transmitting indecent 
programming in violation of the Commission's rules. 

Continental urges the Commission to adopt a rule giving the 
operating company 30 days to implement a customer's request to 
change access to indecent programming. During this time period, 
the operator will be able to install or remove the individual trap 
from the subscriber’s home. Further, the Commission should 
clarify in its order that cable operators will not be held liable during 
this 30-day period if a subscriber continues to receive unscrambled 

Finally, to protect against fraud and miscommunications, the 
Commission should permit operators to require that all subscriber 
requests to change their access to indecent programs be in writing 
and include the name, address and account number of the 
subscriber. Such a requirement will help eliminate the possibility 
that unauthorized people will make fraudulent requests to the cable 


195 


company to unscramble indecent programming at another 
subscriber's home. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, Continental respectfully requests that 
the Commission implement regulations on indecent and obscene 
cable programming that (1) provide operators with sufficient power 
to prohibit obscene programming on PEG and leased access 
channels in a minimally intrusive manner, (2) preempt inconsistent 


impose onerous cost or procedural burdens, thereby resulting in a 
de facto ban on indecent programming on leased access channels. 


Respectfully submitted , 


/s/ 
Robert J. Sachs 
Howard B. Homonoff 
CONTINENTAL CABLEVISION. INC. 
Pilot House, Lewis Wharf 
Boston, MA 02110 
(617) 742-9500 


/s/ 
Diane S. Killory 
Mary K. O'Connell 
MORRISON & FOERSTER 
Suite 5500 
2000 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
(202) 887-1500 


December 7, 1992 


| Table of Contents Omitted 


COMMENTS OF COX CABLE COMMUNICATIONS, 
A DIVISION OF COX COMMUNICATIONS, INC. 


The Commission must also enact regulations to enable cable 
operators to prohibit the use of public, educational and 
governmental (“PEG™) channels for any programming that contains 
obscene material, sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or 
promoting unlawful conduct. Finally, Section 10 eliminates an 
operator's immunity for carrying obscene material on leased or 


Cox submits that the mandatory provisions of Section 10 of the 
Cable Act are unconstitutional. While this is not a determination 
that Congress has authorized the Commission to make, the 
Commission, in implementing this provision, must minimize the 


protected speech. To do so, the Commission’s rules must insulate 
cable operators from liability for not censoring protected speech. 


197 


The Commission should also recognize that cable operators need 
flexibility in complying with this law. 


* * * 


Through Section 10, Congress has impermissibly “deputized” 
cable operators to act as censors of constitutionally protected 
speech Placing the initial notice requirement on programmers does 
not cure the constitutional infirmity of this provision. The 
Commission's rules must take the next step and limit an operator's 
control obligations solely to reviewing and acting in good faith on 
a programmer's certification and not requiring an operator to 
review the programming itself. Once an operator performs these 
obligations, it cannot face even limited liability for failing to shift 
the programming to the blocked access channel. 


* . + 


Otherwise, operators may be unwilling to carry constitutionally 
protected speech. In keeping with the permissive nature of the PEG 
provision, operators must be given the flexibility to determine the 
extent to which they will monitor programming for such material 
A rigid definition of “material soliciting or promoting unlawful 
conduct” is probably impossible to achieve in this context. '' 
Conclusion 

The Commission's primary obligation in this rulemaking is to 
minimize the unconstitutional elements of Section 10 by immunizing 
cable operators from liability if they comply in good faith with its 
provisions. While Congress has impermissibly imposed censorship 
duties on cable operators, the Commission must minimize the 
chilling effect of these provisions. Cable operators simply cannot 
be required by the government to investigate, evaluate and contro! 
constitutionally protected speech. 


' However, in the interest of reducing uncertainty in the area of 
constitutionally protected speech, the Commission should clarify that it 
interprets “sexually explicit conduct” to have the same meaning as 
“undecent program material.” Senate drafters of this provision appear to 
have intended the phrases to be synonymous. NPRM at 6, n.11. 


198 


* * . 


Respectfully submitted, 


COX CABLE COMMUNICATIONS, 
A Division of Cox Communications, Inc. 


By _/s/__ 
Brenda L. Fox 
David J. Wittenstein 
Michael J. Pierce 


Its Attorneys 


Dow. Lohnes & Albertson 
(255 - 23rd Street, N.W. 


Suite 500 


Washington, D.C. 20037 


202) 857-2500 


December 7, 1992 


199 


FCC Caption Omitted 


COMMENTS OF 
DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CONSORTIUM, INC. 
ON NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULE MAKING 


Denver Area Educational Telecommunications Consortium, 
Inc. (“DAETC”) hereby submits the following comments regarding 
the policies and conditions proposed in the above-captioned 
proceeding. 


I. Background on DAETC and its Program Service, 
The 90’s Channel 


Descrinti f The 90's CI 
DAETC began programming leased access channels in late 1989. 


DAETC’s program service in known as The 90's Channel.' 
Although DAETC is non-profit, as are its cable programming 
efforts, The 90’s Channel carries advertising. Since it is a “basic” 
program service, cable subscribers do not pay extra to receive the 
channel. 


The 90’s Channel carries a wide variety of material, much of 
it both controversial and otherwise unavailable to its viewers. It 
transmits documentaries and magazine programs on topics which 
have included: the Persian Gulf War, environmental contamination, 
racism, US-Cuba relations, union organizing, the status of recent 
immigrants, issues of concern to Native Americans, the Palestinian 
uprising, the US invasion of Panama, the Iran-contra scandal, urban 


' Because The 90’s Channel is DAETC’s chief cable programming 
effort, herein the terms “The 90’s Channel” and “DAETC” will be used 
essentially interchangeably . 


200 


gangs, prison conditions, art censorship, gay rights, prostitution, 
and AIDS.’ 


Most programs carried on The 90's Channel express opinions 
in addition to reporting facts. Most of the opinion is liberal. If 
The 90’s Channel were a publication, then, it would have more in 
common with The New Republic than the New York Times. 


Much of the material shown on The 90's Channel is recorded 
with portable video cameras in a verite or semi-verite style. The 
channel has carried more than 20 hours of programming from a 
source known an CamNet, which is described in several articles 
attached hereto as Appendix A. As Appendix A shows, critics and 
observers have often commented on the immediacy, unvarnished 
quality, and the “realness” of such portable video work. 


The 90’s Channel delivers its programming to cable systems on 
videotape, which is played on automated equipment. Generally, 
there are two fresh hours of programming each week, which are 
repeated around the clock. The channel’s present equipment makes 
it difficult to run different programs at different times of day, since 
manual tape changing would be required. The “round the clock” 
nature of the programming has provoked complaints, since material 
oriented toward adults runs during daytime hours.’ The 90's 
Channel has voluntarily refrained from transmitting certain 
meritorious programming because we are not yet equipped to run 
it only during evening hours. 

A small but important portion of The 90’s Channel's 
programming deals with sexuality. Such material cannot be 
extricated from coverage of matters such as gay rights, AIDS, art 
censorship, sud prostitution. Although the channel has never 
carried a full-length program that dealt with sexuality per se, certain 


: Originally, the channel’s programming consisted of The 90's magazine 
series. However, in 1991 the Public Broadcasting Service acquired all 
new episodes of The 90’s on an exclusive basis, and the channel was 
forced to diversify its program sources. 

> ‘This material deals with topics which are not readily comprehensible 
to children, but is in no way “adult” in the sense of pornography. 


201 


Magazine segments have been about sex. Appendix B to these 
comments describes a number of program segments dealing with 
sexuality which The 90’s Channel has carried. 


As well, the unvarnished quality of certain programming on the 
channel means that it includes profanity; some common profane 
terms are of course sexual or excretory in character. 


The 90’s Channel pre-screens and carefully assesses the 
programs it carries. Our executives personally respond to viewer 
comments and complaints. We have had long, heartfelt 
conversations with viewers who were offended by material we 
transmitted. Although we carry programming which other networks 
would exclude, it is not because we have failed to weigh the 
implications carefully. 


DAETC and the Difficult History ofits Current Channe! 


DAETC is a Colorado non-profit corporation formed in 1983. 
In 1986, DAETC entered into an agreement to lease full-time 
channels on eight cable systems operated by United Cable 
Television Corporation (“United”). The term of this lease 
commenced in 1987. 


In 1987, when DAETC was prepared to transmit programming 
pursuant to the channel lease with United, United refused to honor 
the lease. DAETC subsequently sued United in state court in 
Colorado, where both entities were headquartered. After a 
substantial period of litigation, DAETC and United entered into a 
settlement agreement by which United agreed to provide the leased 
access channels. The state court judge hearing the case accepted 
the settlement agreement by court order, and retains supervision of 
the matter to insure adherence to the terms of settlement. 


* Those systems are: Alameda, CA: Scottsdale, AZ; Denver (suburbs), 
CO; Hacienda Heights and San Fernando Valley, CA (both in Los Angeles 
County); Vernon, CT; Baltimore, MD: and Oakland County, MI. Today, 
these cable systems serve over 500,000 subscribers. Pursuant to the 
channel lease agreement, DAETC’s programming is to be carried on the 
lowest tier of service. 


202 


After DAETC began programming the leased access channels, 
United was merged into United Artists, forming a company known 
as United Artists Entertainment (“UAE”). UAE was majority 
owned by Tele-Communications, Inc. (“TCI”). 


In September, 1990, the management of UAE’s East San 
Fernando Valley system removed all 90’s Channel programming 
from the air because it found the content to be objectionable. This 
removal was in direct violation of the quondam terms of Section 
612 of the Communications Act, which at that time specified that 
cable operators were to exercise no control over the content of 
leased access channels. DAETC was forced to hire attorneys and 
threaten the resumption of litigation before it was able to regain 
editorial control over its leased channel on the East San Fernando 
Valley system. 


Subsequently, TCI acquired 100% ownership of UAE, and 
assumed direct control over the systems on which DAETC leases 
channels. 


The manager of at least one TCI system has made it clear that 
she wants The 90’s Channel removed from the air an soon as 
possible. Several others have expressed concern about the fact that 
they have received viewer complaints about controversial programs. 
These managers aver, and DAETC agrees, that viewers are often 
unaware that the cable company cannot control the content of 
programs on leased access channels. 


In August, 1992, DAETC received a letter from a TCI 
executive which claimed, erroneously, that the United-DAETC 
channel lease agreement was to expire on October 31, 1992. As a 
result, DAETC has filed a motion in Colorado state court seeking 
a ruling that, inter alia, the term of the applicable channel lease 
agreement will not expire until November 1, 1995, at the earliest.° 
This matter is pending in Colorado state court, and The 90's 
Channel remains on the air. TCI and DAETC have entered into 
settlement negotiations, which are continuing. 


5 In addition, the United-DAETC channel lease provides for certain 
further renewal rights, at DAETC’s option. 


203 


DAETC’s relationship with United and its successors has been 
consistently difficult. As well, Congress has found that cable 
operators have evinced a general pattern of hostility toward channel 
leasing. For instance, the Senate Report to the Cable Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Act”) states: 


For irrefutable evidence of the failure of the leased access 
provision, one need look no further than the marketplace. 
Despite widespread instances of dropping of local broadcast 
stations and refusals to carry competitive program services, 
there is no evidence that excluded programmers have been 
successful in gaining access through Section 612 . . . 


.. -The cable operator in almost certain to have 
interests that clash with that of the programmer seeking to 
use leased access channels. If their interests were similar, 
the operator would have been more than willing to carry the 
programmer on regular cable channels. The operator thus 
has already decided for any number of reasons not to carry 
the programmer .. . ° 


li. Background on Indecency-Related Issues 
Posed by the 1992 Act 
The Indecency Standard 


Although indecency has been considerably litigated as a legal 
standard it cannot be applied with unfailing accuracy.” With regard 
to the indecency definition which the Commission proposes in its 
Notice of Proposed Rule Making (“NPRM”) in the above-captioned 
matter, one has to assess what is “patently” offensive under 


® Senate Report 102-92 at p. 30. Footnotes omitted. The first quoted 
paragraph is an excerpt from the testimony of Preston Padden contained 
in Senate Report 102-92. 


. In DAETC’s view the indecency provisions of Section 612 of the 1992 
Act are unconstitutional. However, since the Commission is required to 
implement these portions of the statute until they are stayed or overturned 
— an unknown period of time — DAETC has elected to participate in this 
proceeding. 


204 


“contemporary community standards.”* By the plain wording of 
the phrase “contemporary community standards,” such standards 
can change over time. As well, they are likely to vary from 
community to community. Perhaps more importantly, different 
individuals in any given community will possess radically different 
notions of what is or is not patently offensive. Thus, generally 
without the benefit of quantitative methods, programmers have to 
determine the balance of opinion in a given locality at a given time 
with regard to innumerable specific program segments .° 
C ‘onally Mandated Rule Making | 

The NPRM in the above-captioned proceeding responds to the 
requirement established by Section 612(j) of the 1992 Act. As 
noted in the NPRM at pp. 3-4, the Commission in required to adopt 
a definition of indecency, and to establish procedures for the 
handling of indecent material on leased access channels, if such 
material is not voluntarily prohibited by the cable system operator. 


Section 612(j) in effect penalizes cable operators for not 
voluntarily banning indecent material in that they are required to 
designate a special scrambled channel. Most cable operators today 
perceive channel capacity to be scarce. DAETC believes very few 
cable operators will want to set aside an entire channel for indecent 
material carried by leased access programmers. 


Two important provisions of the 1992 Act pertaining to 
indecency are self-effectuating. Both are contained within Section 
612(h). 


* NPRM at p. 4. 

. The task facing adjudicators is easier only in that they need examine 
many fewer programs, and thus can take much more time to study each 
instance of possible indecency. Under these circumstances, it is possible 
to undertake more extensive research into what is or is not patently 
offensive to various groups within a given community. Even with this 
advantage, the Commission itself on occasion has been forced to anguish 
over what is indecent; its adjudication of political advertising which 
contained gruesome images of aborted fetuses provides a recent example. 


205 


First, cable operators are authorized “to enforce prospectively 
a written and published policy of prohibiting programming that the 
cable operator reasonably believes describes or depicts sexual or 
excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner an 
measured by contemporary community standards.” As noted above. 
operators are in effect penalized for refraining from implementing 
such a policy, in that they are required to set aside a scrambled 
channel for indecent programming. 

Second, as already quoted above, effective December 4, 1992 
cable operators were given the power to refuse to carry a leased 
access program service, if in the judgment of th. cable operator 
such service is “obscene, or is in conflict with community standards 
in that it is lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent or is otherwise 
unprotected by the Constitution of the United States.” '° 

Although these provisions are self-effectuating, DAETC 
believes that they are the most critical, in that DAETC expects that 
the vast majority of cable operators will adopt prospective policies 
and/or ban channels rather than be forced to reserve scrambled 
channels for indecent programming. 

Other Perti Proviai f the 1992 A 

Section 612(c4)(a)ii) of the 1992 Act authorizes the 
Commission to establish reasonable terms and conditions for the use 
of leased access channels. Section 612(c)\4)(a\iii) authorize. the 
Commission to establish procedures for expedited resolution of 
disputes concerning leased access rates or carriage. 

Ill. Over-broad Application of the Act by Cable Operators 

As described above, self-effectuating portions of the 1992 Act 
delegate to cable operators important powers with regard to 


© This provision also allows the operator to carry the service subject to 
conditions. Unlike the other Section 612(h) provisions herein described. 
there in no explicit standard of reasonableness required for the removal or 
attachment of conditions to leased access program services which the cable 
operator judges to be obscene, indecent, or possessing the other 
characteristics listed in the statute. 


206 


obscenity , indecency, and similar matters as they pertain to leased 
access. 


However, unlike the Commission or the courts, cable operators 
are not neutral judges of indecency. DAETC’s experience is that 
United and TCI have shown great resistance to the notion of leased 
access in general, and Congress came to a similar conclusion about 
the industry as a whole when it drafted the 1992 Act. UAE, and, 
to an extent, TCI, have been hostile toward controversial 
programming carried on DAETC’s leased access channels. This 
animus is at least in part understandable, since viewers often believe 


As of this date, TCI has not supplied DAETC with a written 
policy pertaining to indecency on leased access channels, despite the 
fact that the statute authorizes TCI to implement one. DAETC has 
been given to understand that TCI does plan to adopt a policy an 
indecency in the future, however. 


In the absence of a written policy, DAETC cannot be sure of 
TCI’s stance. However, DAETC has been informed that highly and 
unnecessarily repressive policies are under consideration in the 

Under the contemplated policy described to DAETC by 
knowledgeable industry personnel, leased access programmers 
would be required to represent and warrant that their programming 
is not indecent. If even a single breach of representation and 
warranty occurs, the offending programmer would be taken off the 
air permanently, or its channel would be scrambled in the manner 
described in Section 612(j(1). If a leased access program provider 
refuses to provide the required representation and warranty, the 
penalty would be the same as that for breach. 

A policy imposing such draconian consequences for 
programmer error, if implemented by a cable operator, would go 
far beyond the intent of the statute to protect children from indecent 
programming . 


In DAETC’s estimation, the only certain way to avoid 
presenting indecency is to eschew not only that which is indecent, 


207 


but also that which a hostile cable operator arguably could hold to 
be indecent in the most conservative locality served. Such an 
approach will inevitably lead to the blocking of meritorious 
programming which is not indecent. 

Until the indecency provisions of the 1992 Act are enjoined or 
found to be unconstitutional, the 90’s Channel is of course resolved 
to comply with the law. However, we are adamantly opposed to 
procedures which force us to self-censor all materials that approach 
the margins of indecency. 

IV. DAETC’s R lations for C tesion Acti 

As noted in the NPRM, Commission has recognized its 
obligation to implement the Act in the most constitutionally 
permissible manner,’ i.e. the least restrictive manner needed to 
protect children from indecency." 

Self-Effi ine Proviai f the 1992 A 

DAETC believes that, given the Commission’s obligation to 
implement the 1992 Act in the most constitutionally permissible 
manner, it must establish rules and policies concerning the self- 
effectuating portions of the 1992 Act. Commission involvement in 
self-effectuating provisions will prove especially important, because 
vast majority of cable operators will adopt prospective policies 
pursuant to Section 612(h), mooting the rules adopted pursuant to 
Section 612(j). DAETC points out that among the triangle of 
interested parties — the cable operator, the channel lessee, and the 
Commission — only the Commission is neutral. The 90's 
Channel’s experience establishes that cable operators cannot be 
relied upon to be impartial judges of indecency, and that such a 
state of affairs is natural since their paying subscribers hold them 
responsible for programming they find offensive. 


'' NPRM at p. 4. 
See Sable Communications v. FCC, 109 S$. Ct. 2829. 2836 (1989). 


208 


In these comments, DAETC has described circumstances in 
which certifications can be used in a highly and unnecessarily 
repressive manner. If the penalties associated with actual or 
putative breach of certification are severe, the result will go far 
be to chill a wide variety of speech which is not indecent. 

DAETC believes that the Commission should permit the use of 
certifications only under conditions which it proscribes and 

1) The cable operator must be barred from removing, 
scrambling, or otherwise harshly penalizing a leased access 
programmer based on a single instance of indecency in breach 
of certification, or based on a small number of instances over 
time; 


2) Disputes over the indecency of individual programs or 


3) If a cable operator wishes to remove, scramble, or 
otherwise harshly penalize a leased access programmer on the 
grounds of indecency, it must give advance notice of such a 
contemplated action to the programmer in writing, and the 
programmer must have the right to appeal such planned action 
to the Commission before it takes place. 

DAETC believes that the above conditions are appropriate for 
two reasons. First, as already described, the cable operator cannot 
be relied upon as a neutral adjudicator of indecency. Secondly, 
DAETC observes that cable operators remain protected from 


' The Commission states: “We assume that cable operators who have 
a written and published policy of prohibiting indecent material may require 
such certifications.” (NPRM at p. 6.) 


209 


liability under Section 638 of the Act for the transmission of 
indecent programming. 

DAETC recognizes that cable operators’ Statutory immunity 
under Section 638 has been removed with respect to obscene 
material, and that obscenity is not constitutionally protected. 
However, DAETC believes that the above-listed protections should 
also apply to allegedly obscene material, since the 1992 Act allows 
operators to adopt policies refusing to transmit any individual 
program they believe to be obscene — at least until the question of 
obscenity is adjudicated as to that program. To permit harsher 
sanctions for breach of certification with regard to obscenity invites 
operators to abuse their discretion by branding objectionable content 
obscene rather than indecent." 

Further, DAETC believes that because the Commission now has 
jurisdiction over the rates, terms, and conditions pursuant to which 
leased access channels are provided, it will inevitably become the 
forum for disputes between programmers and operators about 
DAETC believes that the Commission should adopt expedited 
complaint resolution procedures for such problems, somewhat in the 
manner it presently does for Section 315 and related political 
broadcasting disputes. 

Finally, DAETC believes that the Commission should Clearly 
state that its rules and policies do not shield a cable operator from 
civil liability for breach of contract if the operator removes or bars 
programming that is not obscene or indecent. 


Other Provisions of the 1992 Act 


In the NPRM, the Commission inquires as to whether, under 
Section 612(j) of the 1992 Act, a cable operator is powerless to 


4 


There is little reason to believe that such a regime is so lax as to 
encourage obscenity on leased access channels. Leased access 
programmers are subject to criminal prosecution for carrying obscene 
material. 


210 


require that indecent programming be carried on a blocked channel 
if the program provider fails to identify the program as indecent. '° 

DAETC points out that Section 612(j)(1)(A) of the statute is 
clear that cable operators are required to place all indecent 
programs as identified by program providers on a blocked channel. 
This provision does not give program providers unbridled 
discretion, however, or leave operators without recourse. Under 
Section 612(j)(1)(C) of the 1992 Act, programmers are required to 
inform cable operators if a program is indecent as defined by 
Commission regulations. The Commission or the courts have the 
power to sanction program providers if they fail to comply with the 
provisions of Section 612(j)(1)(C). As mentioned above, DAETC 
procedures regarding indecency, and, pursuant thereto, cable 
operators would be free to bring such matters to the Commission’s 
attention. 


Respectfully submitted, 


DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CONSORTIUM, INC. 


By: ___/s/ 

John B. Schwartz, President 
P.O. Box 6060 

Boulder, CO 80306 

(303) 442-2707 

Dated: December 4, 1992 


NPRM at p. 5. 


211 
Appendix A 


ARTICLES CONCERNING CAMNET 


212 


Mark Robichaux, Camcorders Spark Two Cable Ventures, 
WaLL STREET JOURNAL, July 30, 1992 at B1 


Los Angeles—Cameraman 
Jay April sinks ankle-deep into 
a three-story-high compost 
heap. believed to be the largest 
in the Western world, and 
trains his camcorder on the 


veap’s long-haired, bearded 
»wner, who speaks only in 
rhyme 


Environmental zealot Tim 
Dundon, better known as Zeke 
the Sheik from the planet 
Bleak, is pontificating on the 
pie 

| mix it like pancake batter 

To make the ladder of 
matter fatter, 

But it doesn't matter 

Because everybody thinks 
/'m as mad as a hatter. 


At intervals, Zeke breaks 
into song. A favorite: “I 
Never Promised You a Rose 
Garden.” 


The footage will soon air 
» Camnet, a five-month-old 
cable network that shows mini- 
documentaries shot with cam- 
corders by a cadre of aging 
video activists and artists. 
Started by two women from 
Venice Beach, Calif., Cammnet 
eschews, anchors, reporters and 
hosts 


Correspondents have taped 
homeless poets, a skinhead 
picnic on the Mexican border, 
a visit to the Nixon Museum, a 
“Justice for Janitors” rally in 
Los Angeles and a guided tour 
of the Barbie doll inventor's 


woeful footage of life in their 
neighborhood drew tears from 
one video editor. 

This isn’t cute enough to be 
“America’s Funniest Home 
Videos.” And it’s a far cry 
from NBC’s “I Witness Vid- 
eos,” which is often grisly. It’s 
cinema verite meets vax populi, 
a gentle amateur service from 
the handheld point of view. 


Two-Hour Loop 


The stories, some sober and 
serious, some arcane, air the 
last two weeks of every month 
to more than 828,000 homes in 
10 cable systems from Los 
Angeles to Philadelphia. The 
same two-hour loop airs 12 
times a day. “Think of televi- 
sion as food,” says Mr. April. 
“We've been eating the same 
meat and potatoes served up by 
the networks since the 1950s. 


Now people are cooking more 
exotic dishes at home.” 


The attitude has drawn a 
cult-like following of young and 
old viewers. “They reveal as 
opposed to preach,” says Victor 
Dinnerstein, a 46-vear-old San 
Fernando Valley resident and 
Camnet fan. “It's a little off 
the wall, but it’s pure insight.” 

Camnet is run on a budget 
not much bigger than the com- 
bined savings of cofounders 
Nancy Cain and Judith Binder. 
They met while working on 
“The ‘90s,” a critically ac- 
claimed, populist camcorder- 
based magazine show now in its 
fourth and final season on PBS. 
They like the concept so much 
that they decided it could work 
on a much bigger scale. 


Ms. Binder had been an 
independent director with alter- 
native theater troupes in Los 
Angeles. Ms. Cain and several 
other Camnet contributors are 
the same counter-culture video 
artists who roamed from loft to 
loft in New York in the late 
1960s and early 1970s, watch- 
ing each other’s experimental 
videos on such topics as the 
trial of the Chicago Seven and 
Woodstock. They dubbed 
themselves the Videofreex and 
once transmitted homemade 


213 


programming to a valley in 
upstate New York that wasn’t 
being served by a broadcast 
Station. 


Camnet personnel _ still 
haven't exactly joined the Es- 
tablishment. Advertisers are 
few despite the cheap rates. 
Sponsors can buy two dozen 
30-second spots a day for a full 
week for $504. Editorial con- 
trol, what little there is, lies 
entirely in the hands of Ms. 
Cain, a longtime freelance 
video producer, and Ms. Bind- 
er. 


“We open the window a 
little wider, try to let things 
develop a little more,” says 
Ms. Binder. “Sometimes we 
succeed, sometimes we fail, but 
we're willing to risk the pro- 
cess to find the truth.” 


The two edit tapes sitting 
side by side before two 13-inch 
monitors in a small backroom 
of Ms. Cain’s Venice Beach 
house, which is littered with 
videocassettes. On the wall are 
pictures of President Bush and 
former presidents Reagan and 
Nixon. “They inspire me,” 
Ms. Cain remarks, deadpan. 


The pair seek a seamless 
tapestry of footage when they 
edit, and they discourage their 
17 or so correspondents from 


ever turning the camera off 
during shoots. “Process is 
product,” says Ms. Cain, “I 
have a high tolerance for raw 
tape.” 

One of the more prolific 
correspondents, if not the most 
passionate, is Mr. April, a 
militant environmentalist who 
sleeps in a giant green tent in 
his living room. He drives 
from shoot to shoot in a 1970 
Karmann Ghia, hugging the 
broken driver-side door so it 
doesn’t swing open on curvy 
mountain roads. On a swelter- 
ing California afternoon, he 
dutifully follows and records 
Zeke the Sheik as he points out 
areas of interest in his compost 
pile. 

The footage isn’t exactly 
broadcast quality. When the 
compost beneath his feet crum- 
bles, Mr. April struggles for 
balance and the camera wob- 
bles. He inadvertently coughs 
in the middle of a question, and 


an overhead jet muffles Zeke’s 


voice. “It may not be techni- 
cally perfect, but it’s flat-out 


honest,” he says. “This is 
gonzo journalism with a human 
touch.” 

Extinct Butterfly 


What the network lacks in 
polished professionalism, it 


214 


makes up in serendipity. Mr. 
April once stumbled on a group 
of real estate agents playing 
softball in a park whose con- 
struction drove the last known 
Palos Verdes Blue butterfly into 
extinction, in violation of the 


Endangered Species Act. 


The cameraman approached 
a middle-aged couple sitting on 
bleachers and asked them sol- 
emnly, “Are you aware this 
was the last known habitat of 
the Palos Verdes Blue butter- 
fiy?” “I'm sorry to hear that,” 
the woman responded politely, 
as she continued to watch the 
game. 

Mr. April also shot a story 
on a coyote that was feasting on 
the poodles of the rich. It 
included interviews with the 
distraught pet owners and the 
county agent called to trap the 
coyote. The animal was even- 
tually shown writhing in a trap, 
and minutes later, a single 
gunshot was heard off camera 


~as Mr. April zoomed in on the 


agent’s truck and its logo: 
Animal Control. 


The agent, identified on 
camera only as Louie, told the 
camera he didn’t feel good 
about killing the coyote. 
“What justifies this in my heart 
and in my mind is the pets I 


save. Here I saved perhaps 10, 
20 cats.” 


It was a classic Camnet 
moment — unstaged and other- 
wise unremarkable, a snapshot 
of life made more dramatic by 
its appearance on a TV screen. 
“If you point a camera and let 
people say what they want to 
Say, nine times out of 10 it’s 
more stimulating , more interest- 
ing than some reporter who's 
more concerned with the per- 
fect part down his hair,” says 
Mr. April. 


Mr. April hopes for the day 
Camnet becomes a full-fledged 
network, but he says it has 
already spawned a revolution. 
“It used to be that Big Brother 
is watching us,” he says. 
“Now, it’s Little Brother.” 


215 


216 


Steve Weinstein, A Cable Network About the Real Word, 
Los ANGELES TIMES, October 16, 1992 at F24 


Television: The fledgling CamNet presents footage shot on 8mm 
cameras by activists, amateurs and artists. In Southern California, 
it is seen by about 100,000 viewers. 


Inside the Democratic 
convention last July, a fledgling 
cable network, armed only with 
a home video camera, roamed 
the aisles alongside NBC, CNN 
and PBS. But while th estab- 
lishment media aired the 
speeches and the spin of the 
assembled pols, the CamNet 
camera focused elsewhere. The 
constant milling and inattention 
of the delegates, the hot dogs 
and sauerkraut, a reporter 
complaining about the frequent 
evocation of God and the lack 
of anything healthy to eat. 


“I’m actually for some sort 
of spirituality in school, but 
you can’t have God, because 
what about the people who 
believe in the Goddess? What 
about the secular humanists?” 
said correspondent Beth Lap- 
ides from somewhere in Madi- 
son Square Garden. “You 
really can get lost in this place. 
You get hungry, you get thirsty 
and the food here is really 
awful. And that very much 
symbolizes how hungry Ameri- 
cans are for some real food. 
How hungry I am for some- 


thing nutritious to eat is how 
hungry America is for some- 
thing good.” 

The two founders of Cam- 
Net, a 6-month-old cable net- 
work that presents mini-docu- 
mentaries and features shot on 
8mm home-video cameras by a 
contingent of activists, amateurs 
and artists, have essentially the 
same philosophy. 

“TV is boring. You flip 
through and every channel is 
the same thing,” said Nancy 
Cain, who operates CamNet out 
of her Venice Beach home with 
her partner, Judith Binder. 
“CamNet stops you. If you're 
flipping around and you see 
this, it doesn’t look like public 
access and it doesn’t look like 
television, and it looks like 
something is happening, and it 
looks like it might be live and it 
looks like you might be right in 
the middle of it. It’s very often 
riveting and exciting. It’s 
NBC-Not.” 

Only about | million people 
can see it, however. CamNet 
is available on cable systems in 


only eight cities, including 
Denver, Baltimore, Detroit and 
Philadelphia. In Southern 
California, CamNet can be seen 
by about 100,000 viewers on 
United Artists Cable in the East 
San Fernando Valley and La 
Puente-Baldwin Park area. 


Home video, of course, is 
no stranger to television. The 
video-taped beating of Rodney 
G. King changed the very 
history of Los Angeles. 
“America’s Funniest Home 
Videos” turned home bloopers 
into a Top 10 network smash, 
and “I Witness Video” shows 
grisly home video of accidents 
and disasters. 


But Cain and Binder con- 
tend that CamNet is not “ex- 
ploitative,” not out for the 
video “Boing!” that punctuates 
those other shows. 

“We're really the opposite 
of what you can see on televi- 
sion,” said Binder. “We're 
trying to show events, issues or 
lifestyles that haven’t had their 
say-so before. We'd like to be 
a real alternative.” 


The idea was born out of 
PBS’ “The 90s,” the populist 
camcorder magazine series on 
which Cain and Binder served 
as producers. When the pro- 
gram, now in its fourth and 


217 


final season, died, they decided 
to test the concept on a broader 
scale. 


Many of the stories Cam- 
Net has produced reflect the 
artsy, unorthodox background 
of the network’s founders, 
although Cain said that their 
only guiding philosophy is 
“freedom of speech.” 

Binder, who was moved by 
the power of Frederick Weis- 
man’s cinema verite documenta- 
ries, has worked as a director 
and videographer in the perfor- 
mance art scene. Cain was a 
member of the Videofreex, a 
group that toured the country in 
the "60s and °70s producing 
experimental videos on Wood- 
stock, the Chicago Seven and 
geodesic domes. CBS actually 
commissioned a pilot of their 
work, but, Cain said, one 
executive “told me that it was 
five years ahead of its time. 
He was wrong. It was 20.” 


The CamNet pieces 
some sad, some funny, some 
haunting — include a visit to . 
condom store on Melrose Ave- 
nue to learn about teen-age 
sexual behavior, skinheads 
taunting Mexicans along the 
border, a trip to the Richard M. 
Nixon museum, a day in the 
life of New York City squatters 


and a demonstration in Wash- 
ington in the aftermath of the 
King beating verdict. 


About 20 correspondents 
around the country tape these 
stories on their own cameras 
and send the raw footage to 
Venice, where Cain and Binder 
sit side-by-side at a tiny editing 
bay in the back of Cain’s 
house. The duo trim and craft 
the raw tape into cinema verite 
reports — very few CamNet 
pieces contain narration 
producing four hours of pro- 
gramming each month that is 
shown in repeated cycles. 


Reaction has been mostly 
positive, Binder said. “Those 
who hate it call it a communist 
plot, but most people seem to 
love it.” The city of Alameda 
threatened to sue CamNet over 
its somewhat clinical look at a 
woman and the device she uses 
for sexual stimulation, Binder 
said, but that has been the only 
serious complaint. 


Their office receives phone 
calls almost every day from 
viewers who want to help them 
expand into other areas. One 
teacher at San Fernando High 
School uses the CamNet reports 
in his civics classes. And 
Barbara Brownell, a North 
Hollywood mother of three who 


218 


discovered her teen-agers 
watching CamNet one day, was 
so “turned on” by it that she 
went out and bought her own 
camera and started making 
tapes. 


“It’s very intimate and very 
real,” said Brownell, who just 
shot a piece on a homeless man 
who warms his food on his car 
engine. “You can get people to 
say things that they would 
never say to a big camera with 
a crew and a big microphone 
boom. Just by turning on this 
little camera and pointing it at 
someone you can discover the 
kind of charming and incredibly 
poignant human stories that 
would never happen with Ted 
Koppel.” 

Cain and Binder are financ- 
ing the venture primarily out of 
their own pockets, paying their 
correspondents “essentially 
nothing ” Advertisers are 
scarce, even though one week 
of hourly ads costs just $504, 
or $3 per spot. One of Cam- 
Net’s most reliable sponsors, a 
Long Beach electronics store, 
burned down during the L.A. 
riots. 


Nevertheless, Cain and 
Binder pledge to persevere. 
They brim with optimism that 
they will find their way onto 


thousands of expanding cable 
systems and make money for 
themselves and their dedicated 
contributors. They continue to 
seek underwriting from severa! 
companies that are compatible 
with their philosophy, and a 
Tokyo firm is interested in 
airing CamNet on late-night 
television in Japan, Cain said. 

“I think that some rich 
Asian newspaper magnate is 
going to want to get into televi- 
sion or [the head of a huge 
cable conglomerate] is going to 
see something about us and say, 
I'm sorry I didn’t return your 
calls, but now I believe in 
you,’” Cain said. “I'm con- 
vinced that there is a market for 
us just like there is a market for 
Ted Turner's cartoon channel. 
I mean, how many of these 
same old cartoons can you look 
at?” 


219 


220 


Joe Rhodes, Video: Power to the People, 
TV GuIDE, November 28, 1992 


CamNet, America’s first all-camcorder channel, shows life on the 
fringe 


became a sort of non-establish- house. They hatched the idea 


egg yg kag Agee > on te 

in turn, gives c to bss 

people who don’t hobnob with = 4 yng la 

Gs aie get. They keep it going with 
CamNet has shown gang their savings and a few small 


subways, racist skinheads atthe fortune. It's difficult to keep 
Mexican border, and topless secrets when everyone has a 
protesters outside the Demo- camera, says Cain. As the 


r 


MEDIA 
[Cont. from 117] 


ably offer their own cable TV 
programs in a few years. 

These new phone, screen 
and satellite technologies make 
Ross Perot’s mad vision of an 
Perot was on the mark when he 
crazy by making the White 
House press conference obso- 
lete. 


Reporters are also being 
shoved aside by a relatively 
low-tech opponent: video- 
driven, reality-based TV. How 
can a police reporter describe a 
murder when viewers can see 
one on Cops? What some 
producers call “unfiltered” 
programming, Cops is one of a 
whole generation of reality 
broadcasts — Rescue 911, Code 
3, Top Cops, Unsolved Myster- 
ies, America’s Most Wanted, 
Sightings, I Witness Video — 
which prove nothing is more 
gripping than a real story. 
None of the broadcasts use 
what used to be called report- 
ers. 

This fall Time Warner 
unveiled New York | News, 
New York City’s first twenty- 
four-hour local news channel. 


221 


Local cable news operations 
already exist in Washington, 
D.C., California and New 
England, but the debut of New 
York | in the nation’s largest 
TV market has gotten the atten- 
tion of the thousands of journal- 
ists who live there, providing a 
showcase of the world to come. 
New York | News, and other 
cable channels expected to 
follow, will broadcast live high- 
school football games and City 
Hall tax hearings and Board of 
Education condom fights and 
four-alarm fires — things we 
used to need reporters to learn 
about. 


In the United States anyone 
with a pen or pencil, a note- 
book, a still camera or a video- 
cam — there are tens of mil- 
lions — is a reporter. Some of 
them, like the amateur journal- 
ist who shot the police beating 
of Rodney King, will break the 
biggest stories in the country. 
They will provide the manpow- 
er, the audience and the voice 
for the next step in the evolu- 
tion of information: the Peo- 
ple’s News. 

The inevitable successor to 
the old and new kinds of trans- 
mitting stories, the People's 


News will make journalists out 
of all of us and plug us back 
into the political system in ways 
that would have had the radicals 
who founded the nation’s media 
dancing in their cobbled streets. 

The People's News is, in 
fact, already on the air, al- 
though most journalists have 
never heard of it. It is Cam- 
Net, a nine-month-old cable 
network that airs documentaries 
and features shot on Hi-8mm 
video cameras by amateurs, 
artists, activists. Like Ted 
Turner’s belittled vision of 
CNN a decade ago, CamNet is 
the brilliant vision for the next 
decade and beyond. Founded 
in a back room of a Venice 
Beach, California, home by two 
former PBS producers, CamNet 
has no corporate backing or 
market research. Just twenty 
picture makers scattered around 
the country. CamNet is so far 
available in only eight cities, 


with millions of people and 
return TV to individual Ameri- 


222 


cans, a process Clinton, Perot 
and Brown legitimized. 


CamNet’s pieces are eclec- 
tic, odd, funny, haunting, 


spontaneous and strikingly apart 
from slick commercial-TV 


production values. CamNet 
stories include condom stores in 
L.A., skinheads taunting Mexi- 
cams along the border, the 
Richard M. Nixon museum, a 
Washington, D.C., march 
against police brutality. 

“You really can get lost in 
this place,” a CamNet corre- 
spondent reported during the 
Democratic Convention § in 
Madison Square Garden. “You 
get hungry, you get thirsty, and 
the food here is really awful. 
And that very much symbolizes 
how hungry Americans are for 
some real food.” CamNet 

individual, idi : 
ic, untutored voices to broad- 
ture of TV journalism — poll- 
sters, blow-dried reporters and 
anchors, 


be preserved. But if they do 
exist, the media need to start 


articulating them. 


So far the media, like the 
White House during 1992, 
show few signs of seeing them- 
selves in crisis. The New 
News is largely still pooh- 
poohed as unnerving, slightly 
dangerous and frivolous mush. 
Newspapers still run black-and- 
white pictures of events the rest 
of us saw twenty-four hours 
earlier in color, and white, 
middle-aged men in suits still 
sit behind evening-news anchor 
desks and say nothing much in 
grave and mellifluous voice. 


Time does finally seem to 
be getting short. Perot’s 
bloody loss did not reaffirm the 
media's importance or service 
to the republic. Quite the 
opposite. Like Marley’s Ghost, 
his campaign brought with it 
visions of the future nobody 
wants to see. 

The blunt reality is this: In 
a world where everybody is a 
journalist, then nobody really 
is. Journalists derived their 
power and special place in the 
country from the fact that they 
got to see history and relay it to 
us. If we're all seeing history 
as it unfolds and taking the 
pictures ourselves, then journal- 


223 


ists seem increasingly, and 
sadly, doomed to follow the 
lumbering , awkward and poorly 
adapted institutions they work 
for into the country’s history. 
The 1992 campaign and the 
technological revolution that is 
charging along on its heels 
suggest the death of the report- 
er is just a few channels away. 


224 
Appendix B 


Program Segments Carried by The 90’s Channel Dealing with 
Sexuality 


“Self-help.” A women’s health organization in Austin, TX 
seeks to demystify gynecology, teaching women how to perform 
their own pelvic examinations. The organization’s director is 
interviewed on the intimidating nature of gynecological procedures, 
and an internal examination is shown. A woman’s pudenda are 
visible. 


“Mapplethorpe Exhibit.” The controversy over the Robert 
Mapplethorpe exhibit at a Boston art museum. Interviews with 
attendees are interspersed with images of many of the photos, 
including some of his most dramatic nudes. One man protests that 
$30,000 in government funding was spent “to put picture frames 
around these hideously obscene pictures.” A woman observes that 
while nudes of women are common, Mapplethorpe is one of the few 
photographers who celebrates the beauty of the male body. She 
speculates that this quality is threatening to certain men. The 
museum director says he thinks that the exhibit has brought 
important issues concerning racism and homophobia into the public 
debate. 

“Abortion Protest.” This piece documents performance art by 
Elise Millikan. Millikan appears in front of a billboard which 
overlooks a New York street, and which bears the image of a giant 
coat hanger. She removes her overcoat, and, naked, performs a 
simulated self-abortion. She screams. Red liquid splatters 
copiously, staining considerable portion of the billboard. Interviews 
follow with passers-by and with Millikan. She says: “The 
government doesn’t own my body. The government doesn’t own 
my art. So hands off.” 


“Fertility Festival.” Images and sounds from the annual 
fertility festival in luyama, Japan, complete with bright costumes 


225 


and a street procession. Many of the objects carried by marchers 
are totems shaped like penises. 

“The Kind and Di.” Di, a Los Angeles woman, buys a dildo. 
This is her first-person story of why and how she did it. It 
develops that she is disillusioned by the phoniness of courtship, and 
depressed that she is not in love. In a decision she admits is bitter- 
sweet, she resorts instead to a sexual device. She holds up the 
dildo, which is made of clear plastic and shaped like a penis. She 
switches it on. She discusses its features and pleasures with Judith 
Binder, who both operated the portable camera and produced the 
piece. 


226 


COMMENTS OF INTERMEDIA PARTNERS 


InterMedia Partners believes that the so-called “voluntary” 
prohibition of indecent material and other types of programming on 
cable television leased access and public, educational and 
governmental (“PEG”) channels, violates the First Amendment of 
the Constitution. Nevertheless, InterMedia believes that it is 
compelled to ban such programming in order to avoid potential 
\iabulity for the exhibition of certain programming which are shown 
on channels it does not control. Any rules established by the FCC 
must provide cable operators flexibility to adopt workable program 
policies. This includes permitting cable operator to: (1) require 
appropriate certification and indemnification; (2) terminate a user’s 
access to a channel if that user violates the operator’s program 
policy, (3) require that certain programs be placed on a “blocked” 
‘eased access channel; and (4) pre-screen and prohibit the exhibition 
of any program that the operator reasonably believes is obscene, 
indecent or solicits or promotes unlawful conduct. 


InterMedia recognizes that the FCC is obligated to implement 
the 1992 Cable Act, and in particular Section 10 of the Act. 
Therefore, in order to promote the public interest and to establish 
a consistent body of case law, the FCC must assert exclusive 
jurisdiction over the enforcement of any regulations promulgated 
pursuant to Section 10. Specifically, the FCC must preempt state 
and local regulation of program content, establish a national 
standard for defining indecency, and adjudicate disputes among 


227 


cable operators, programmers, leased access channels lessees, and 
PEG users. 


Finally, the FCC must recognize and make some 
accommodation in its rules for the added time and expense that will 
be required to technically “block” leased access channels which 
may exhibit indecent programming. The cable operator should not 
be required to absorb the costs of implementing Section 10. 
Moreover, the FCC must consider these costs in its ratemaking 
proceeding on leased access channels. 


FCC Caption Omitted 


COMMENTS OF INTERMEDIA PARTNERS 
I. Introduction 


InterMedia Partners (“InterMedia”), by its attorneys, hereby 
submits these comments in response to the Federal Communications 
Commission’s (“FCC” or “Commission”) Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (“NPRM”) in the above-referenced proceeding. 


InterMedia owns and operates cable systems throughout the 
United States. InterMedia currently provides commercial leased 
access channels pursuant to Section 532 of the Communications Act 
of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. § 532) (“the Communications 
Act”), and public, educational and governmental (“PEG”) channels 
pursuant to the requirements of InterMedia’s various franchise 
agreements. InterMedia is obligated to lease access channels to 
individuals pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532(a). Franchising authorities 
have a similar interest in promoting the use of PEG channels. 


The purpose of the instant proceeding is to promulgate 
regulations so that cable system operators may take all necessary 
and lawful steps to limit their liability for program content on 
leased and PEG access channels; channels over which uperators 
have virtually no control. Accordingly, InterMedia has a direct 


228 


interest in the outcome of this proceeding and submits the following 
comments in response to the FCC’s NPRM. ' 


ll. “Voluntary” Prohibition of Indecent Programming on Leased 
and Peg Access Channels 


A. Threat of Litigation Does Not Make 

Programming Policies “Voluntary” 

Section 10(a)(2) of the Cable Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (hereinafter “1992 Cable Act”) permits 
cable operators to “voluntarily” establish a “written and published 
policy of prohibiting programming” that the cable operator 
“reasonably believes” contains obscene and/or indecent 
programming on leased access channels. Section 10(c) allows 
operators to “voluntarily” prohibit “sexually explicit conduct” and 
“material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct” on PEG 
channels. 


In fact, because Section 10(d) eliminates cable operators 
statutory immunity from liability for the transmission of obscene 
programming on leased and PEG access channels, such policies are 
hardly “voluntary.” InterMedia anticipates that the practical result 
of Section 10 will be that cable systems will establish policies which 
ban all “questionable” programming altogether, applying the policy 
broadly in order to avoid liability. If the cable operator does not 
prohibit potentially obscene and indecent material, the alternative 
is to rely on the lessee’s or PEG user’s judgment as to what is 
indecent or obscene.? Clearly, there is a conflict in interest for the 
lessee/PEG user to self-censor its program material. Moreover, the 
“deep pockets” of cable operators are a likely target for lawsuits. 


While InterMedia is commenting in this proceeding, it wishes to make 
clear that it firmly believes these provisions violate the First Amendment 
of the Constitution, and InterMedia supports the efforts of Time Warner 
and others to strike them down in Federal Court. 


Obscenity is based on local values under Miller v. California, 413 
U.S. 15 (1973). Operators, such as InterMedia will use a “highest” 
common denominator approach to avoid litigation. 


229 


Given the serious consequences of violating the Communic~ ions 
Act or state statute, cable operators will feel obligated to take 
significant precautions. 

As an example of the consequences, many franchise 
agreements specify that a violation of the Communications Act, or 
any state or federal criminal statute, is a material violation of the 
franchise. If a PEG user violates an operator's policy of 
prohibiting obscene or indecent material, the operator may be liable 
for violating the Communications Act and may also be required to 
defend a federal or state criminal obscenity prosecution. Similarly, 
if a leased access channel lessee exhibits “indecent” programming 
in violation of the operator’s policy banning such material, the 
operator could be liable for violating the Communications Act by 
failing to place the program on a blocked channel. 

B. Intermedia’s Policy Prohibiting Indecent Material 
on Leased Access Channels 


Given the present statutory language of the 1992 Cable Act, 
InterMedia feels that it is necessary to ban all indecent 
programming material from its leased access channels. InterMedia 
outlines below the steps that it believes are necessary to insure that 
it complies with the difficult provisions of the 1992 Act. 
Commission approval of such policies and practices in its Report 
and Order and in final rules adopted in this proceeding, is vital to 
preserve cable service. Moreover, as discussed below, the FCC 
must preempt state and local regulations or actions that interfere and 
conflict with the purpose of this proceeding. 

Effective December 4, 1992, InterMedia will require lessees 
to certify that they will not carry obscene or indecent programming. 
InterMedia will review, at the lessee’s request, or im certain 
circumstances, on its own initiative, any program material which 
might conceivably be construed as obscene or indecent, and advise 
the lessee within 14 days whether it may cablecast the 
programming.’ A determination by InterMedia that a particular 


5 


InterMedia will request pre-screening if it has reasonable belief that 
the program is obscene or indecent. 


230 


program is obscene or indecent will be the final determination of 
the issue. If a lessee transmits any material on a leased access 
channel which InterMedia reasonably believes violates its policy, 
the lessee’s access to the channel will be terminated immediately, 
and that lessee will be prohibited from acquiring any leased channel 
capacity from InterMedia in the future. 


To effectively implement such policy, InterMedia will 
require most lessees of leased access channels to obtain insurance, 
similar to broadcaster’s liability insurance, which will name 
InterMedia as a beneficiary. Proceeds from the insurance policy 
would be used by InterMedia in the event of a lawsuit arising out 
of the transmission of obscene or indecent material. 


In deciding to implement this policy, InterMedia considered 
several alternatives. InterMedia could require lessees to post a 
bond sufficient to cover the cost of possible fines and forfeitures, 
However, bonds are difficult to collect and do not provide for 
attorney’s fees to defend potential lawsuits. InterMedia also 
considered and rejected as too severe a requirement that lessees 
provide an irrevocable letter of credit to cover anticipated costs of 
liability. 

InterMedia recognizes the public policy goals behind 
promoting the use of leased access channels. There is a likelihood 
that implementing the programming policy outlined above will deter 
or even prevent the use of leased access channels by some 
individuals and companies. However, InterMedia presumes that 
Congress considered carefully the impact of Section 10, and 
weighed the competing public policies of promoting diversity of 


* If a lessee cannot demonstrate sufficient balance sheet strength to 
support an indemnification, InterMedia will require the lessee to obtain 
broadcaster’s liability insurance. It has been InterMedia’s experience that 
many potential lessees are highly under-capitalized. Thus, insurance is 
necessary in lieu of a bare indemnity. 


231 


viewpoint with the concerns over children’s access to obscene and 
indecent material on leased channels.° 


C. Intermedia’s Policy Prohibiting Certain Programming 
on PEG Channels 


Similar to its policy with respect to leased access channels, 
InterMedia believes for the reasons stated above, that it is necessary 
to ban all “obscene” and “indecent” programming on its PEG 
channels in order to protect itself from potential liability for 
program material that it does not control. 1992 Cable Act 
§ 10(c). InterMedia will also prohibit material which it reasonably 
believes solicits or promotes unlawful conduct. Although the 
Commission indicated in the NPRM that it believes Congress 
intended “unlawful conduct” to refer only to prostitution, 
InterMedia will interpret and apply this restriction broadly to cover 
a greater range of possible criminal activities, until the FCC or the 
Courts limit the broad statutory language of Section 10(c). 


At the request of any PEG user, InterMedia will review any 
program material (within 14 days) to determine whether such 
material complies with InterMedia’s policy. In addition, InterMedia 
reserves the right to preview any material which it reasonably 
believes may violate its policy. InterMedia’s determination as to 
whether a particular program complies with its policy will be the 
final determination. 


InterMedia operates a cable system where the public access 
channel is programmed and controlled by an independent public 


* Placing indecent programming on a special, scrambled leased channel 
is not a realistic alternative unless, of course, the program schedule of a 
commercial lessee contains repeated, indecent offerings. Scrambling a 
normally unscrambled channel requires a significant amount of time and 
labor in most systems operated by InterMedia. 

*  InterMedia agrees with the Commission’s tentative conclusion that 
“sexually explicit conduct” was intended to refer to the same material 
defined as “indecent.” Therefore, InterMedia will interpret “sexually 
explicit conduct” the same as it would interpret “indecent” material, unless 
the Commission's final rules indicate otherwise. 


232 


access corporation. InterMedia will require the corporation to 
obtain the same type of insurance policy as it will require for leased 
access channel lessees.’ Such an insurance policy will name 
InterMedia as a beneficiary and its proceeds will be used by 
InterMedia to defend itself in any action arising out of the 
exhibition of obscene or indecent material on the public access 
channel. 


All individual users, and where applicable, the access 
corporation, will be required to certify that no material that violates 
InterMedia’s policy will be exhibited.* Moreover, each individual 
user and the access corporation, will be required to indemnify 
InterMedia for any liability arising out of the transmission of any 
obscene or indecent material. In the event that either the 
corporation or an individual user of InterMedia’s PEG channels 
violates the policy, InterMedia will immediately, and permanently, 
terminate the violator’s access to all InterMedia’s PEG channels. 


D. Censorship and Prior Restraint Concerns require Strong 
FCC Involvement 


Notwithstanding the 1992 Cable Act, indecent material is 
constitutionally protected speech, and attempts to ban such material 
on cable television have been struck down in the courts. Community 
Television of Utah v. Wilkinson, 611 F. Supp. 1099 (D.C.Utah 
1985). InterMedia is concerned that screening out potentially 
indecent programs, material containing “sexually explicit conduct,” 
and “material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct,” could 
raise claims of unconstitutional prior restraint.’ 


Because of potential liability, InterMedia can no longer delegate all 
authority over the channel! to the corporation. 


* See discussion at p. 14-16 infra regarding cable operators’ limited 
liability where the access channel users certify they will comply with the 
cable operator’s policies. 


* “The schemes that have been invalidated by the Supreme Court as 
prior restraints on speech had this in common: they gave public officials 
the power to deny use of a forum in advance of actual expression.” Dial 

(continued...) 


233 


A regulatory or statutory requirement that cable operators 
ban indecent programming is very likely to be unconstitutional. '° 
While Senator Helms’ discussion in the Congressional Record on 
the passage of S.12 argues that a “voluntary” prohibition of 
indecent material by cable operators is not a “state action” which 
triggers First Amendment concerns, that issue is clearly open." 
However, until the courts address the issue, the FCC must assert 
exclusive jurisdiction over any prior restraint issues surrounding 
prohibited uses of leased and PEG access channels. 


For example, InterMedia's policy prohibiting obscenity and 
indecency on leased access channels provides that: (1) the channel 
may not be used for the transmission of such programming; (2) if 


*(...continued) 
Information Services v, Thornburgh, 938 F.2d 1535, 1543 (2nd Cir. 1991), 


citing, Southeastern Promotions, Lid. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 553 
(1975). 


‘© Apparently, Senator Helms conceded that unless the ban on obscene 
and indecent material is implemented voluntarily, it will not withstand 
constitutional scrutiny. See January 30, 1992 CONG. REC., p. S646. 
Moreover, in F.C.C. v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689, 695, 0.4 
(1979), the Supreme Court noted with approval that the Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit stayed the FCC's 1977 regulation 
which required cabie operators to prohibit the transmission of obscene and 
indecent material on access channels. “The [Court of Appeals} 
disapproved the requirement on the belief that it imposed censorship 
obligations on cable operators.” id. 


‘' January 30, 1992, CONG. REC., p. S646 - $649. Senator Helms 
cites Dial Information Services, supra, for the proposition that the 
Constitution permits cable operators to voluntarily ban indecent 
programming. However, the telephone companies in Dial Information 
Services did not ban the transmission of decent messages. Rather, the 
dial-a-porn providers were required to notify the telephone company which 
messages were indecent so that the telephone company could activate the 
presubscription provision. Furthermore. it has yet to be adjudicated as to 
whether a “voluntary” ban imposed by cable operators, which this statute 
permits and in essence mandates, is a state action for purposes of 
Constitutional analysis. 


234 


the lessee violates InterMedia’s policy, access to InterMedia's cable 
system will be immediately terminated; and (3) parties who violate 
InterMedia's policy will be barred from obtaining channel capacity 
in the future. Given InterMedia’s concerns over questions of prior 
restraint, InterMedia urges the Commission to assert exclusive 
jurisdiction over disputes concerning permitted uses of leased access 


capacity. The same applies to PEG access channels — prohibiting 
the exhibition of certain questionable material could raise prior 


restraint issues by PEG users. 


RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED, 


INTERMEDIA PARTNERS 

By: /s/ 
Stephen R. Ross 
Kathryn A. Hutton 


ROSS & HARDIES 
888 16th Street, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20006 
Dated: December 7, 1992 


enactment of regulations that enable a cable operator to prohibit the 
use of any public, educational, or government access facility for 
any programming which contains obscene material, sexually explicit 
conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct. 

Manhattan Neighborhood Network is a non-profit organization 
responsible for administering the public access channels in the 
Borough of Manhattan. Manhattan Neighborhood Network 
in September 1992 after twenty years of administration by the local 


1) The mission of Manhattan Neighborhood Network is to ensure 
the ability of Manhattan’s residents to exercise their First 
Amendment rights through the medium of cable television. 
to cable television for non commercial programming. We believe 
that our mission supports the intent of Congress in dedicating access 
channels as the video equivalent of the speaker's soapbox, fostering 
a diversity of viewpoints to viewers and furthering the goals of the 
First Amendment. The provisions under consideration by the 
Commission could seriously impair our ability to fulfill this 
2) Public access in New York has a history of providing a voice 
to people who would not otherwise have a means of pubiic 


236 


expression. The complexities and conflicts of urban life are often 
explored on public access providing greater understanding among 
the people of Manhattan. 

3) In Manhattan, as elsewhere around the country, the cable 
operator has no editorial control over the public access channels. 
Editorial control by the cable operator or any other entity managing 
public access endangers the principle of public access. Regulations 
“for any programming which contains obscene material, sexually 
explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful 
conduct” is disturbingly vague. We feel that this provision will 
threaten people's First Amendment rights and create a chilling 
effect on the use of public access by potential users in Manhattan. 
4) Tobe sure, Manhattan Neighborhood Network does not support 
or endorse obscene programming or unlawful conduct. The 
question is what is the most effective means to deal with 
programming that may cross the line within the context of the First 
Amendment. To that end, we believe that local and federal law, 
with obscenity and other unlawful conduct should they occur 
through public access or any other forum. If necessary, these laws 
can be effectively enforced against the program producer. We 
cannot imagine regulations censoring programming in advance that 
5) There are currently two public access channels on each of 
Manhattan's two cable systems with two more channels on each 
system to be activated in early 1993. Demand for time on the 
public access channels constantly exceeds supply. Currently, the 
public access channels carry approximately 590 different programs 
per week totaling over 300 hours With the addition of the new 
public access channels in 1993, we anticipate this number to 
increase by about fifty percent. 


6) Public programs are generally produced by volunteers. People 
work with very limited resources contributing mainly their time and 
talent. Any regulations that would place increased burdens on 
producers would undoubtedly diminish the use of the public access 
channels. 


237 


7) It is our view that the access provisions under review are 
unconstitutional. However, if the Commission adopts rules to 
implement these provisions, the rules should be as specific and as 
narrowly defined as possible. Cable operators must not be 
permitted to curtail the legitimate public use of the access channels 
under a broad umbrella of program regulation. 


8) The enforcement of program regulations will cause enormous 
at all. The people responsible for public access will be burdened 
by having to interpret and apply broad regulations to specific 
programs. The resulting cost for the necessary expertise to make 
these enforcement decisions will create an expense for both the 
cable operator and the public access producer. Such expense could 
be prohibitive to the public access producer thereby negating the 
producer’s right to speak. Many speakers may never appear on 
public access for fear that they might be in violation of the 
regulations. 

10) Several programs on Manhattan's public access channels are 
live and include interaction with the public via telephone. These 
programs are often forums for lively debate on local and national 
issues. We wonder how such programs could effectively be 
screened in advance to comply with program content regulations. 
Would such regulations pre-empt all such live programs therefore 
silencing many potential speakers within our community? 


11) In 1993, we expect the volume of programs on Manhattan's 
public access channels to exceed 450 hours per week. Pre- 
screening to comply with cable operator rules would require about 
twelve dedicated full-time staff people, more than the entire staff 
currently employed by Manhattan Neighborhood Network. In 
addition to this added cost, enforcement of regulations would 
certainly delay programs dealing with timely issues thereby greatly 
reducing the effectiveness of those programs. 

12) The Commission should make sure that the cost for any 
actions taken by the cable operator under this provision be 
undertaken at the operator’s expense. Of course, the cable 
subscriber will ultimately bear the added cost. 


238 


13) We note with irony the Senate debate leading to the 
approval of the amendment necessitating the Commission's current 
deliberations on public access. According to a transcript of the 
U.S. Senate's debate on January 30, 1992, Senator Fowler referred 
to the use of public access channels to solicit prostitution through 
shams such as escort services, fantasy parties and live call-in shows. 
Senator Wirth elaborated by referring to the public access in New 
York City as “the most prurient and, in fact in many ways grossly 
illegal access one could imagine.” We know of no program on 
Manhattan's public access channels that solicits prostitution through 
escort services, fantasy parties, live-call-in shows or any other 
means. In fact, commercial programming and advertisements of all 
types are expressly prohibited on public access by Manhattan 
Neighborhood Network policy statement. 


14) | _We-can not help but think that a serious error was made and 
that perhaps what Senator Wirth viewed on cable television in New 
York was the cable operator's “commercial use” or “leased access” 
channel. We note that Time Warner's “commercial use” or “leased 
access” channel regularly features advertisements for a variety of 
adult services. The manner in which the “commercial use” or 
“leased access” channel is operated in Manhattan should not lead to 
burdensome and unnecessary regulations imposed upon public 
access channels here and elsewhere across the country. Although 
Manhattan Neighborhood Network would not necessarily restrict 
non commercial programming of a sexual nature falling within the 
bounds of the First Amendment and applicable law, that type of 
programming is rare and infrequent. We urge the Commission not 
to jeopardize the integrity of public access as a First Amendment 
forum based upon erroneous perceptions or the fear that an isolated 
program may be potentially offensive to some viewers. 


Respectfully Submitted, 
/s/ 
Alexander Quinn, 
President 
Manhattan Neighborhood Network 
110 East 23rd Street, 10th Floor 
New York, NY 10010 Date: December 4, 1992 


239 


FCC Caption Omitted 


COMMENTS OF THE 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
OFFICERS AND ADVISORS, NATIONAL LEAGUE OF 
CITIES, UNITED STATES CONFERENCE OF MAYORS, 


AND THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES _ 


The National Association of Telecommunications Officers and 
Advisors, the National League of Cities, the United States 
Conference of Mayors, and the National Association of Counties 
(collectively, “the Local Governments”) submit these comments in 
the above-captioned proceeding. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The Federal Communications Commission (“FCC” or 
“Commission” ) seeks comment on implementation of Section 10 of 
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
1992 (“1992 Act”). Section 10 permits cable operators to prohibit 
indecent programming on the leased access channels on their 
systems, and eliminates cable operators’ statutory exemption from 
liability for programming on access channels that involves obscene 
material. Section 10 also directs the FCC to promulgate regulations 
“designed to limit the access of children to indecent 
programming ... which cable operators have not voluntarily 
prohibited,” and to enable cable operators to prohibit the use of any 
public, educational, or governmental (“PEG”) access channel “for 
any programming which contains obscene material, sexually explicit 
conduct, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct.” 

The Local Governments concur in the Commission's 
interpretation that the primary responsibility for identifying obscene 
material under Section 10 should be placed on programmers of 
leased and PEG access channels, rather than on cable operators. 
The programmer has the best knowledge of the content of the 
programs on access channels, and the cable operator shouid not be 
permitted — much less required — to censor programming on PEG 


240 


or leased channels. Accordingly, the Local Governments support 
the Commission’s proposal which would allow cable operators to 
require programmers to identify obscene programming and to 
certify that all other programming does not contain obscene or 
indecent material. 


The Local Governments submit, however, that the unique role 
of PEG channels in providing important programming in the public 
interest and encouraging the free flow of information among all 
segments of the community should be taken into account with 
respect to regulations governing responsibilities of providers of 
programming for PEG access channels. In particular, 
considerations of administrative ease and the prevalence of live 
programming on PEG access channels should support modification 
of the Commission’s proposed rules concerning certification by 
PEG program providers. 


fl. DISCUSSION 
A. PEG Access Channels 


PEG access channels perform the vital function of ensuring that 
a diverse range of programming in the public interest from diverse 
sources is provided on cable systems. Many franchises regularly 
provide for one or more governmental channels which may be 
programmed by a government-related entity or government agency, 
educational channels, which may be programmed by one or more 
local institutions of higher learning or the local school system; and 
public access channels, which may be available for distribution of 
programming by the public on a first-come, first-served basis. 
Governmental channels carry such programming as local 
government meetings and deliberations, school board meetings, 
community events, citizen forums on current events, job bulletin 
boards, and information on availability of government services. 
Educational channels may provide primarily educational and 
informational programming, in many cases at no cost to the viewer. 
The public access channels are often managed by a public access 
organization, independent of the local franchising authority, that 
establishes and administers rules for the distribution of 
programming by the public. The unique nature and important 
function of PEG channels has been recognized by Congress: 


241 


Public access channels are often the video 


equivalent of the speaker’s soap box or the 
electronic parallel to the printed leaflet. They 
provide groups and individuals who generally have 
not had access to the electronic media with the 
opportunity to become sources of information in the 
electronic marketplace of ideas. PEG channels also 
contribute to an informed citizenry by bringing 
local schools into the home, and by showing the 
public local government at work. 


H.R. Rep. No. 98-934, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 30 (1984). 


Given the wide array of PEG programming and the potential 
administrative burdens of requiring programmers to provide, on a 
program-by-program basis, certification that certain programming 
does not contain obscene material — particularly when a substantial 
amount of the programming on PEG channels is live, the Local 
Governments urge the Commission to modify its proposed rules 
with respect to certification by PEG program providers in certain 
important respects. 

First, the Local Governments urge the FCC to adopt regulations 
that would allow programmers to certify their programs on as broad 
a basis as the programmers deem appropriate. For example, a 
programmer could choose to provide a blanket, rather than 
program-by-program, certification that its programs do not contain 
obscene material. Such certification could be renewed annually, 
and would allow cable operators to place primary responsibility on 
programmers for ensuring that programs containing obscene 
material are not aired on the PEG access channels — without 
unduly burdening the administrative capabilities of those responsible 


for public interest programming. 


Second, the Local Governments submit that some programming 
on PEG access channels, particularly live programming, is not 
amenable to prior certification as to its content. The Local 
Governments therefore urge the FCC to modify its regulations 
governing certification by PEG access providers. Such regulations 
would allow programmers of live formats to certify that they have 
exercised reasonable efforts to ensure that their programs will not 


242 


contain obscene or otherwise proscribed material. This “reasonable 
efforts” certification should apply generally to various PEG formats 
because of the unique nature of PEG access programming. 


Finally, the FCC has suggested that disputes between cable 
operators and programmers of PEG access channels should be 
resolved by franchising authorities at the local level. The Local 
Governments believe that a better approach would be for such 
disputes to be resolved in the judicial system. Such disputes 
ultimately will be resolved in the judicial system; requiring 
franchising authorities to mediate such disputes merely will add an 
additional, inefficient step to resolution of disputes of the 
constitutional issues that inevitably will be decided by courts. This 
is especially true in connection with the PEG access channels, 
where the franchise authority may be the programmer, the editor or 
the facilitator. 


B. Leased Access Channels 


The Local Governments agree with the Commission’s approach 
with respect to programming on leased access channels. 
Programmers, rather than cable operators, should bear the primary 
responsibility for identifying programs containing obscene material 
and for certifying that programs not so identified do not contain 
obscene material. The Local Governments furthermore support 
existing law providing that lock boxes shall be available to block 
access to cable services; nothing in the 1992 Act alters this existing 
law or mandates that lock boxes should be available only to block 
programming on the single leased access channel containing 
indecent programming. Many subscribers may wish to block 
programming on other channels. The 1984 Cable Act is quite 
specific in requiring the availability of lock boxes; this requirement 
should be enforced strictly. 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A). 


Tl. CONCLUSION 


The Local Governments believe that the Commission’s approach 
is sound with respect to implementing Section 10 of the 1992 Act. 
The Commission should take special care, however, to 
accommodate the unique public interest and administrative concerns 
of program providers for PEG access channels by allowing such 


243 


providers to make blanket, rather than program-by-program 
certifications, make only “reasonable effort” certifications with 
respect to live programming not amenable to prior certifications, 
and have disputes with cable operators resolved in the first instance 


by the judicial system. 


December 7, 1992 


Respectfully submitted, 


_/s/_ 
Norman M. Sinel 
Patrick J. Grant 
Stephanie M. Phillipps 
Preeta D. Bansal 


ARNOLD & PORTER 
1200 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 872-6700 


Counsel for the Local Governments 


The problems caused by prohibiting operators from exercising 
editorial discretion over their channels are wel! known. In fact, the 
legislative history of the Act recognizes that the leased and PEG 
access requirements of the 1984 Cable Act have caused operators 
to allow programming on their systems that they and their 
subscribers may find objectionable.‘ But rather than eliminating 
entirely the access requirement in order to avoid these intrusions on 
editorial discretion, the Act imposes a different — and troublesome 
— remedy. It allows operators to deny access to some speech — 
but only to speech that the government defines as objectionable. 


* * ~ 


* — See Statement of Senator Thurmond, 138 CONG. REC. $648 (daily ed. 
Jan. 30, 1992) (“It is truly disturbing that cable companies are forced to 
give [objectionable] programs a public forum and that cable subscribers 
must accept this porn as part of basic cable.”) 


December 7, 1992 


245 
Respectfully submitted, 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVI- 
SION ASSOCIATION, INC. 


By Is/ 


Daniel L. Brenner 


By /s/ 
Diane B. Burstein 


COMMENTS OF TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC. 
* * * 


The courts have repeatedly recognized that, unlike broadcasting, 
cable permits consumers to exercise several levels of control over 
their program selection and viewing.© For example, cable 
subscribers must affirmatively elect to have cable service brought 
into their homes; cable subscribers can request a lockbox from the 
cable operator to block any channel; and, if cable subscribers are 
dissatisfied, they can cancel their subscription at any time. 
Similarly, cable programming is unlike telephony because it is not 
a necessity. 


5 See Jones v. Wilkinson, 800 F.2d 989, 991 (10th Cir. 1986), affd., 
480 U.S. 926 (1987); Cruz v. Ferrel, 755 F.2d 1415, 1419-22 (11th Cir. 
1985). 


247 


Notwithstanding its strong view that leased and PEG access are 
unconstitutional, TCI offers the following comments because its 
systems will be directly and significantly burdened by Commission 
rules issued to implement Section 10. 


In addition to the inherent constitutional problem, there is a 
fundamental internal inconsistency in the schemes for leased access 
and PEG access, particularly as amended by the 1992 Act. On the 
one hand, Congress prevents cable operators from exercising 
control over the content of leased and PEG access channels. 47 
U.S.C. §§ S31(e} and 532(cX2). On the other hand, Congress 
imposes on oper:tors criminal, as well! as civil liability for certain 
programming carried on those channels. 47 U.S.C. § 558. 


> > > 


Positive traps are a form of interdiction that involves inserting 
a jamming carrier at the headend of a cable system between the 
video and audio carrier of a signal. This significantly degrades the 


picture quality and causes a repetitive beep in the audio. 
Subscribers need a device that is attached to the television set to 


descramble the signal. 


Lockboxes are another form of interdiction. Since 1984, cable 
operators have been required to provide lockboxes to requesting 
subscribers. See 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A). In the Notice (para. 
9), the Commission inquires whether, in light of the 1992 Act, 
cable operators should still be required to provide lockboxes. There 
appears to be nothing in the Act that would eliminate that 
requirement. The Commission should also conclude that lockboxes 
are an option for blocking indecent leased access channels in 
satisfaction of the cable operator's obligation under 47 U.S.C. § 
532(j 1B). TCI is not aware of any significant problems with 
lockboxes. To the contrary, lockboxes give subscribers another 
method of controlling their program viewing, a clear goal of 
Section 10 of the Act. Thus, lockboxes, pursuant to the 
requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A), should be an appropriate 
method of satisfying a cable operator's obligation to block indecent 
leased access channels. 


Ls/ 
Michael H. Hammer 
Philip L. Verveer 
Willkie Farr & Gallagher 
Three Lafayette Centre 
1155 21st Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20036-3384 


Its Attorneys 
December 7, 1992 


Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. (“TWE”) has taken 
the position that being compelled to carry leased access (commercial 
use) and public, educational and governmental (“PEG”) 
programming is a violation of TWE’s rights as a First Amendment 
speaker. See Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. v. FCC, 
Civil Action No. 92-2494 (D.D.C. filed Nov. 5, 1992). Yet, 
because TWE and its divisions will be affected by any rules issued 
by the Commission concerning these types of programming, it 
offers the following comments. 

To accomplish Congress’ goals, TWE believes the Commission 
should promulgate rules that: 

+ provide for channel blocking procedures that reflect the 
technological and programming realities of the cable 
industry ; 

* permit cable operators to require certification, notice and 
indemnity regarding indecent material from commercial use 
program providers; 

* recognize that many PEG channels are not administered by 
cable systems, but instead are administered by an agency of 
the local government or by a community access 
organization; 


250 


to require certification and indemnity from PEG program 
providers; 
- establish a procedure whereby disputes regarding prohibited 
PEG programming are resolved; and 
+ adopt a definition of “indecent” and “sexually explicit” 
material that incorporates a community standard “for the 
cable medium” as measured by the “average cable user” on 
program and the merit of the work. 
TWE believes the recommendations set forth above fully comport 
with Congressional policy and would best serve the public interest. 


COMMENTS OF TIME WARNER 
ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY, L.P. 


Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. (“TWE”) 
of Proposed Rule Making (“NPRM”), released November 10, 1992 
and relating to the implementation. of Section 10 of the Cable 
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (the 
“1992 Cable Act”). 

Introducti 

TWE is a partnership, which is primarily owned (through 
subsidiaries) and fully managed by Time Warner Inc., a publicly 
traded Delaware corporation. TWE is comprised principally of 
three unincorporated divisions: Time Warner Cable (“TWC"), 
operates pay television programming services; and Warner Bros., 
which is a major producer of theatrical motion pictures and 


251 


TWC, which is the TWE division most affected by Section 10 
of the 1992 Cable Act, owns and operates cable systems in 
approximately 1,000 franchise areas throughout the United States. 
As required by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (the 
“1984 Cable Act”) and many local franchises, these systems carry 
both leased access and public, educational and governmental 
(“PEG”) access channels. Because of this, TWC and its divisions 
are directly impacted by the Comunission’s proposed rules relating 
to indecent programming and other types of material on cable 
access channels. 


One striking example of a TWC cable operator that will be 
immediately and directly affected by the Commission's rules is 
Time Warner Cable of New York City (“TWCNY”), which serves, 
among other parts of that City, over 250,000 subscribers in the 
southern portion of Manhattan. TWCNY’s Manhattan system has 
over 70 channels and offers more than 10 leased access and 5 PEG 
channels.' On both its leased access and PEG channels TWCNY is 
required under the 1984 Cable Act to carry programming that may 
at times be indecent, which it otherwise would not choose to 
provide. Indeed, on leased access Channel 35 TWCNY has at least 
five hours daily of “adult” programming from at least 9 producers 
offering sexually explicit programming. Most of the adult 
programmers offer one or more programs on a daily or weekly 
basis on time they lease by agreement from TWCNY in periods 
from 13 to 78 weeks. 


For example, TWCNY in required to carry on Channel 35 in 
Manhattan a series entitled “Midnight Blue” twice a week from 
midnight to 1:00 a.m. Portions of “Midnight Blue” include 
excerpts from sexually explicit video cassettes and films showing in 


counterpart). On Channel 35, each day from 10:00 p.m. to 4:30 
a.m. is usually fully booked with sexually explicit programming and 


' In 1993, TWCNY is committed to provide 9 PEG channels. 


252 


the demand for additional time remains high. Most of these 
programs are provided on videotape and require the system to 
handle and process dozens of video cassettes every week. 


In addition, various other TWC cable systems carry 
programming that is considered by some viewers in their localities 
to be indecent. For example, TWC’s system in Austin, Texas was 
provided programming by a public access programmer that 
combined nude scenes from a movie, photographs of aborted 
fetuses, and a man shooting himself in the head. TWC’s cable 
system in Indianapolis, Indiana has carried on its public access 
channel “safe sex” programming, which includes sexually graphic 
descriptions. And, TWC’s cable system in Cincinnati, Ohio has 
carried on its public access channel nude sports programming 
supplied by a nudist organization. 


In its pending action against the Commission, Time Warner 
Entertainment Company, L.P. v. FCC, Civil Action No. 92-2494 
(D.D.C. filed Nov. 5, 1992), TWE takes the position that the 
leased access and PEG channel requirements (Sections 611 and 612 
of the 1984 Cable Act (47 U.S.C. §§ 531, 532) and Section 
7(b)(4)(B) of the 1992 Cable Act), as well as the must carry channel 
requirements (Sections 4 and 5 of the 1992 Cable Act) 
unconstitutionally compel it to speak in a manner that it would not 
otherwise choose. This is a violation of TWE’s rights as a First 
Amendment speaker. In addition, TWE challenges the leased 
access, PEG and must carry requirements because they seize, 
without adequate compensation, substantial portions of its facilities 
(an average of roughly more than 30% of TWC’s systems’ channel 
capacity) and transfer control of that capacity to other speakers. 
This is a violation of the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. 
In submitting these Comments, TWE specifically reserves, and does 
not waive, its constitutional rights, and these Comments are filed 
without prejudice to TWE’s constitutional challenges. 

Notwithstanding TWE'’s position on being forced to carry leased 
access and PEG programming, but recognizing that the Commission 
must act pursuant to the obligations imposed by the 1992 Cable 
Act, since TWE and its divisions will be further burdened directly 
by any rules issued by the Commission, it offers the following 


253 


comments regarding the proposed rules for carriage of material that 
is indecent on leased access channels and material that is obscene, 
indecent or solicits or promotes unlawful conduct on PEG channels. 
I. Proposed Rules Regarding Indecent Programming on Leased 

Access Channels. 

Section 10(b) of the 1992 Cable Act directs the Commission, 
within six months from October 5, 1992, to promulgate regulations 
limiting the access to indecent programming on leased access 
channels, to the extent that cable operators have not voluntarily 
done so pursuant to Section 10(a), by (i) placing all indecent 
programming on a separate channel, (ii) blocking the channel unless 
the subscriber requests access thereto in writing, and (iii) requiring 
programmers to inform cable operators in advance if the 
programming they are providing is indecent. 

A. The Definition of “Indecent”? 


Section 10(b) of the 1992 Cable Act does not define “indecent” . 
The Commission is proposing to adopt the definitional language of 
Section 10(a) as the definition of indecent. The definition should, 
as proposed, incorporate a community standard “for the cable 
medium”. Additionally, the rule should make clear that the 
standard is that of the “average cable viewer” on a nationwide 
basis, much as the Commission has done in the broadcast area.’ 


? Although TWE discusses below the proper definition of “indecent,” 
nothing herein concedes that it is constitutionally permissible for the 
government to prohibit or restrict the carriage of indecent programming on 
cable television. 


> See In re Infinity Broadcasting Corp., 3 F .C.C. Red. 930, 933 (1987), 
remanded on other grounds sub nom. Action for Children’s Television v. 
FCC, 852 F.2d 1332 (D.C. Cir, 1988) (“[T}he purpose of ‘contemporary 
community standards’ [is] to ensure that material is judged neither on the 
basis of a decisionmaker’s personal opinion, nor by its effect on a 
particularly sensitive or insensitive person or group... . Hence, in a 
Commission proceeding for indecency, in which the Commission applies 
a concept of ‘contemporary commwvnity standards for the broadcast 

(continued. ..) 


254 
Moreover, the rule should also include an indication that in 


judging whether the material is patently offensive, it must be judged 
within the context of the whole program and the merit of the work. 
The Commission has recognized this approach in the broadcast 
area.‘ Any reluctance to give the merit of the work significant 
weight in the determination of indecency in the broadcast area 
should not impede such an approach in the cable medium. 


continued) 


medium,’ indecency will be judged by the standard of an average 
broadcast viewer or listener.”) (footnotes omitted) 


‘ 


See Infinity, 3 F.C.C. Red. at 932: 


“16. As we stated in our April rulings, and as we re-emphasize today, 
the question of whether material is patently offensive requires careful 
consideration of context. The Supreme Court has said that the term 
‘context’ encompasses a ‘host of variables’. These variables, whose 
interplay will vary depending on the facts presented, include, as the 
Court noted, an examination of the actual words or depictions in 
context to see if they are, for example, ‘vulgar’ or ‘shocking,’ a 
review of the manner in which the language or depictions are 
portrayed, an analysis of whether allegedly offensive material is 
isolated or fleeting, a consideration of the ability of the medium of 
expression to separate adults from children, and a determination of the 
presence of children in the audience. 


“17. The merit of a work is also one of the many variables that make 
wp a work's ‘context,’ as the Court implicitly recognized in Pacifica 
when it contrasted the Carlin monologue to Elizabethan comedies and 
works of Chaucer. But merit is simply one of many variables, and it 
would give this particular variable undue importance if we were to 
single it out for greater weight or attention than we give other 
variables. We decline to do so in deciding the three cases before us. 
We must, therefore, reject an approach that would hold that if a work 
has merit, it is per se not indecent. At the same time, we must reject 
the notion that a work’s ‘context’ can be reviewed in a manner that 
artificially excludes merit from the host of variables that ordinarily 
comprise context.” (footnotes omitted) 


255 


There are good reasons to adopt for cable television a definition 
of “indecent” more narrow than those developed by the 
Commission for application to broadcast programming and 
telephonic communications. Cable television is not freely available 
like broadcast television or radio, viewers have affirmatively to 
subscribe to get it and cable television lends itself well to opt-out 
mechanisms such as lock box devices and signal scrambling.* 


Therefore, TWE respectfully submits that subpart(a) of the 
proposed rule read: 


“(a) A cable operator may enforce prospectively a written and 
published policy of prohibiting on leased access channels 
programming that the cable operator reasonably believes 
describes or depicts sexual or excretory activities or organs, in 
a patently offensive manner, as measured by contemporary 
community standards for the cable medium, and when judged 
in the context of the entire program, including the program’s 
overall merit.” 


B. Blocking of Indecent Programming 


Section 10(b) requires cable operators to place on a “single 
channel” all indecent commercial use programming and then to 
block that channel. Congress’ clear intention in passing this 
provision was to limit children’s access to indecent programming, 
and not necessarily to limit the amount of indecent programming 
that a cable system could carry to that which may fit on one 
channel. The Commission, therefore, should make clear that cable 
operators may, if they choose, place indecent commercial use 


* — There are authorities rejecting as unconstitutional on grounds such as 
those stated in the text the extension to cable television of overbroad 
definitions of indecent programming. See, e.g., Cruz v. Ferre, 755 F.2d 
1415 (11th Cir. 1985); Community Television of Utah, Inc. v. Roy City, 
555 F. Supp. 1164 (D. Utah 1982); see also Quincy Cable TV, Inc. v. 
FCC, 768 F.2d 1434, 1453-54 (D.C. Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 
1169 (1986); Cox Cable Communications, Inc. v. United States, 774 F. 
Supp. 633, 636-37 (M.D. Ga. 1991) (tending to extend to cable television 
the robust First Amendment protection accorded to the print media). 


256 


programming on more than one channel as long as any channel that 
in designated for indecent programming is blocked. 

To block a channel designated for indecent programming 
requires certain technical adjustments that will vary from system to 
system depending on a system’s technological development. 
Because of the differences in system technologies that exist, the 
choice of the mechanism to accomplish blocking should be left to 
the cable operator. In addition, because the blocking will generate 
potentially burdensome technical and administrative expenses, cable 
operators should be allowed to recoup these expenses from either 
subscribers or program providers. 


Even in systems that are fully addressable, and which can 
thereby block channels by the relatively straight-forward approach 
of scrambling the signal, it will take time to make the necessary 
technical adjustments and to permit the operator to notify 
subscribers if it wishes. Moreover, certain local authorities require 
advance notice before an operator can make certain changes to its 
service or programming.* Operators will need sufficient lead time 
to put in place the blocked channel. Therefore, TWE proposes that 
operators with addressable systems have at least 180 days from the 
effective date of the rule to comply. 


As recognized by the Commission, to date the problem of 
blocking programming not desired by the subscribers has been 
addressed by supplying a locking device to subscribers, pursuant to 
Section 624(d)2)(A) of the 1984 Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 
§ 544(d)(2)(A)). There has been no showing that these locking 
devices have been ineffective in keeping indecent programming 
from children. With this mechanism available, and to accommodate 
the technological problems, the rule should permit systems that are 


* See, e.g., New York Executive Law § 824-a(1) (1992) ("Every cable 
television company shall notify the [state] commission of any network 
change or significant programming change no later than the later occurring 
of forty-five days prior to the network change or significant programming 
change or five business days after the cable television company first knows 
of such change."). 


257 


not fully addressable to be in compliance within 10 years from the 
effective date of the rule.’ 

Additionally, in certain areas channel capacity constraints may 
result in indecent programming being cablecast on the same channel 
as non-indecent programming. On other systems where there is 
little indecent programming, the operator may prefer not to devote 
an entire channel to such programming to avoid leaving large 
blocks of fallow time on the channel. Therefore, the rule should 
make clear that the channel .eed be blocked only during the times 
indecent programming is being carried. If operators cannot have 
this leeway, producers of non-indecent programming may well have 
difficulties selling advertising since such programming will be 
viewed only by those interested enough to request access to the 
channel. Moreover, certain providers of non-indecent programming 
may not want time adjacent or near to indecent programming. 
These circumstances make it important that the system operator also 
be able to limit the time periods during which indecent 
programming may be cablecast, so as not to interfere with non- 
indecent programming and to minimize the blocking and unblocking 
of the signal during the day. Such restrictions are consistent with 
the power granted to the operator by Section 10(a) to bar ail 
indecent programming if it so chooses. 


Similarly, in certain systems, such as TWCNY’s Manhattan 
system, more than one programmer may request a particular time 
slot and want to cablecast indecent programming in that slot. If the 
operator has provided only a single blocked channel for indecent 
programming,* the rules should permit the operator to choose one 
programmer over the other for cablecast on that single channel 
without facing the possibility of having to defend against an action 
for denial of access under Section 612(d) or (e)(1) of the 1984 


” This is similar to the 10-year delayed compliance date with the buy 
through prohibitions in § 3(b)(8)(B) of the 1992 Cable Act. 


* — Since, as noted above, an operator may bar all indecent programming, 
it surely may not be required to offer additional channels for indecent 
leased access programming above what it has voluntarily chosen to 
provide. 


258 


Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 532(d) or (e)(1)), or for denial of access or 
imposing unreasonable terms and conditions of carriage by 
relegating one producer to an allegedly less desirable time slot on 
the channel.’ 


® — Subsections (d) and (e)(1) of § 612 provide as follows: 


"(d) Any person aggrieved by the failure or refusal of a cable 
operator to make channel capacity available for use pursuant to 
this section may bring an action in the district court of the United 
States for the judicial district in which the cable system is located 
to compel that such capacity be made available. If the court finds 
that the channel capacity sought by such person has not been 
made available in accordance with this section, or finds that the 
price, terms, or conditions established by the cable operator are 
unreasonable, the court may order such system to make available 
to such person the channel capacity sought, and further determine 
the appropriate price, terms, or conditions for such use consistent 
with subsection (c), and may award actual damages if it deems 
such relief appropriate. In any such action, the court shall not 
consider any price, term or condition established between an 
operator and an affiliate for comparable services. 


"(e)(1) Any person aggrieved by the failure or refusal of a cable 
operator to make channel capacity available pursuant to this 
section may petition the Commission for relief under this 
subsection upon a showing of prior adjudicated violations of this 
section. Records of previous adjudications resulting in a court 
determination that the operator has violated this section shall be 
considered as sufficient for the showing necessary under this 
subsection. If the Commission finds that the channel capacity 
sought by such person has not been made available in accordance 
with this section, or that the price, terms, or conditions 
established by such system are unreasonable under subsection (c), 
the Commission shall, by rule or order, require such operator to 
make available such channel capacity under price, terms, and 
conditions consistent with subsection (c).” 


259 
Therefore, TWE respectfully suggests that subpart (b) of the 


proposed rule read as follows: 


“ (b) All programs intended for carriage on channels designated 
for commercial leased access use under this section and 
identified by the program provider as indecent shall be placed 
on one or more channels designated by the cable operator for 
indecent programming, except for such programs prohibited by 
the cable operator pursuant to paragraph (a) above. A cable 
operator shall block any such channel at least during the times 
when indecent programming is being carried except for 
subscribers requesting access to such channel in writing. The 
cable operator may group time slots to be made available for 
indecent programming in order to facilitate the administration 
and the sale of time on these channels without such action 
constituting the exercise of editorial control subject to 47 
U.S.C. § 532(c)(2). 


(1) For cable systems that are fully addressable, this 
paragraph (b) is effective 10 days after publication in the 
Federal Register. 


(2) For cable systems that are not fully addressable, this 
paragraph (b) shall not apply until the earlier of: 


(A)the time at which the cable system is fully 
addressable; or 


(B) 10 years after the effective date of this rule. 


(3) In those circumstances where the time requested by the 
program provider is already under contract, the cable operator 
shall offer the program provider time available on the channel 
as Close as possible to the time requested. If no other time is 
available, the cable operator is entitled to refuse to carry the 
programming on its system until capacity is available for 
indecent programming, upon further application by the program 
provider. 


(4) In those circumstances where two or more program 
providers request the same time period on a channel designated 
for indecent programming, the cable operator can select which 


260 


program provider will program that time period without such 
action constituting the exercise of editorial control subject to 47 
U.S.C. § 532(c)(2).” 


CP Provider Must Give Notice By Certificat 


Section 10(b) of the 1992 Act requires that program 
providers notify the cable operator regarding indecent programming 
they intend to offer in order to trigger the operator’s obligations to 
restrict access to such programming. It is essential, to protect the 
cable operator from undeserved liability, that the rules require that 
this notice be clearly set forth in writing and timely and that the 
cable operator be able to rely on it. In cable systems such as 
TWCNY’s Manhattan system as an example, to date most indecent 
programming has been contained in series programming where the 
program provider contracts for time (in “%-hour, hour or larger 
blocks of time on one or more specific days each week) for periods 
of from 13 weeks to as long as 18 months.” Once the time has 
been contracted for, the program usually is cablecast on a specific 
channel for the duration of the contract. Programmers should not 
be permitted to change their minds during the contract period and 
give notice of intention to submit indecent programming thereby 
requiring a possible change in channel placement of their 
programming. Although in Manhattan most contracts permit the 
system to relocate the program, such moves are disruptive for 
subscribers and costly tv the operator, and while sometimes 
necessary, are usually avoided. Therefore, if a series program 
provider is able to insert and give notice of indecent programming 
within the series term whenever it desires, and the series is not 
already on the blocked channel, there could be serious 
administrative, scheduling and expense burdens on the operator. 


To address these issues, the rule should permit the operator to 
require each leased access program provider to give the statutory 


‘© While these programmers lease time at a specified price, as the 
legislative history makes clear, the form of transaction for purchasing the 
time is not limited to a lease, but can include “fees per subscriber, profit 
sharing or any combination of these arrangements”. 130 Cong. Rec 
H12239 (daily ed. Oct. 11, 1984) (statement of Rep. Wirth). 


261 


notice at the time it contracts for time on the system in the form of 


prepared two months in advance. In practice, this means, for example. 
that the November line-up must begin production on September | 


262 


cable systems will need different lengths of prior notice, the rule 
should make clear that cable operators are allowed to require that 
notice (in the form of the required certification) be given a 


reasonable amount of time prior to the requested carriage, 
depending on their individual needs. 


The notice should be required to be in writing to avoid later 
confusion or unnecessary disputes. Retention of these notices 
should be for a period of 18 months which is consistent with other 
similar record retention requirements in the cable area."’ 


The Commission also has asked whether the operator should be 
held harmless from liability if it does not receive timely notice from 
the program provider. Since the cable operator is already immune 
from civil and criminal liability for indecent programming cablecast 
on leased access channels (47 U.S.C. § 558), TWE assumes this 
concern relates to possible sanctions by the Commission for 4 
violation of this new rule. 


The operator should be held harmless in those circumstances 
because without such assurance, cable operators might feel 
compelled to prescreen all or portions of leased access 
programming to try to insure that no indecent programming is 
included — a task that is expensive, far from easy and has proven 
troublesome even for justices of the Supreme Court. The burden 
and expense of such prescreening outweighs whatever additional 
comfort that might give to the Commission that indecent 
programming would not inadvertently be made available. Indeed, 
leased access programming may be delivered live or by satellite 
feed instead of by presubmitted videocassette making notice even 
more critical. Moreover, failure to provide this immunity would be 
inconsistent with the objective of the statute to place the burden in 
this area squarely on the program provider. 

Finally, the Commission should specifically authorize the cable 
operators to require indemnity from program providers for breach 
of their notice or certification obligations. If program providers 


% See 47 C.F.R. § 76.225(c) (1991) (Commercial Limits in Children’s 
Programs); 47 U.S.C. § SO3b\6)\B). 


263 


breach their certifications, cable operators, through no fault of their 
own, could suffer both liability and legal expense. Accordingly, 
that expense should be placed on the party at fault — the program 
provider that breached its representations. 


TWE respectfully proposes that subpart (c) be modified and 
supplemented as follows: 


“(c) Cable operators are authorized to require program 
providers on leased access channels that lease or otherwise 
contract for time to certify to cable operators, a reasonable 
time prior to cablecast determined by the cable operators, 
that they plan to include indecent material as defined in 
paragraph (a) above in their programming or that they will 
not include any indecent material as defined in paragraph 
(a) above in their programming for the duration of the lease 
or contract period. Cable operators are also authorized to 
require program providers to certify in their contracts that 
they will not include obscene material in their 
programming. Such certification can be required to be in 
the contract for time or in some other available manner, at 
authorized to require program providers to indemnify cable 
operators completely for any liability or expense the cable 
operators may incur in relation to the programming 
submitted for cablecast. 


“(d) The failure to limit indecent programming to a blocked 
channel as required by this rule shal! not subject the cable 
operator to sanction by the Commission unless it is 
demonstrated that the operator had received the required 
written notice from the program provider in a timely 
fashion.” 
Il. Proposed Rules Regarding Public, Educational and 
Governmental Access Channels. 


Section 10(c) of the 1992 Cable Act directs the Commission to 
promulgate regulations that enable cable operators to prohibit on 
PEG channels programming that “contains obscene material, 
sexually explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting 


264 


unlawful conduct”. As was stated in the NPRM, Section 1U(c) does 
not require cable operators to prohibit such programming, it simply 
makes clear that cable operators have the right to do so if they 
choose. 


The proposed rule, however, needs certain clarifications. First, 
the rule fails to recognize that many PEG channels are not 
administered by cable systems, but instead are administered by an 
agency of the local government or a community access 
organization. For example, in Erie, Pennsylvania, a Public Access 
Authority, established by the City Council pursuant to State 
legislation, completely administers public access channels, in 
Indianapolis, Indiana, a Citizens Advisory Committee, established 
by franchise, consults regarding appropriate programming on PEG 


completely administers three public access channels.“ The 
proposed rule, therefore, should be amended in its reference to “[a] 
cable operator” to refer instead to “[a] cable operator or 
organization, designated in the franchise or by the franchising 
authority to oversee the operation of public, educational or 
governmental access facilities on a system”. 


Second, the NPRM recognizes (p. 6 n.11) the congressional 
intent that “sexually explicit” as used in Section 10(c) should be 
interpreted to mean “indecent” as used with respect to the leased 
access restrictions. The proposed rule, however, uses the “sexually 
explicit” term. Not all sexually explicit programming is indecent. 
To avoid any confusion, TWE proposes that the rule use “indecent” 
as defined in the leased access rules instead of the term “sexually 


explicit” ."° 


In addition to these three public access channels, Austin also has one 
educational channel administered by a local community college, two 
educational channels administered by a local school district, one 
governmental channel administered by the county and one governmental 
channel administered by the City of Austin. 


'S The use of terminology in this area is difficult and important and one’s 
ability to understand it is not made easier by the language of the Cable 
(continued...) 


265 


Third, the rule should reflect, as the NPRM recognizes, that a 
cable operator or local access organization may enforce its policy 
of prohibiting the defined programming by requiring certification by 
PEG users, in their contracts for PEG access or otherwise, that 
their programming does not fit into any of the rule’s three defined 
categories. This approach promotes Congress’ intent. Just prior to 
Section 10(c)’s passage, Senator Wirth, the original author of the 
PEG provisions, stated that through Section 10(c) Congress would 
“give a very clear signal to the cable companies that, in fact, they 
can police their own systems”. 138 Cong. Rec. S 650 (daily ed 
Jan. 30, 1992). 


Such certification is also justified as a means for cable operators 
to balance their power under the rule on the one hand, and the 1984 


channels’”. However, the statute's text only refers to programming that 
has been rated R, NC-17 or X by the Motion Picture Association of 
America, and the R rating is not equivalent to “sexually explicit” or 
“indecent” material. An R rating may be bestowed on a film for “hard 

wt dy or nudity within sensual scenes, or drug 
abuse”. Jack Valenti, The Voluntary Movie Rating System 9 (1991). 


actions brought by the producers of adult programs on a leased 
access channel against TW , the plaintiffs claim that representations 
(continued...) 


266 


Local access organizations as well may need such indemnification 


since they may not have immunity for actions they take regarding 
the channels they administer ."’ 


Fourth, the NPRM recognizes that procedures need to be 
developed to govern disputes between the cable operators and PEG 
programmers and indicates the Commission's inclination to leave 
those disputes to be handled at the local level. While TWE agrees 
with that approach, it suggests that certain limits be put on such 
local power. As discussed above with respect to leased access, 
cable operators must be able to rely on the certification of the 
program providers. However, in some instances, an operator may 
in good faith come to the conclusion that the certification is 
inaccurate. Accordingly, when a programmer certifies that its 
programming does not contain any of the defined material, yet the 
cable operator finds that it does, the cable operator’s finding should 
have a presumption of validity. Moreover, programming which the 
cable operator determines should be prohibited from cablecast under 
the rule need not be cablecast until the programmer challenges the 
cable operator’s decision and successfully proves that it does not 
fall within a prohibited category. Finally, cable operators should 
be given the right to obtain an assurance from the local franchise 
authority that if the operators reasonably and in good faith 
determine that PEG programming falls within a prohibited category, 
they will not be held liable by the local franchise authority for 


'*(.. continued) 

and warranties clauses and indemnification clauses in contracts are 
unreasonable in part because they constitute the exercise of editorial 
control by the operator. Media Ranch, Inc. v. Manhattan Cable 
Television, Inc., No. 90 Civ. 7218 (S.D.N.Y. filed Nov. 9, 1990); Gay 
Cable Network, Inc. v. Manhattan Cable Television, Inc., No. 91 Civ. 
7450 (S.D.N.Y. filed Nov. i, 1991). 


‘’ Furthermore, the Commission should make clear that cable operators 
can require indemnity from a local access organization or franchise 
authority that requires cable operators to carry programming from which 
they may incur liability. 


267 


breaching an obligation under their franchises to provide PEG 
programming. 

TWE respectfully submits that the proposed rules regarding 
PEG programming should read as follows: 


“(e) A cable operator or organization designated in the 
franchise or by the franchising authority to oversee the 
operation of public, educational or governmental access 
facilities on a system may prohibit the use of any channel 
capacity on such facilities for any programming that contains 
obscene material, indecent material as defined in paragraph (a) 
above, or material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct.” 


“(f) A cable operator or organization designated in the franchise 
or by the franchising authority to oversee the operation of 
public, educational or governmental access facilities on a system 
are authorized to require that public, educational or 
governmental program providers (including governments or 
access organizations acting as program providers) (1) certify, by 
contract or otherwise, that they will not submit programming 
that contains obscene material, indecent material as defined in 
paragraph (a) above, or material soliciting or promoting 
unlawful conduct, and (2) agree that they will indemnify the 
cable operator or organization designated in the franchise or by 
the franchising authority to oversee the operation of public, 
educational or governmental access facilities on a system for 
any liability or expense they may incur in relation to the 
programming.” 

“(g) In any dispute brought under paragraphs (e) or (f), there 
shall be a presumption that the findings of the cable operator 
material as defined in paragraph (a) above, or material soliciting 
or promoting unlawful conduct are reasonable and in good faith 
unless shown by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary. 
Any programming that the cable operator, or organization 
designated in the franchise or by the franchising authority to 
oversee the operation of public, educational or governmental 
access facilities on a system, determines to contain obscene 
material, indecent material as defined in paragraph (a) above, 


268 


or material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct shall not 
be cablecast until the program provider challenges that deter- 
munation and there is a final decision by a competent authority 
that the programming does not fall within one of the prohibited 
categories set out in paragraph (f).” 


“(h) Cable operators are authorized to require local 
governments or access organizations to indemnify them 
completely for any liability or expense the cable operators incur 
as a result of indecent programming being carried on their 
systems which the local governments or access organizations 
control.” 


“() A cable operator is authorized to require a franchising 
authority to provide its assurance that it will not hold the cable 
operator liable for breaching an obligation under its franchise 
to provide public, educational and governmental programming 
if the cable operator in good faith withholds programming 
because it finds it to be within one of the prohibited categories 


set Out in paragraph (f).” 


I] Obscene Programming on Leased Access and PEG 
Channels. 


Congress in amending Section 612(h) of the 1984 Cable Act 
appears to provide coextensive power in both the cable operator and 
the local franchise authority to prohibit programming that is 
“obscene, or is in conflict with community standards in that it is 
ewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent or is otherwise unprotected by 
the Constitution of the United States”. Section 612(h), as amended, 
‘s unartfully drafted and creates the possibility of situations where 
the local franchise authority determines that certain programming 
violates Section 612(h) while the cable operator does not believe 
that the programming violates Section 612(h). If in fact the 
franchise authority can order the cable operator not to cablecast 
such programming, then the cable operator faces possible action 
against it by the program provider pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 
532(d) or (e)(1). Therefore, the Commission should authorize the 
cable operator to require an indemnification from the local franchise 
authority concerning any liability or expense incurred by the 


269 


operator because of the action by the franchise authority prohibiting 
programming from the leased access channels. 


With particular reference to “obscene” programming, Congress 
has opened up cable operators to liability for cablecasting such 
programming. See 1992 Cable Act § 10(d). This liability, 
however, places a very high price on the difficult and complicated 
decision that cable operators must make regarding the ever- 
troubling question of what is obscene. If a cable operator labors 
over whether certain material is obscene and in the end decides that 
it is not, that cable operator, even though it in good faith allowed 
the material to be cablecast, is nevertheless subject to possible 
criminal and civil liability regarding programming it did not 
voluntarily choose to cablecast in the first place. In order to 
alleviate the unfair exposure that the cable operator now faces if it 
cablecasts a leased or PEG program that is later determined to be 
obscene, the Commission should provide the cable operator 
immunity from state and local law for the cablecast of any obscene 
programming on leased access or PEG channels. 


TWE respectfully submits that the proposed rules be 
supplemented with the following: 


“(j) Cable operators are authorized to require local franchise 
authorities to indemnify them completely for any liability or 
expense the cable operators incur as a result of the franchise 
authorities prohibiting the cable operators from cablecasting 


programming pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532(h).” 


“(k) Cable operators shall not incur any liability under state or 
local law for any program that involves obscene material which 
is carried on any channel designated for public, educational, or 
governmental use or on any other channel obtained under 47 
U.S.C. § 532 or under similar arrangements.” 


270 

Conclusion 
With the understanding that TWE has taken a position against 
its cable systems being forced to carry leased access and PEG 
programming, TWE has appended hereto recommended rules to 
implement Section 10 of the 1992 Cable Act and respectfully 

submits them for the Commission’s adoption. 
Respectfully submitted, 


TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT 
COMPANY, L.P. 


_/s/ 
Stuart W. Gold 


Cravath, Swaine & Moore 
Worldwide Plaza 

825 Eighth Avenue 

New York, New York 10019 
(212) 474-1000 

Its Attorneys. 


December 7, 1992 


271 


December 4, 1992 
VIA FEDERAL EXPRESS 


Alfred C. Sikes - Chairman 

Federal Communications Commission 
1919 M. Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 30554 


Re: Public Access Programming 
Dear Chairman Sikes: 


I am writing to you because I have recently become aware of 
and alarmed about sexually explicit adult programming cable cast 
on my public access cable channel. I live in Tampa, Florida and | 
am an attorney as well as a wife and mother. My public access 
channel is channel 12, situated between ABC on Channel 10 and 
CBS on Channel 13. While switching channels one evening, I saw 
scenes that I couldn’t believe were on at all, but especially during 
prime time. Totally nude women were pole dancing and lap 
dancing, squatting and gyrating so that their genitals were in full 
view. I have since seen a tape of a totally naked man dancing and 
screaming obscenities and have become aware that such 
programming is even shown on Saturday mornings. I am 
concerned about the negative effect of such programming on our 
children. 


David Elkind, Professor of Child Development at Tufts 
University, has this to say about the effect of nudity on television 
on our children: 


“In what I call the postmodern family,” he says, “we have 
this new image of the child as competent and sophisticated. 
Adults have this perception that children can handle all this 
stuff. . . But I disagree. I think children find it most 


272 


disturbing, hurtful and damaging. Any they wonder, Why 
am I being allowed to see this? Why isn’t anyone saying, 
Kids don’t need to see this stuff. Why isn’t anyone looking 
out for my interest?” Newsweek, November 2, 1992. 


A friend, Amy Lerom and I have spoken with Tampa Mayor 
Sandra Freedman, the Chairman of the City Council Joe Greco, 
made a presentation to our Local Cable Advisory Committee and 
the Hillsborough County Commission. Everyone says there is little 
they can do to limit or regulate this adult programming. Tapes 
have been presented to the State Attorney’s Office and were not 
considered criminally obscene. As an attorney, I understand that 
this material, unless adjudged obscene by a court of law, is 
protected by the First Amendment. Therefore, Mrs. Lerom and I 
are presenting three proposals that we feel are the least restrictive 
ways to achieve a balance between the interest of our children and 
the interest of free speech. 


We are not asking that sexually explicit/indecent material be 
banned or that its contents be changed or censored in any way. We 
are asking that it be made available at a time and in a manner so 
that it is accessible to adults but not children. These 
recommendations are set forth in the enclosed Comments to 


Proposed Rule Making. 


We, as parents, need this commission to help us protect our 
children by adding these three /ogical and simple recommendations 
to the existing FCC Regulations. 


I urge the FCC to promulgate rules regulating adult 
programming on public access cable channels. 


Sincerely, 


By: _/s/_ 
Virginia B. Bogue 


By: /si_ 
Amy Lerom 


We are concerned about children being exposed to sexually 
explicit/indecent programming on PEG channels. 


Section 10 of the Cable Act of 1992 allows the cable operator 
the option of prohibiting sexually explicit/indecent programming on 
Public, Educational and Governmental Access Channels. However, 
if the cable operator opts to allow or continue sexually 
explicit/indecent programming, there are no provisions provided to 
regulate the time or manner in which sexually explicit programming 
is presented. Cable operators are liable only for programming 
which reaches the level of obscenity. 


Therefore, we urge the Commission to adopt the following rules 
to regulate sexually explicit/indecent programming on cable PEG 
channels: 


1. Move the public access channel to channel 50 or above so 
that it is less likely for children to unintentionally be exposed to 
adult content. 


2. Require all sexually explicit/indecent programming to be 
shown only after midnight and before 6:00 a.m. so that it will be 
less accessible to teenagers and children. 


3. Cable operators providing PEG channels must provide: 


(a) Written notification at time of cable subscription 
informing the subscriber of adult programming on 
designated channels and of the subscriber's option to 
lock out these channels free of charge. 


(b) Notification of adult programming and free lockout on 
monthly billing statements, including a phone number 
which can be called to lock out channels immediately. 


274 


4. For the purpose of Section 10, sexually explicit/indecent 
material shall be defined as including, but not limited to, the 
following: 


Frontal nudity, nude dancing, sado-masochistic behavior, 
excretory activities, exposed genitalc and fondling. 


5. Interpretation of “sexually explicit/indecent” shall be made 
by Local Cable Advisory Committees. 


/s/ 
Virginia B. Bogue 
2625 Jetton Avenue 
Tampa, Florida 33629 
(813) 253-0831 


Ls/ 
Amy Lerom 
816 South Poinsettia Drive 
Tampa, Florida 33629 
(813) 872-6865 


275 


City of Tampa, Office of Cable Communication 


Letterhead 


COMMENTS ON PROPOSED RULE MAKING 
Adopted November 5, 1992: Released: November 10, 1992 


Comments Date: December 7, 1992 


By: City of Tampa 
Office of Cable Communication 
306 East Jackson Street 
Tampa, Florida 33602 


Attention: John M. McGrath, Operations Improvement 
\dmini 


Background: 
The City of Tampa, a po)tical subdivision of the State of 
Florida, is located on the west coast of the state. 


The City of Tampa (125 square miles) is served by Jones 
Intercable Venture Fund 12 (B, C, D), a 60 channel system offering 
a 47 channel basic cable service package to approximately 55,000 
subscribers 


The City of Tampa has within the last few years seen a 
marked increase in programming on its Public Access channels 
Some of this increased programming is perceived by many of the 
City’s residents to be vulgar, obscene, and a detrimental influence 
on minors. The programs in controversy have included visual 
depiction of male and female nudity, including but not limited to. 


276 


genitalia, simulated sexual activity, and/or sexually related physical 
contact between performers and audience members, profanity, 
alleged drug and alcohol abuse as well as acts of masochism and 
violence. 

Tapes containing examples of the above ceferenced activity 
has been referred to the local State Attorney's Office for possible 
criminal prosecution under the State of Florida's obscenity statutes. 
This Office has to date not yet initiated prosecution. It is perceived 
at this point in time that while many of the activities involved may 
be “indecent” they may not necessarily rise to the level of obscenity 
set forth in the state statutes. 


The City, as a result, finds itself severely restricted in its 
efforts to be responsive to those members of the community who 
object to the availability of the programming in question. 
Clarification of the 1992 Cable Act's provisions contained in this 
proposed rule making are, therefore, of paramount importance to 
the City of Tampa. Towards that end, we submit the following 
comments : 

INTRODUCTION 

l. N/A 

2. Liability to cable operations for access programming should 
be extended to include not only obscene programming but 
also those areas of speech otherwise protected by the 

Constitution as well. The current amendment will, however, 

encourage the cable operator to join with the local 

franchising authority in taking affirmative steps to preclude 
the transmission of obscene programming. 
3. N/A 


LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS: VOLUNTARY PROHIBITION 
BY CABLE OPERATORS 


4 The language of Section 10, amending Section 612(h), 
providing the cable operators the discretion to exclude any 
programming it “reasonably believes” to be indecent seems 
inconsistent with the mandatory language included in 
subsection (j) aimed at limiting the access of children to 


277 
What, for example, happens in the situation where the cable 
operator has chosen of to do a written policy prohibiting 
such programming on leased access and a program 


qualifying under the proposed indecency standard is 
submitted? 


If the program is not otherwise prohibited, where should the 
program in question be shown, on the cable operator's 
regular leased access channel or on the separate blocked 
leased access channel mandated by the language of Section 
612? 
While it can reasonably be anticipated that this area may be 
subject to a prior restraint challenge, it is recommended that 
the cable operator be required to make an election via 
written policy, (to be filed with the franchising authority), 
which precludes all indecent programs outright or follows 
the specific guidelines for blocked leased access set forth in 
Section 612(j). This recommendation will avoid the 
enforcement problem described above. 

LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS — INDECENT MATERIAL 
REQUIRED TO BE BLOCKED 


5. The City of Tampa supports the specific provision set forth 
in this Section with the following clarification: that these 
provisions requiring a blocked leased access channel and 
programmer disclosure of indecent content are deemed 
binding on all cable operators except in those instances 
where a written policy completely precluding such 
programming is provided. 

6. The City of Tampa supports the adoption of a definition of 
indecency which incorporates the language applied in the 
telephone and broadcast medium. 

7. The City of Tampa supports the adoption of a “community 
standards” test unique to the medium of cable television. 

8. The blocking approach described in Section 10 as opposed 
to the “safe harbor” approach (programming within specified 


10. 


11. 


278 


hours) currently applied in broadcast medium is beneficial 


from an enforcement standpoint. To parties 
protect all 
involved, the City of Tampa recommends: (a) the leased 


PEG 


13. 


279 


for the provision of adequate notice regarding program 
content: 


(a) seven (7) days notice for pre-produced programs; and, 
(b) three (3) days notice for live programs. 


(c) If written certification is not received by air date, the 
program in question is not aired. Absent exigent 
circumstances defined at the local level, the program 
provider will not be entitled to a refund of fees assessed for 
air time. 

(d) The cable operator in coordination with the program 
provider will also have the discretion to air another 
(e) Program certifications should be retained for the term 
of the franchise or some other mutually agreed upon time 
period. 

CHANNELS - CABLE OPERATOR-IMPOSED 


PROHIBITIONS ON CERTAIN TYPES OF 
PROGRAMMING 


The City of Tampa recommends: 


(a) further clarification of the linkage between the “sexually 
explicit conduct” referred to in Section 10 for PEG channels 
and the definition of “indecent” programming developed for 
leased access channels; 


(b) making mandatory the adoption by cable operators of 
a written policy either completely prohibiting “programming 
es cli or eae sexually explicit conduct or 

material soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct”. or 
authorizing its transmission under certain limited 
circumstances such as allowing “indecent” programming to 
be placed on either a separate public or leased access channel 
under the same conditions set forth in Section 612(j); and, 
(c) the limiting of cable operator control over PEG Access 
programming to public access only, except in those instances 
where the cable operator is specifically required to program 


14. 


15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 


280 


the government and educational access channels as well. 


The City of Tampa supports codifying the new statutory 
provisions and specifically those related to programmer 
certification of program content. On the issue of conflicts 
between cable operators and programmers, a local based 
method of penalties and dispute resolution is recommended. 
A suggested grievance procedure might include the following 
steps: 

(a) initial review of laint by cabl ' 

(b) the referral of unresolved disputes to a citizen advisory 
committee authorized to act in such a capacity; 

(c) further review by franchising authority if a resolution 
cannot be reached; and, 

(d) the judicial process. 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 


N/A 


JOINT REPLY COMMENTS OF THE ALLIANCE FOR 
COMMUNITY MEDIA, THE ALLIANCE FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS DEMOCRACY, THE AMERICAN 
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION AND PEOPLE FOR THE 
AMERICAN WAY 


INTRODUCTION 

The Opening Comments of the Alliance for Community Media 
(formerly the National Federation of Local Cable Programmers), 
the Alliance for Communications Democracy, the American Civil 
Liberties Union and People for the American Way demonstrated 
many of the ways that Section 10 and the Commission’s Proposed 
Rule are unconstitutional. Various other comments — of both 
operators and programmers — have similarly pointed out the 
serious constitutional defects of this system of content-based 
restrictions.’ Moreover, a number of comments have recognized 


' These constitutional defects have been recognized by operators and 
owners of cable systems and their trade associations, see, ¢.g., Blade 
Communications, Inc. ef al., at 2; Community Antenna Television 
Association, Inc., at 2-3; Cox Cable Communications, at 2, 4, 14; 
InterMedia Partners, at 8-9; National Cable Television Association, Inc., 

(continued...) 


282 


the utility of lockboxes in achieving Section 10's ostensible goal — 
protecting children from programming that their parents find 
inappropriate.’ Because this type of content-based regulation of 
protected expression must use the least restrictive means, see Sable 
Communications v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989), any 
mechanism more restrictive than lockboxes, such as the Proposed 
Rule's regulatory scheme, fails to pass constitutional muster. 


We continue to adhere to our original position that the 
Commission has embarked on a course to promulgate an 
unconstitutional final rule. However, there are serious problems 
with many of the suggestions put forward by several other 
commenters — primarily cable operators — allegedly to minimize 
the unconstitutional effects that they would feel from the 
Commussion’s Proposed Rule. While these oper tors make a host 
of suggestions for their own economic or regulatory benefit, their 
proposals would only exacerbate the burdens placed on 


(...contunued) 

at 3-6, as well as programmers and access centers, see, ¢.g., Ann Arbor 
Community Access Television, at 1; Boston Community Access and 
Programming Foundation, at 3-6; Roxie Lee Cole, at 1; Columbia 
Community Access, at 1; Community Access Network, Inc., at 1; Judy D. 
Crandall, at 1; Defiance Community Television, at 1; Denver Area 
Educational Telecommunications Consortium, Inc., at 5 n.7; David B. 
Dreety, at 1; Steven C. Fortriede, at 1; Manhattan Neighborhood 
Network, at 2-3; Erik S. Mollberg, at 1; Waycross Community Television, 
al. 


Blade Communications, inc. ef al., at 8; Boston Community Access 
and Programming Foundation, at 5 (noting that lockboxes provide a less 
restrictive means of protecting children from indecent programming); 
Community Antenna Television Association, Inc., at 6-7; Local 
Governments, at 7; Telecommunications, Inc., at 14 (arguing in favor of 


lockboxes as a permissible alternative to operator blocking); Time Warner 
Entertainment Co., L.P., at 10. 


283 


programmers’ free speech rights, as we discuss in the separate 
argument sections presented below. 


Before examining each of these arguments, we note that several 
operators have also advanced a different kind of constitutional 
argument that is seriously in error. For example, Time Warner in 
both its comments and in separate litigation (Time Warner 
Entertainment Co., L.P., v. FCC, Civil Action No. 92-2494 
(D.D.C. filed Nov. 5, 1992)) argues that it is unconstitutional to 
require operators to carry access channels because they are thereby 
associated with messages with which they do not agree.’ This 
argument is necessarily predicated on the notion that, 1 respect 
to access channels, cable operators are editors with their own first 
leased access channels as a public forum, they have explicitly 
distinguished access from other cable channels and rejected the 
contention that operators are editors with their own first amendment 
rights with respect to access channels. See cases cited in Opening 
Comments at 36 & n.16. 

These operators’ erroneous constitutional analysis leads them 
into misreading Section 10 and offering several highly inappropriate 
suggestions to the Commission. Because they view themselves as 
editors of access channels, many operators ave forwarded 
suggestions that would use Section 10 to overwh:lm Congress’ 
general intent to preserve access channels as a public forum.‘ 


> For other comments arguing that PEG and leased access is itself 
unconstitutional, see Blade Communications, Inc. ef al., at 1-2; 
Community Antenna Television Association, Inc., at 2-3; National Cable 
Television Association, Inc., at 3-4 & n-3; Tele-Communications, Inc., at 
2. 


* Perhaps like Time Warner (who advances such an argument in their 
lawsuit), these operators hope that the result will be that some court will 
look to the Commission's final rule to find, first, that the newly heightened 
level of operators’ editorial involvement grants them heretofore 
unrecognized first amendment rights and, second, that those rights are 
violated by the requirement that operators must carry access programming. 

(continued...) 


284 


Section 10, however, contains only a narrow exception to the 
general requirement that speech on PEG and leased access channels 
remain unedited. While Congress enacted that part of the 1992 Act 
to afford the Commission a highly limited basis to address sexually 
explicit or politically controversial speech, it left intact the general 
command that “a cable operator shall not exercise any editorial 
control over” PEG or leased access. 47 U.S.C. § 531(e) (PEG; 
emphasis supplied); 47 U.S.C. § 532(c)(2) (leased access; emphasis 
supplied). While operators may choose to ignore these general 
provisions, they remain in force, and the Commission must 
interpret Section 10 so that it is consistent with the prohibition 
against operator editing. Thus, the Commission cannot assign to 
operators the task of defining what material a programmer may not 
air over a cable system’s PEG and leased accessed channels. 
Rather, it must limit the operator of that system to exercising an 
option to prohibit programmers from. airing that material. 
Similarly, the Commission must also vest the power to police these 
channels in an entity other than the operator, whom Congress has 
forbidden from “exercis[ing] amy editorial control.” Rather, as we 
pointed out in our Opening Comments (at 58-60), prior restraints 
are the exclusive domain of the courts. See generally Freedman v. 
Maryland, 380 U.S. 51 (1965). 

This construction of the statute is also mandated by the 
constraints of the constitution. Even under a view that attempts to 
gain for operators an unprecedented first amendment right to edit 
access programming, it remains unconstitutional for the government 
to lodge censorship authority in operators who may then be 
subjected to liability if they fail to exercise that authority. For that 
reason, operators cannot be conscripted as “a corps of involuntary 
government surrogates . . . without providing the procedural 
safeguards respecting ‘prior restraint’ required of the government.” 


*(...continued) 

Cf. Midwest Video Corp. v. FCC, 571 F.2d 1025 (8th Cir. 1978) aff'd on 
other grounds, 440 U.S. 689 (1979). We submit that this bootstrapped 
result was not intended by Section 10, and the Commission must therefore 
reject this approach to the current rulemaking. 


285 


Midwest Video v. FCC, 571 F.2d 1025, 1056 (8th Cir. 1978), aff'd 
on other grounds, 440 U.S. 689 (1979); see also Opening 
Comments at 58-60 (noting requirement of prior judicial 
procedures). To do so would impermissibly “subject[] the cable 
user’s First Amendment rights to decision by an unqualified private 
citizen, whose personal interest . . . enlists him on the ‘safe’ side 
— the side of suppression.” Midwest Video, 571 F.2d at 1057; see 
also Opening Comments at 30-34 (noting constitutional problems 
from liability provision of Section 10(d)).° 

With this background in mind, we turn to specific proposals 
made in certain comments. As we show below, many commenters 
would have the Commission forego the restraint that is required of 
it under both the statute and the constitution. For that reason, we 
again urge the Commission to adopt the limiting construction of 
Section 10 that we offered in our Opening Comments. As we 
demonstrated in those comments, lockboxes are consistent with the 
PEG and leased access statutes, and they are the least-intrusive 
means for the Commission to implement any legitimate 
governmental interest in restricting children from viewing 
programming deemed inappropriate by their parents. Any other 
approach will fall below constitutional minima, as we pointed out 
in our Opening Comments. 


* We thus adopt the analysis of Midwest Video that holds that a system 
for censoring the access channel public forum violates the constitution 
when it lodges the power to censor with operators who may be held liable 
for failing to exercise that power. We also recognize that Midwest Video 
incorrectly determined in dicta that a regulation requiring operators to 
carry access channels violated the constitution. This incorrect 
determination has been rejected by the courts in later cases, which have 
upheld the statutory requirement that operators carry access channels. See 
cases cited in Opening Comments at 36 n.16. 


286 


SUMMARY 


Even if the Commission fails to follow the constitutionally 
mandated course of recognizing lockboxes as the least restrictive 
means to effectively implement Section 10, it certainly cannot 
accept the main proposals forwarded by operators. First, the 
Commission must reject the suggestions that operators be given the 
power to edit broadly, pre-screen programming, and/or require 
certification from programmers. These proposals are either 
contrary to the statute, unnecessary under it, or potentially violative 
of the constitution. Second, the Commission must reject the 
suggestion of operators that they be granted an immunity to censor 
with impunity. Such an inducement towards widespread censorship 
fails to afford programmers the first amendment protection they are 
from programmers must be rejected because it both is unnecessary 
under the statute and implicates serious constitutional concerns. 

If the Commission decides to wander into constitutionally 
dangerous territory by rejecting the lockbox course, there are 
certain suggestions of other commenters it may wish to follow in 
order to minimize the burden being placed on programmers’ first 
amendment rights. While the Commission should not preempt state 
and local laws and franchise contracts forbidding operator editing, 
it should make clear that its national standards preempt state laws 
with regard to speech not allowed on cable. It should also require 
operators to unblock a channel upon a phone call from a subscriber. 
And it should stay the effectiveness of its final rule until courts have 
completed their review of it. Moreover, if lockboxes are given due 
recognition, operators should be forbidden from attributing lockbox 
costs as a cost of providing access. Instead, as the Commission 
develops regulations for operators’ rates, the costs of lockboxes 
should be considered as a cost of providing cable. 


287 


I. THE COMMISSION WOULD HEIGHTEN THE 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL BURDEN ON PROGRAMMERS IF IT 
STRENGTHENED THE ABILITY OF OPERATORS TO 
CENSOR PROGRAMMING 


Most of the operators filing comments have requested that the 
Commission grant them certain powers, beyond taose contained in 
the Proposed Rule, that would strengthen their ability to keep the 
programming they choose off of PEG or leased access channels. 
We strongly oppose any such measure. Congress explicitly 
provided for PEG and leased access in the 1984 Cable Act, and 
local franchising authorities have negotiated contractual provisions 
for such channels, for the specific purpose of facilitating unedited 
programming.* To now grant the very same operators unbridled 
editorial discretion would contravene the clear intent of Congress. 
Moreover, it would exacerbate the unconstitutional burdens on 
speech that we discussed in our opening Comments. 

The most blatant proposal in this regard comes from operators 
such as those who filed comments along with Acton Corp., who 
insist that they must have “broad discretion” to both establish and 
apply censorship standards because “different operators [have] 
different editorial positions.” Acton Corp. ef al., at 2,5. By its 
very mature, however, such a sweeping proposal would 
impermissibly allow wholly standardless censorship. The only 
government interest that even arguably supports Section 10 is the 
protection of children from programming deemed inappropriate by 
their parents, not the furtherance of each operator’s unique editorial 
viewpoint. The Commission must therefore reject the proposal that 


* Despite these protections, some cable operators have attempted to 
impede access programming, as is demonstrated by the articles attached as 
Appendix A to these reply comments. If the Commission were to grant 
operators editorial power over programming, these instances are likely to 
muluply. 


288 


it read Section 10 to abrogate the general prohibition against 
operator editing, which remains intact.”’ 


Certain of the commenters who make this proposal apparently 
recognize that it would allow censorship beyond constitutionally 
permissible bounds. Having asked for unbridled discretion, for 
them “[ijt is then irrelevant under the statute whether either the 
Commission or a court would reach the same conclusion as the 
cable operator.” Jd. at 3-4. Tne conclusion that courts would 
reach is of course relevant, however, for it is only they who can 
determine what speech is not deserving of constitutional protection. 
Indeed, as we pointed out in our Opening Comments (at 58-60), the 
prompt application of such judicial process is a necessary 
component of any constitutionally permissible content-based prior 
restraint on speech. 


For these reasons, the Commission must emphatically reject 
operator proposals that seek broad editorial discretion. If the least- 
restrictive lockbox regulatory approach is rejected, the Commission 
— in order to avoid promulgating a regulation that is also overbroad 
— would have to clarify that programmers may be barred from 
including in their material only that speech which is constitutionally 


In any event, we note that the editorial policies of some operators are 
to program non-access channels with sexually explicit material even as 
they seek to ban such material from access channels. For example, 
although Time Warner lists in its comments a handful of access programs 
it “would not choose to provide” (at 3-4), it neglects to inform the 
Commission that the highest rated documentary series carried on its Home 
Box Office division is called “Real Sex.” “Real Sex” has highlighted 
segments such as, inter alia, a home striptease class and a studio that 
makes pornographic films for women. See Appendix B. As we discussed 
in our Opening Comments (at 49-54), the Commission has failed to rectify 
the constitutional problems of banning material from access channels while 
allowing it on other channels. If the Commission does not adopt the 
lockbox approach, it should therefore “prevent operators from prohibiting 
from access channels the same type of programming it carries on other of 
its channels.” Jd. at 50-51. 


289 


unprotected, as defined by the Commission.’ In addition, rather 
than allowing an operator to make its own determination as to 
whether a particular programm falls outside the scope of 
constitutionally protected speech, the Commission must clarify that 
only a court may declare that a program is obscene and order it 
kept off the air. 


No less problematic is the suggestion by several operators that 
the Commission’s final rule contain a provision that would allow 
them to pre-screen programming before it is aired on PEG or leased 
access channels.’ Pre-screening is highly objectionable for several 
different reasons. First, by allowing pre-screening, the Commission 
would place operators in the position to make specific editorial 
demands before giving final approval." Such editorial control 


the PEG and 
retains at its core the principle that speakers who use PEG and 
leased access channels must be allowed to program without regard 


* If a lockbox regulatory approach is rejected, confirming PEG 
censorship to Commission-defined speech becomes a necessary implication 
of Section 10(c) of the statute. Section 10(a), on the other hand, concerns 
speech over leased access channels that an operator “reasonably believes” 
is indecent. Nonetheless, the Commission should treat leased access in the 
same manner that the statute treats PEG to avoid constitutional difficulties. 
As we pointed out in our Opening Comments, prior restraints can only 
attach with the guarantee of a prompt court determination that some 
constitutional standard would otherwise be violated (at 58-60); they cannot 
be imposed under standards developed by a non-neutral entity whose own 
liability may prompt it to censor widely (at 30-34). Allowing operators to 
censor based on their subjective beliefs would violate these first 
amendment principles. 


* See Acton Corp. et al., at 5; Blade Communications, Inc. ef al., at 
12; Continental Cablevision, Inc., at 5-6 (advocating pre-screening if the 
Commission rejects a certification system); InterMedia Partners, at 4, 18. 


‘© The suggestion of some operators that they should “be able to impose 
monetary penalties on programmers,” see Acton Corp. ef al., at 8, must 
be rejected for similar reasons. To give operators the power to penalize 
programmers would also implicitly grant them the power to make editorial 
demands in advising programmers how to avoid those penalties. 


290 


for the operator's editorial preferences. Second, as we pointed out 
in our Opening Comments (at 26-27 & 32), any pre-screening 
requirement would likely eliminate all live programming, including 
call-in shows, regardless of whether they contained prescribable 
that pre-screening occasions. See, e.g., Community Antenna 
Television Association, Inc., at 3-4; Time Warner Entertainment 
Co., L.P., at 19. 


Moreover, pre-screening as proposed by the operators would 
also violate the first amendment in two ways. First, the pre- 
screening proposals contain no reasonable time limits. By allowing 
an operator the power to threaten indefinite delay, such pre- 
screening would constitute a prior restraint that exacerbates all of 
the problems of allowing operators to exercise unbridled editorial 
control over access programming. Put another way, such pre- 
screening adds the element of unrestrained delay and necessarily 
places all programs under a prior restraint: even programming that 
does not contravene an operator's editorial policy will necessarily 
be delayed from airing, regardless of how timely it is. 

Second, the pre-screening proposals forwarded by operators call 
for unreviewable discretion. For example, InterMedia Partners 
pronounces that, as part of its proposed pre-screening, 
“InterMedia’s determination as to whether a particular program 
complies with its rr will be the final determination.” 
Intermedia Partners, at 7 (emphasis added); see also Tele- 
Communications, Inc., at 2 (urging that no dispute resolution 
mechanism is necessary because the operator’s decision should be 
final). This unaccountable exercise of power necessarily raises the 
prospect that arbitrary or irrational decisions will go unchecked. In 


291 


discussed in our Opening Comments at 58-61.'' For these 
reasons, as well, the Commission must reject pre-screening. 


Several operators have also requested that the Commission 
allow them to require programmers to certify that their 
programming does not fall outside of the operator's policy 
regarding allowable speech. An integral part of this certification 
proposal would immunize operators from liability for carrying 
programs certified not to be indecent, but later held to be so. The 
Commission should reject these proposals because certification 
should not be necessary to insulate operators from liability when 
they allow access programming to air, as the PEG and leased access 
statutes require them to do. At most, the Commission’s final rule 
should state that no liability will attach to an operator if a 
programmer violates the Commission’s rule and an operator's 

As an initial matter, we note that the operators’ perceived need 
for certification and its attendant immunity for failing to censor 
apparently stems from their mistaken assumption that Section 10 has 
given them editorial control over PEG and leased access channels. 
However, as we have discussed above, see supra at 3-5, the 1992 
Act has not amended the portion of the PEG and leased access 
statutes that prohibits operators from exercising amy editorial contro! 
over these channels. Operators are therefore not placed in an active 
position with regard to editing PEG and leased access. Because 
liability should only be predicated on operators actively speaking or 
editing, liability should not lie in this instance. See generally 
Farmers Educ. & Coop. Union of Am ». WDAY, Inc., 360 U.S. 
525 (1959). 


‘Moreover, the NCTA notes that pre-screening would allow an 
operator to “both prohibit some programming and choose not to prohibit 
other programming.” National Cable Television Association, Inc., at 9 
n.8 Such umequal selective screening raises the specter of an 
unconstitutional system that allows speech to be regulated “based on 
hostility — or favoritism — towards the underlying message expressed.” 
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538, 2545 (1992) (quoted in 
Opening Comments at 53 n.25). 


292 


Consequently, to allay the fears of operators concerning 
liability, the Commission's final rule need only clarify that an 
operator cannot be held to be a liable party when a programmer 
violates that operator’s policy and the Commission’s standards 
prohibiting the broadcast of indecency. As InterMedia Partners 
pointed out in its comments (at 15), the Commission has followed 
a similar approach in Enforcement of Prohibitions Against the Use 
of Common Carriers for the Transmission of Obscene Materials, 2 
F.C.C.R. 2819, 2820 (1987), when it stated that “[u}nless an MDS 
common carrier has actual notice that a program has been 
adjudicated obscene . . . it will not be subject to adverse agency 
action.” In the case of access programming, as in the earlier MDS 
context, there is neither “a high degree of involvement” nor the 
“actual notice of an illegal use” on which operator liability may be 
predicated. Because operator liability thus should not be 
implicated, there is simply no need for the Commission to require 


that programmers certify the content of their programs. Even 
without a certification, the operators should face no liability." 


In any event, a certification requirement such as that proposed 
by operators may very well be considered vague when viewed from 
the perspective of a lay programmer who is not tutored in fine first 
amendment distinctions. For that reason, a court might very well 
strike down such a requirement under the first amendment. See, 
e.g., Bella Lewitzky Dance Found. v. Frohnmayer, 754 F. Supp. 
774, 782 (C.D. Cal. 1991) (“‘a conscientious applicant who takes 
the certification seriously is thus compelled to avoid undertaking 
any project that might even arguably violate’ the vague certification 
requirement” that a production not fall short of the Miller obscenity 
standard) (citation omitted). Certification in this regard could be 
likened to an oath, which may similarly be considered 
unconstitutional if it chills speech by forcing self-censorship on the 
part of those who are unsure of whether they meet the implicated 


Under the operator's own justification, therefore, if the Commission 
were to adopt certification, it should at most go only so far as to have 
programmers certify that they recognize and accept their own liability if 
they fail to live by an operator’s policy and the Commission's standards. 


293 


standard. See, e.g., Baggett v. Bullitt, 377 U.S. 360, 373-74 
(1964); Speiser v. Randall, 357 U.S. 513, 526 (1958) (oath takers 
“steer far wider of the unlawful zone”). Rather than implicating 
these constitutional concerns, the Commission should reject the 
While each of these several different ways of strengthening 
operators’ power to censor programmers is therefore inappropriate, 
we note that several commenters have urged that the Commission 
simultaneously adopt several or all of them.’ However, viewing 
these measures as somehow complementary is especially 
wrongheaded. To the contrary, if the Commission were to consider 
any one of these proposals appropriate despite the problems it 
poses, its implementation would negate the need for any other. For 
example, if certification (with its attendant immunity) were 
implemented, there would be no need for pre-screening. Because 
an operator would be held harmless for carrying programming 
mistakenly certified as not indecent, that operator has no reason to 
screen certified programming to determine whether or not program 
content meets operator standards. In this way, each of the 
operators’ proposals are duplicative, and the Commission would be 
unnecessarily multiplying the burden on programmers’ free speech 
rights if it were to adopt a number of them. 
Il. THE COMMISSION WOULD FURTHER HAMPER 
PROGRAMMERS’ FREE SPEECH IF IT IMPLEMENTED 
SUGGESTIONS REGARDING OPERATOR LIABILITY 


Several operators have requested that the Commission expand 
its Proposed Rule in two ways to minimize the liability operators 
may face for censoring PEG and leased access programming. First, 
several operators seek a blanket immunity from liability whenever 
they act as censors, regardless of the reasonableness of their 
activities in this regard. Second, many operators propose that the 
Commission’s final rule grant them the power to require 


See Acton Corp. ef al., at 3-5; InterMedia Parmers, at 14, 18; Blade 
Communications, Inc. ef ail. , at 12; National Cable Television Association, 
Inc., at 8-9. 


294 


programmers to indemnify operators and provide proof that they 
carry sufficient insurance to cover any such contingent liability. 
For reasons we now discuss, the Commission must reject all such 
proposals because they are both contrary to the requirements of the 

The proposals to immunize operators’ censorship add an 
unnecessary additional burden on the first amendment rights of 
programmers. All of these immunity proposals would prompt 
operators to censor as widely as they can in order to avoid even the 
most remote possibility of liability under Section 10(d) for carrying 
a program that “involves obscene material.” See, e.g., InterMedia 
Partners, at 6 (“InterMedia will interpret and apply this restriction 
broadly”). As we discussed in our Opening Comments (at 28-34 
& 38-42), the impetus towards broad censorship created by the 
liability provision of Section 10(d) is not narrowly tailored to 
implement a compelling governmental interest, and it therefore 
contravenes the constitution. For a similar reason, the proposals to 
grant operators an immunity from liability must be rejected by the 
Commission: they would create a further incentive for operators to 
engage in standardless censorship and thereby chill the first 
amendment rights of access programmers. '* 


In a similar vein, several of the operator commenters have 
asked the Commission to include provisions in its final rule that 
would allow operators to require that programmers guarantee 
indemnification and provide proof of insurance concerning any 
possible operator liability. For both statutory and constitutional 
reasons, the Commission must reject the proposals to enshrine 
indemnification and insurance provisions in its final rule. First, 
there is no reason to read into the statute any concern with 


‘* We also note that such an immunity is unnecessary under the statute. 
As we demonstrated above, operators are not active PEG and leased access 
programmers and hence should not face the risk of liability absent actual 
notice of a prior court action finding a particular program obscene. 
Consequently , immunity for censorship — an activity operators should not 
be engaged in — is contrary to the prohibition that they not edit access 
programs . 


295 


indemnification or insurance issues. Potential liability from 
programming arises from a wide variety of theories (such as 
negligence in the act of filming a show) under which a plaintiff may 
name the operator. The operators now seeking indemnification and 
proof of programmer insurance have failed to suggest any basis to 
differentiate liability with regard to program content from all of the 
other forms of potential liability, with regards to which 
indemnification issues have long been successfully handled on a 
case-by-case basis under the common law." 

Second, the Commission should avoid widening its rulemaking 
to reach indemnification and proof of insurance issues because such 
requirements may raise first amendment concerns. A concern with 
only the content of speech that is to take place in a public forum 
affords “no justification for insurance or hold harmless conditions 
. . . [and] they may not constitutionally be imposed” by the 
government. Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan 
v. Mayor of Thurmont. Md., 700 F. Supp. 281, 286 (D. Md. 1988). 
When crafted with regard to content-based liability, indemnification 
and insurance requirements necessitate an impermissible 
examination of the contents of the proposed speech, and they 
impermissibly levy a heavier financial burden on controversial 
speech. Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 1197, 1207-09 (7th Cir.), cert, 
denied, 439 U.S. 916 (1978)."° Moreover, the proposals that the 
operators have forwarded in this docket are not only content-based, 
but they ask the FCC to adopt a standardless regulation. Under 
these proposals, both the amount of the insurance demand and the 
decision of whether or not to make that demand would be left to the 
unfettered discretion of operators. This standardless discretion is 
inappropriate in all prior restraint contexts, but especially where the 


‘* Insurance is an apt consideration in one regard. Operators who are 
concerned with liability for censoring PEG or leased access may purchase 
their own imsurance to protect themselves against their own negligence. 
‘* For the same reason, the Commission must also reject as 
constitutionally infirm the suggestion of operators such as Acton Corp. ef 


al., at 8, that programmers be required to post a bond before being 
allowed to program on the PEG and leased access public forum. 


296 


decisionmaker has declared that it will exercise that discretion with 
the content of speech in mind. Forsyth County, Ga. v. Nationalist 
Movement, 112 S. Ct. 2395 (1992)."” 


(1. WHILE SOME NATIONAL STANDARDS SHOULD BE 
ADOPTED, OTHERS ARE WHOLLY INAPPROPRIATE 


Several programmers also argue that the Commission should 
adopt uniform national standards on certain matters. While we 
support some of these efforts, others clearly raise serious problems. 


Foremost among the objectionable proposals is that which 
concerns federal preemption of provisions of state laws, local 
ordinances and franchise contracts that prevent operators from 
editing access programs. See Continental Cablevision, Inc., at 6- 
8 As an initial matter, Section 10 is not phrased in the mandatory 
terms that would preempt state and local regulation of the franchise 
process. In other words, while Section 10 states that an operator 
may choose to adopt certain censorship policies, it neither vests that 
choice exclusively with the operators nor removes states and 
localities from playing their role in the process. Moreover, the 
preemption that is urged would abrogate existing franchise 
contracts, whereby operators have voluntarily agreed not to edit 
access programming. Nothing in Section 10 indicates that it is 
intended to abrogate existing contracts whereby operators have 
already exercised their options and decided to allow all types of 
programming — including sexually explicit or politically 
controversial material — in its access channels. 

Preemption may nonetheless be appropriate in one circum- 
stance. If the Commission fails to follow the least restrictive 
lockbox approach, it must carefully define the categories of speech 
which it would allow operators to ban if it is to avoid also violating 
the constitution through an overbroad regulation. See Opening 


The reasoning discussed in text applies equally whether it is the 
programmer who would be required to provide proof of imsurance or, as 
has also been suggested, an access center that administers the access 
requirements over a particular cable system. See Blade Communications, 
Inc. et al., at 14 0.13; InterMedia Partners, at 7. 


297 


Comments at 54-57. Thus, as we suggested in our Opening 
Comments, the Commission should follow its prior indication to 
narrowly construe “unlawful conduct” and “sexually explicit” in the 
PEG standard."* In the same vein, the Commission should clarify 
that those standards preempt any others that may be found in state 
or local laws or ordinances. Similarly, the Commission should 
be weighed against the value of the programming when taken as a 
whole, and it should clarify that its mandate in this regard is 
preemptive. Accord Time Warner Entertainmeat Co., L.P., at 6-8. 
It should also define, with preemptive force, the relevant 
community to be cable subscribers.'’ 

Finally, the National Cable Television Association, Inc. 
(“NCTA”) in its comments proposes a national standard with 
respect to how subscribers nay request unblocking of the channel 
dedicated to indecent leased access programming. As we 
demonstrated in our Opening Comments, any system of central 
blocking is unconstitutional in light of the effective, less restrictive, 
lockbox mechanism. Were it not for lockboxes, we would agree 
that a uniform national standard for unblocking should be adopted, 
although we would still oppose the one offered by NCTA, which 
would delay the viewer's right to receive requested programming 
for sixty days. Such a burden on viewer's rights is unnecessary and 
therefore unconstitutional. Rather, if the Commission fails to 
adhere to the least restrictive lockbox approach, at a minimum it 
should require all operators to implement an unblocking system that 
mirrors the system currently used for pay-per-view services. After 


"For the reasons expressed in both the Commission's Notice and our 
Opening Comments, the Commission should reject the broad reading of 
these terms by InterMedia Partners and Acton Corp. ef al. 

Blade Communications, Inc. ef al., at 7-8, suggest further segmenting 
the relevant community by tier of cable service. This approach should be 
rejected as unworkable, however, because only operators have information 
regarding the constituents who subscribe to each tier of service. 
Additionally, it is unnecessary, because access channels are available on 
several different tiers. 


298 


a subscriber has mailed the operator a written request to activate his 
ability to lift the block on the leased access channel,” the 
subscriber should be able to place a phone call to be able to receive 
that service with no further delay.” 


IV. THE COMMISSION SHOULD IMPLEMENT CERTAIN 
OTHER COMMENTERS’ SUGGESTIONS WITH 
IMPORTANT MODIFICATIONS 

A number of commenters have forwarded two suggestions with 
which we agree, at least with important modification. First, several 
commenters have recommended that the Commission include in a 
cable system's rates whatever costs operators incur in implementing 
Section 10 and the Commission's final rule. See Community 
Antenna Television Association, Inc., at 7; Continental Cablevision, 
Inc., at 10-11. We agree with these commenters, but only for 
lockboxes. The sensible approach to paying for lockboxes is to 
include their costs in developing regulations for cable operators’ 
rates. This sensible approach to cost spreading will also allow the 
Commission to further assure that no parents are deterred from 
using lockboxes to keep their children from viewing programming 


® Ip all instances, the Commission should prescribe the form of request 
an operator is required to present to subscribers. In order to protect 
subscribers’ privacy, see 47 U.S.C. § 551, that form should be phrased in 
neutral terms that do not allow the operator to build a record that the 
subscriber has requested sexually explicit or politically controversial 
programming 

2! Moreover, the operator should be required to ask new subscribers as 


part of their initial subscription questionnaire whether they want all access 
channels unblocked. 


2 Other commenters make objectionable suggestions with regard to who 
should bear these costs. Cox Cable Communications, at 10-11, suggests 
that those subscribers who request unblocking should bear the cost of 
blocking. This suggestion should be rejected because it places the burden 
of paying for blocking on precisely those subscribers who do not find it a 
benefit. Similarly, the suggestion that programmers pay the cost of 
blocking, see Blade Communications, Inc., ef ai., at 9-10; InterMedia 
Partners, at 20, also further burdens those who do not find censorship to 
be a benefit. 


299 


that they deem inappropriate.” Of course, since lockboxes are 
effective for this purpose with respect to all channels (and not just 
PEG and leased access), the Commission should concomitantly 
clarify that cable operators cannot attribute the costs of lockboxes 
as a cost of providing access.“ 


Second, we agree with the comments of Continental 
Cablevision, Inc., at 9, 13-14, to the extent that they urge the 
Commission to recognize that, if the Commission fails to adhere to 
the lockbox approach, all cable operators will need at least 120 days 
before they can implement the Commission's final rule. The 
period of delay, all provisions of Section 10 are to be stayed. 
constitutional difficulties raised by its rulemaking. The stay should 
therefore include whatever period is necessary for the courts to 
complete their review of this scheme, should such review be 

CONCLUSION 


Both operators and programmers appearing as commenters in 
this docket have agreed that the censorship scheme envisioned by 
the Commission’s Proposed Rule would be unconstitutional. None 
of the suggestions forwarded by operators would cure these 
problems. To the contrary, they would only exacerbate the first 
amendment concerns raised by Section 10 and the Proposed Rule. 


» As we noted in our Opening Comments, even with their associated 
expense, the Commission has on several occasions found that lockboxes 
are effective. See Opening Comments at 47. 


* Moreover, as a generic matter, operators who voluntarily choose to 
censor PEG channels pursuant to Section 10(c) or leased access channels 
pursuant to Section 10(a) should not be allowed to include the costs of that 
voluntary activity as a cost of providing access or for any other purpose 


300 


We therefore again urge the Commission to recognize lockboxes as 
the least restrictive means of effectively implementing Section 10. 
Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ 


I. Michael Greenberger 
David A. Bono 


Of Counsel: 

James N. Horwood 

Spiegel & McDiarmid 

1350 New York Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 879-4002 (202) 232-4300 


C ity Media and the Alli Elliot Minc! 


People for the American Way 
Marjorie Heins 2000 M Street, N.W. 
American Civil Liberties Washington, D.C. 20036 
Union Foundation (202) 467-4999 
Arts Censorship Project Counsel for People for 
132 West 43rd Street the American Way. 
New York, New York 10036 
(212) 944-9800 
1-— -~_ iberties Uni 


Dated: December 21, 1992 


301 


Appendix A 


Linda Haugsted, Warner, Access Group in Shootout, 
MULTICHANNEL NEWS, May 20, 1991 at 1 


There's a gunfight brewing 
at the PEG corral in Houston, 
and if the city’s public access 
group has its way Warner 
Cable will lose its franchise. 


At one end of the street is 
Warner Cable Communications, 
Inc. of Houston, which is fac- 
ing down Access Houston 
Cable Corp. Access Houston is 
armed with a franchise docu- 
ment that, its executives be- 
lieve, gives it the right to de- 
cide what will be programmed 
on a new educational access 
channel, an assertion being 
challenged by the operator. 


Bystanders include the 
International Channel, the 
Silent Network and Mind Ex- 
tension University, all satellite 
services that the access group 
wants to schedule on the new 
channel. 


The dispute has arisen over 
a deceptively simple question. 
What constitutes “local” pro- 
gramming? 

Warner has one education 
channel and has been reserving 
a channel slot for a second such 
service. Access Houston deter- 
mined that there was sufficient 


interest to activate the second 
channel by May 1. 

Warner was agreeable until 
it found out that Access Hous- 
ton wanted to use Vietnamese 
and Chinese language program- 
ming from the International 
Channel, programming for the 
deaf and ME/U selections, in 
addition to French lessons and 
classes from the University of 
Houston, on the second chan- 
nel. 


According to the satellite 
services, there are precedents 
for such programming: ME/U 
and Silent Network are on 
educational channels elsewhere, 
but the International Channel is 
not. 


In a letter to the city dated 
April 19, system president 
James Daley said Warner will 
not cablecast the satellite-deliv- 
ered programs because they are 
not appropriate for a local 
access channel. He added that 
satellite programming generates 
costs that Warner should not 
have to pay. 


Pam Thorne, director of 
public relations for the system, 
said delivering the satellite 
service would cost Warner 


Houston $85,000 to $100,000 
for a new satellite dish and 
other support hardware. PEG 
stands for public educational 
and government channels. 


The city’s attorney, Clar- 
ence West, wrote back that 
Warner's interpretation of its 
obligation was erroneous, say- 
ing that as the local educational 
authority, Access Houston has 
the power to determine schedul- 
ing to meet special audience 
needs. 


A blackout of its choice of 
shows would “violate the letter 
and spirit of the franchise” and 
represents an attempt at editori- 
al control in violation of federal 
law. West also wrote that 
Warner is responsible for any 
“reasonable and appropriate” 
expense incurred by satellite 
programming. 

Refusal to cablecast the 
programming scheduled by 
Access Houston represents a 
franchise violation, the attorney 
warned, adding that if the 
educational channel did not run 
by May 15, Warner would be 
considered in violation of its 
ed a extension of the compli- 
ance to May 23. 

Revocation is the only 
punitive remedy mentioned in 


the franchise for 
breach of contract. 


“I suspect the city will 
begin that process [revocation] 
... the council seems amend- 
able. I expect to fight this all 
the way,” said Tomas Cantrell, 
executive director of Access 
Houston. 


He said satellite program- 
ming would not generate signif- 
icamt cost to Warner. Warner 
is already “looking at the ap- 

birds,” he said. 
Warner carries C-SPAN, which 
is on Galaxy 3 with ME/U; and 
the International Channel and 
Silent Network are on Satcom 
F4. Warner turns to Satcom 
F4 for its pay-per-view special, 
Cantrell added. 

Thorne Said Warner is not 
“already looking at the right 
satellites,” adding that 
$100,000 doesn’t seem to be a 


material 


was talking with the city coun- 


an agreement that is still possi- 
ble. 

The dispute leaves the 
programming networks in a 
awkward position; they want 
access to the community, but 
not at the cost of alienating a 
large MSO. Some did not want 
to discuss the dispute. 
dent of ME/U, said that where 
his service is on educational 
access in other markets, the 
programming decision was 
made mutually and amicably by 


“We enjoy the fact that our 
carriage has been mutually 
supported. We're hopeful that, 
in time, we can be available (in 
Houston), but we recognize that 
there are specific issues be- 
tween the franchiser and fran- 
chisee that need to be cleared 
up,” he said. 

Lawyers familiar with cable 
by MULTICHANNEL NEWS said 


next few years, since it is an 
area uncharted by legal prece- 
dent. “Local” is often ill-de- 


Linda Haugsted, Warner Cable Houston Up for Renewal, 
MULTICHANNEL NEWS, July 22, 1991 at 14. 


for Warner Cable Houston 
began last week amid allega- 
tions that the operator censored 
a public service message solicit- 
ing comments on its perfor- 
mance. 

The charges were hurled by 
Access Houston, the operator’s 
the system has been feuding. 

Warner initially declined to 
run the inflammatory spots 
proposed by Access Houston on 
its educational channel. 

The spots included state- 
ments such as, “Tired of paying 
among the highest rates in the 
country for cable TV? Tired of 
bad reception? Did you know 
that you pay among the highest 
rates in the United States for 
cable TV?” 

Also mentioned in the spots 
was the absence of Mind Exten- 
sion University, The Interna- 
tional Channel and the Silent 
Network, networks that Access 


Houston wants programmed on 
a second educational channel. 


Warner has declined to run 
that the programming is not 
local and that the new additions 


Warner Cable, held July 16, or 
call a municipal cable TV 
hotline to register concerns 
about cable service. 

Access Houston notified the 
local press about Warner's 
refusal to show the spot, as 
well as soliciting the support of 
the city attorney’s office to 
compel Warner to cablecast the 

The controversial spot was 
cablecast the day before the 
meeting, officials said. Regard- 
ing the censorship charge, 
Warner told the local press, 
“This hearing was widely publi- 
cized.” 

The publicity on the issue 
may have driven calls to the 
city’s cable hotline, noted 
Rhonda And tate 
tive manager, regulatory affairs 
for the city. 

More than 350 calls, “gen- 
erally negative,” came in by 
hearing time, she said. Con- 
sumers’ top complaints were 


picture quality and program- 
ming choices. 

The system is using all 
available channels now, includ- 
ing some that suffer seepage 
from broadcast stations. Most 
of these ingress channels are 
programmed with public access, 
Andrews said. 


callers said they'd like to see 
some programming services not 
currently offered, most fre- 
quently naming American 
Movie Classics and Bravo. 
Andrews added. 


At the public hearing before 
a committee of the City Coun- 
cil, Warner was lauded for its 
community projects by many of 
the charities it has aided, by 
local businessmen who deal 
with the company and teachers 
who use Cable in the Class- 
room. 


But it was also dunned by 
some of the 54 speakers, sever- 
al of whom were access pro- 
ducers or affiliated either with 
Access Houston. Of the speak- 
ers, Andrews judged that one- 
third were affiliated with Ac- 
cess Houston or Warner and 
two-thirds were members of the 


general public. 


306 


At the hearing, the impar- 
tiality of one of the council 
members was questioned. 
Warner's critics circulated 
financial disclosure forms of 
tung, alleging that she was a 
stockholder in the cable com- 
pany’s parent, Time Warner 
Inc., and had received a politi- 
cal contribution from the cable 
company’s local president. 

The councilwoman told 
local reporters that the stock is 
actually her husbands’s and that 
ly mean that she supports the 
contributor. 

The hearing was only the 
first volley in the refranchising 
process. Warner's current 
franchise expires in 1994, and 
the company has not yet pro- 
posed any operational changes 
under a refranchise, said 
Andrews. Two more public 
hearings will be held as part of 


System Notes, MULTICHANNEL NEWS, July 22, 1991 at 43. 


MASSACHUSETTS 


Springfield: Spring- 
aid ocanndumenCantinnad 
Cablevision will survey com- 
munity access users to see if a 
group of disgruntled program 
producers has valid arguments 
with the firm. Group cites lack 
of access to facilities, worn and 
worn out equipment, staffing 
problems and an “unclear” 
budget. Continental has said it 
has fulfilled its license agree- 
ment to provide public access. 
NEW JERSEY 

- Old Bridge: “Big 
MAC” — the town’s municipal 
access channel — operates on 
“no budget,” according to its 
executive director for program- 
ming, but subsists on corporate 
donations of equipment and the 
elbow grease of volunteers. 
The community bulletin board 
service cablecasts over channel 
29 on the TKR Cable Co. 
system here. Still, “Big MAC” 
plans to move from cramped 
quarters of the Town Hall to a 
proposed addition to the central 
Old Bridge Public Library. 
Channel will also ask township 
council for $10,000 next year 


to pay for editing equipment 
and to prepare town council 
chambers for cablecasts. 


° Altoona: Area public 
library officials went to meet 
with Warner Cable Communi- 
cations’ manager to discuss 
company’s assertion to a Citi- 
zens cable committee that lib- 
rary’s media center in a local 
hotel is also Warner's local 
studio. Library officials said 
that although Warner Cable has 
equipment there, and cablecasts 
local access programs from the 
center, cable company pays no 
rent and provides no mainte- 
nance. Cable committee had 
been trying to find out whether 
Warner was living up to all 
stipulations of franchise, which 
specifies that Warner maintain 
a studio in Altoona, according 
to a library official. 


309 


Jerry Adler with Vernon Church, Was It Good for You, Too, 
NEWSWEEK, February 24, 1992 at 63 


“Real Sex” is the ultimate reality in programming. 


BODY: 


If you’ve ever wondered i- 
you have what it takes to be on 
TV ... well, “Real Sex,” on 
Home Box Office, proves that 
you do. The people having sex 
on “Real Sex” are human be- 
ings just as God made them. If 
you’ve forgotten what women 
look like without breast im- 
plants, the women on “Real 
Sex” will remind you. The 
men on “Real Sex” invite com- 
parison to no other species. In 
answer to the question that 
Americans have asked since the 
start of the sexual revolution -- 
do people reaily do that? -- the 
show proves not only that they 
do, but that they use the same 
body parts you saw in the 
shower this morning. 


“Real Sex” has all the 
virtues of improvisation: no 
discernible premise, no host 
and virtually no celebrities. 
The first 45-minute-long seg- 
ment, which has been shown a 
dozen times since November 
1990, revealed the goings-on at 
a women’s vibrator workshop, 
a home striptease class and a 
studio that makes pornographic 
movies for women. The pre- 


miere was HBO's top-rated 
documentary for the year. A 
second installment also has 
been shown 12 times, and a 
third will debut on Feb. 22. It 
is always shown late at night. 
Executive producer Sheila 
Nevins insists the show has not 
“crossed any sexual boundaries. 
We don’t show intercourse, we 
don’t show erections. Consid- 
ering its success, the quotient of 
criticism from the audience is 
minuscule.” She didn’t describe 
the response from people not in 
the audience, but HBO has been 
uncommonly modest about the 
show, taking several days even 
to come up with someone to 
speak about it on the record. 


Yeasty name: Throughout, 
“Real Sex” has kept the same 
tone, blithe and uplifting and 
full of relaxed, happy post- 
orgasmic smiles. “Real Sex” 
was conceived at a time when 
“it seemed like life was getting 
pretty depressing and sex had 
become mortally wounded and 
if we could do a program about 
safe sex that had a sense of 
humor people could laugh free 
of charge,” says Nevins. That 
explains a lot about the show, 


including the home-porno se- 
quence of a man in a propeller- 
topped dildo beanie, and the 
fact that the women’s pornogra- 
phy producer, “Candida 
Royalle,” seems to have chosen 
a Stage name strongly reminis- 
cent of a vaginal yeast infec- 


von. 


But there's also lots to be 
learned about “Reali Sex,” even 
for people who may have had it 
once or twice themselves. 
Experience the chaste thrill of 
going on a date with a beautiful 
31-year-old dancer who wants 
to Stay a virgin! Find out about 
the tupuli, supposedly a Chero- 
kee term for “the sacred black 
hole of creation” (a linguist at 
the Cherokee Nation of Oklaho- 
ma said he'd never heard of 
it); learn to make love the 
HBO-Cherokee way, by “plac- 
ing your tipili in front of the 
tupuli” and moaning on a bian- 
ket. Hear “Auntie Maim” 
explain why “business execu- 
tives, lawyers and air-line 
pilots” pay $175 to be hand- 
cuffed to a wall and whipped 
by a woman in a leather collar. 
(It's because it’s a relief for 
them not to have to be in 
charge.) Discover what's really 
on the minds of savvy Nevada 
prostitutes. (How to save for 
their retirements.) And remem- 


ber, someday “Real Sex” might 
make you famous for 15 min- 
utes, in which case .. . well, 
try to make it last 15 minutes. 


311 


Cover Omitted 


FCC Caption Omitted 


Reply Comments of Cambridge Community Television 

Pursuant to the Commissions Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(“NPRM”), Cambridge Community Television (“CCTV”) submits 
these comments on the comments due December 7, 1992 on the 
proposed regulations implementing the provisions of the Cable 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“Act”) relating 
to indecent and obscene programming. 
CCTV, founded in 1987 is the independent non-profit corporation 
providing community access to television services to residents, 
organizations, and business in Cambridge, MA. CCTV has a 15- 
year contract with Continental Cablevision. This contract is 
incorporated into the license issues by the City of Cambridge. 


CCTV receives 3% of the gross annual revenues of the Cambridge 
system to operate 4 community access channels and a television 
production facility in One Kendall Square, Cambridge. Since 
CCTV opened in 1988 over $1,000,000 in free video production 
services, more than 15,000 hours of programming, and more than 
1,500 residents trained in video production. CCTV is recognized 
as one of the leading access centers in the country. 


CCTV did not provide a response to the NPRM due December 7 
because our interests were being represented by the Alliance for 
Community Media. We would also wish to draw the Commissions 
attention to the comments of the Boston Community Access and 
Programming Foundation which is located across the river from 
Cambridge. However, after reading the comments submitted by 
Continental Cablevision in which CCTV was essentially named in 


312 


footnote #3, the Board of Directors of CCTV felt that it was their 
responsibility to reply. 


We wholeheartedly agree with the statement by Continental “urging 
the Commission to adopt a regulatory scheme that minimizes the 
operators editorial intrusion in access programming so long as their 
liability is correspondingly minimized. (p.2)" We feel that if 
producers are going to be given the rights to access cable television 
channels they, and not the cable operator, should also take the 
responsibility for their programming. 


Although Congress included language requiring the Commission to 
promulgate regulations to “prohibit the use ... for any 
programming which contains obscene material .. .” we can not 
imagine that the Congress wanted to create a de facto banning of 
live programming or of indecent programming. Nor do we feel that 
the Congress wishes to stifle access to one of the only media forms 
available (community access cable) by groups which otherwise have 
no access to media outlets. Congress is looking for a reasonable 
solution to a rare occurrence. 

We recognize that programming mentioned in the Act creates 
difficulties, but just because something is difficult does not mean it 
should be prohibited. There are mechanisms which CCTV has 
instituted in recognition of difficult programming. For example, we 
run a disclaimer on programming which may offend a cable viewer. 
The responsibility is on the shoulders of the producer to flag a 
difficult program. In addition, any difficult programming is shown 
as late as possible in our cablecast day. Producers who violate our 
policies will be suspended from using CCTV’s facilities. 


Where CCTV disagrees with Continental is in the event that the 
operator remains liable therefore the “operator must be afforded the 
discretion to exclude material that the operator reasonably believes 
to be obscene. And the operator must be permitted to ask for 
certification regarding a broader category of programming than 
obscenity—sexually explicit material, for example—so that the 
operator can review the sexually explicit programs to decide if it 
reasonably believes any of it obscene. (p.4-5)" .. . and. . . “1) the 
cable operator must be permined to make its own determination 

notwithstanding any certification that maternal is obscene and 


313 


should be excluded 2) word its certification request in whatever 
form it desires . . 
The cable operator is not the best authority to determine whether or 
not a program is obscene, sexually explicit, or promoting unlawful! 
conduct (even with the caveat of NPRM footnote 11). It has been 
difficult enough to define obscenity. What is the definition of 
sexually explicit or unlawful conduct? Generally, there is not the 
personnel on the local level sufficiently schooled in the First 
Amendment to make these decisions. If rulings are based on an 
operator by operator basis there will be further problems of 
‘efiaition if am operator in one community has different 
interpretation of the “sexually explicit/unlawful conduct 
programming” from an operator in an adjacent community. 


If the Commission insists that the operator has full liability perhaps 
a matter should go to an advisory board consisting of producers, 
citizens, cable operator personnel, access staff, City officials, etc 
to make case by case decisions. This would at least afford some 
level of protection for the operator. The Commission may also 
wamt to consider language similar to that in the recent CPB 
Reauth drization Act which called for the FCC to “promulgate 
regulations..the broadcasting of indecent programming between 6 
a.m. and 10 p.m. on any day by a public television station that goes 
off the air before midnight.” (106 stat.964 public law 102-356, 
August 26, 1992) 

Continental urges the commission to “prevent transforming these 
problems into a de facto ban on indecent programs.” (p.2) We urge 
the Commission to not allow the operator to transform any 
regulations into a similar de facto ban on indecent programs. Any 
attempt to have the cable operator decide whether or not a program 
is obscene will have detrimental effects on that operator. Will the 
operator have to devote staff time to pre-screen all programs? The | 
operator will be the judge and jury and have to function in the court 
of public opinion as well. What a position to be in! If the operator 
allows the program they are criminally liable, so the operator would 
take a less lenient view of any program, affording themselves full 
pretection. On the other hand, a program in the grey area of 


314 


interpretation which is prohibited will create an uproar around 
censorship so that the operator loses either way. 


As to the two programs mentioned in footnote 3. It would not be 
true to state that sexually explicit programs have never been shown 
on any access channel. However, CCTV’s research has indicated 
that election related programming have caused far more difficulties 
than obscene programming. Having seen both of the programs 
mentioned in their entirety, CCTV would argue that neither is 
obscene. Of the more than 600 systems owned by Continental, 
most of them with local programming, only one hour of 
programming was found to be sexually explicit. In Cambridge less 
than one hour out of 15,000 hours of programming CCTV has run 
in the past five year may have been affected by the Act. Multiply 
that ratio by the thousands of hours of local programming seen 
every month on cable systems in the country, we end up with a 
tremendous effort for virtually no programming of this nature. And 
to be honest, community access channels do not have the viewership 
of network channels, so that the odds of viewers seeing obscene 
programming is further minimized. 

If there is no significant amount of obscene programming then what 
is wrong with a few rules. By creating a set of burdensome rules 
such as insurance bonding of producers, pre-screening of 
programming, etc. we will all be looking for a needle in a rather 
large haystack. Clearly, a chilling effect on all types of programs 
will take place if sufficient road blocks to making programs are 
erected. Why not take all of the effort necessary to implement 
these regulations and use the energy to make for more and better 
programs. 

Therefore, CCTV feels that there simply is not a problem which 
needs to be fixed. We urge the Commission to address the concern 
of the Congress by creating mechanisms which allow for the free 
flow of ideas, opmuions, and images. The party responsible for the 


315 


program should be the owner of the program and not the cable 
operator or the access entity. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ 
Irwin Hipsman 
Executive Director 
Cambridge Community Television 
One Kendall Square B-400 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
617-225-2500 


316 


FCC Caption Omitted 


REPLY COMMENTS OF 
CINCINNATI COMMUNITY VIDEO, INC. 


The recent comments that were filed by the cable industry in 
this proceeding seem to say that if cable companies are given broad 
authority to implement the regulations adopted by the FCC in 
regards to access channel programming, many of the cable 


companies will exercise this authority as fully as possible, even if 
the end result is to prevent the use of access channels altogether. 


However, this result cannot be fully reconciled with the basic 
purposes of the Cable Act, one of which is to promote diversity. 
Therefore, Cincinnati Community Video is urging the FCC to reject 
any proposal that would allow the cable operator so much authority 
in banning public access programming. What the FCC must do 
instead, as urged by the Alliance for Community Media (ACM) and 
others, is to adopt rules that more carefully and narrowly define the 
circumstances under which access programs can be banned. 


Aside from the constitutional and statutory reasons identified in 
comments filed by the ACM, there are a number of good reasons 
why this is so. The first issue is the sheer amount of time it would 
take to review access programs for content violations. 

In our case, citizens and community organizations supplying 
local programming to four public and educational access channels 
on the Cincinnati cable systems create over 400 new hours of 
programming a month. The practicality of setting up a review 
process in anticipation that there might be an obscenity is not 
prudent. It is particularly imprudent when consideration is given to 
the fact that in 10 years of access operations with over 30,000 
access programs cablecast not a single obscenity violation has ever 
occurred. 


The second reason is Congress’ intention to allow for program 
diversity. This intention comes to fruition through public access. 
Public access allows all constituencies to speak, to use the pervasive 


317 


medium of television to communicate opinions. Thousands of 
citizens and non-profit agencies use or have used public access here. 
From the Better Housing League to the NAACP to the Cincinnati 
Board of Education, all are using or have used public access 
television. Any ruling that would delay or otherwise jeopardize the 
timely delivery of public access programs would inappropriately 
stifle the diversity of programming which Congress sought to 
encourage. 

Finally, Cincinnati Community Video finds especially unclear 
Warner Cable's specific comments to the FCC regarding the 
Cincinnati, Ohio public access channel cablecast of nude sports 
programming supplied by a nudist organization as an example of 
local indecency. The area chapter of the American Sunbathers 
Association did supply a program about nudist lifestyles in March 
of 1992 which ran no earlier than 12:30 am. There were virtually 
no complaints from citizens regarding public indecency. There was 
far more public outcry regarding decency when Warner Cable 
offered the Playboy channel here. They eventually pulled it from 
the channel lineup as Warner had problems controlling illegal 
receipt of the service. Our overall concern is the use of the term 
“indecent” which Warner applies to this particular access program. 
We fear it is an example of how they will exercise unlimited rights 
to censor access programming and, as in this case, develop 
sweeping generalizations regarding the labeling of program 
materials as indecent. 

There is no reason to allow operators to so interfere with access 
operations, established and operating by mutual agreement. For 
reasons stated above, the Commission should reject proposals by the 
cable industry that cable companies be granted broad authority to 
censor PEG programming, and adopt proposals made by the 

/s/ 

Joyce Miller 

Executive Director 

Cincinnati Community Video, Inc. 

3130 Wasson Road 

Cincinnati, OH 45209 December 21, 1992 


318 


Cable operators in many communities have expressly agreed not 
to exercise any control over facilities provided for public, 
educational or governmental (“PEG”) access use. In St. Paul, 
Minnesota, for example, the City of St. Paul (“the City”) has 
authority to determine the rules and procedures that will govern use 
of all access facilities and equipment. The franchised cable 
operator, Continental Cablevision of St. Paul, Inc. (“Continental”), 
expressly agreed to this provision. In December 7, 1992 comments 
to the FCC, however, Continental's parent company (and other 
cable operators) asked the Commission to determine that such 
cable operators, are preempted by Section 10 of the Cable 
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“the 
Act”). 


Agreements regarding control over, and liability for, PEG 
are not in any way inconsistent with, or preempted by, the Act. 
Section 10 of the Act permits, but does not require, cable operators 
to censor certain types of PEG access program material. Nothing 
prohibits a cable operator from entering into contracts at the local 
level (with cities, access centers or producers) that define how and 
under what circumstances this permissive right may be exercised; 
indeed, nothing prevents the operator from agreeing that it will not 
exercise any rights it may have to ban certain types of PEG 


319 


programming. The Cable Act fully supports and is consistent with 
such agreements. For example, it generally requires cable 
operators to refrain from exercising editorial control over PEG 
channels (47 U.S.C. § 531(e)) and specifically authorizes 
franchising authorities and cable operators to enter into agreements 
“that certain cable services shall not be provided or shall be 
provided subject to conditions if such cable services are obscene or 
are otherwise unprotected by the Constitution of the United States.” 
47 U.S.C. 544(d)(1). 

Moreover, an operator’s promise not to interfere with rules 
regarding PEG facilities is often made in exchange for substantial 
benefits. For the PCC unilaterally to modify carefully negotiated 
agreements and to invalidate promises made by cable operators 
would unfairly and unnecessarily harm franchising authorities, cable 
subscribers and PEG access programmers. 


FCC Caption Omitted 


REPLY COMMENTS OF THE CITY OF ST. PAUL 
|. INTRODUCTION 


The City of St. Paul, Minnesota (“the City”) issued a 15-year 
cable franchise to Continental Cablevision of St. Paul, Inc. 
(“Continental”). According to the franchise, as amended, 
Continental is obligated to make available for access programming 
purposes six video channels on its cable system in the City, for 
public, educational and governmental (“PEG”) use. 

During the course of the franchise, disputes arose between 
Continental and the City. The City notified Continental that it was 
out of compliance with the franchise and, as a result, Continental 
filed an application to modify the franchise. Shortly thereafter, the 
City issued a violations notice to Cuntinental. One of the primary 
issues of dispute pertained to Continental's failure to comply with 
its obligations with respect to PEG access facilities On September 
15, 1992, the day after the Conference Report on the Cable 
Television and Consumer Protection Act of 1992 (“the Act”) was 


320 


issued,’ and after more than a year of intense negotiations, the City 
entered into a Settlement Agreement with Continental, whereby the 
City agreed to rescind its violations notice and Continental agreed 
to rescind its modification application. Prior to the settlement, 
Continental had broad obligations to support PEG access and to 
produce local origination programming. As part of the Settlement 
Agreement, Continental was relieved of all of its local origination 
programming production obligations, and its PEG obligations were 
specified support, responsibility for local programming obligations 
(including PEG) will be assumed by the City and/or by a non-profit 
entity or entities designated by the City (the “Designated Entity”), 
on a date agreed to by the parties. 

As part of the Settlement, the parties agreed to make certain 
conforming changes to the provisions of the City Code that govern 
Continental's performance. The City Code, as amended, now 
provides that the Designated Entity will indemnify Continental for 
any acts or omissions on the part of the Designated Entity, but the 
indemnity provision expressly precludes claims for which 
Continental is immune from liability under 47 U.S.C. 558. In 
addition, continental agreed that the City would have responsibility 
for the rules and regulations governing the use of the PEG access 
facilities, and equipment. 

Continental’s parent company has submitted comments to the 
commission, requesting it to clarify that agreements by a cable 
operator not to exercise control over PEG facilities are preempted 
by the Act.’ Similar requests have been made by other operators. 
The City urges the FCC to reject the pleas made by the cable 
operators, because agreements governing the manner in which 
operators exercise control over PEG channels, such as the recent St. 


' —_H. Rep. 862, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1992) 


Comments of Continental Cablevision, Inc. to the FCC, 
“Implementation of Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992,” MM Docket No. 92-258 at 6-8 (filed 
December 7, 1992) (hereafter “Comments of Continental”). 


321 


the Act. Moreover, public policy concerns weigh heavily in favor 
of a determination that such agreements regarding a cable operator's 
liability for, and control over, PEG access programming are not in 
any way affected by Section 10 of the Act. 


fl. THE FCC SHOULD CLARIFY THAT THE ACT DOES NOT 
PREEMPT ANY AGREEMENTS BETWEEN A CABLE 
OPERATOR AND A_ FRANCHISING AUTHORITY 
REGARDING A CABLE OPERATOR'S LIABILITY FOR, 
OR CONTROL OVER, PEG ACCESS PROGRAMMING 
AND FACILITIES. 


A. Nothing in the Act Prevents A Cable Operator from 
Access Programming. 

Section 10(c) of the Act requires the FCC to promulgate 
regulations that will enable cable operators to prohibit the use of 
PEG access channels for material that is obscene, sexually explicit 
or that promotes unlawful conduct. Plainly, the cable operator is 
at most permitted, but not required, to censor PEG access 
programming.’ Not only is a cable operator not required to take 
any steps to prevent any type of programming on a PEG channel, 
but the operator will be immune from liability, pursuant to 47 
U.S.C. 558, unless the program involves obscene material. 


* The City profoundly disagrees with the unsupported assertion by 
InterMedia Partners that because cable operators are likely to exercise their 
rights to censor certain PEG programming, Section 10(c) is somehow 
mandatory rather than permissive. See Comments of InterMedia Partners 
to the FCC, “Implementation of Section 10 of the Cable Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992,” MM Docket No. 92-258 at 2 
(filed December 7, 1992) (hereafter “Comments of InterMedia Partners"). 


* — Section 10(d) of the Act only eliminates cable operator immunity for 
obscene programming shown on PEG access channels. Both operators and 
supporters of access have argued that this provision should be read to 
impose liability only where an operator knows thal a program is obscene; 
under this approach, in situations where an operator does not manage 
access, it could have no liability for the programming. 


322 


A cable operator may refuse to exercise its power to prohibit 
certain types of programming material over PEG access channels, 
as a result of its own, unilateral decision. It follows that an 
operator may limit or condition any such authority it may have 
through a negotiated agreement with a franchising authority or any 
other entity. Continental's attempt to use potential liability as an 
excuse for voiding its contracts is unsupported by principles of 
contract law, which allow parties to allocate risks as part of their 
bargain. 

The FCC has indicated that where a right under federal cable 
law is permissive, existing agreements that restrict use of that right 
remain in full force and effect. For example, the FCC concluded 
that franchise agreements requiring cable operators to pay less than 
the maximum amount of franchise fees permitted by new federal 
regulations were not affected by regulations allowing franchising 
authorities to charge more.’ Likewise, a franchise agreement 
requiring a cable operator to pay only 3 percent of its gross 
revenues to the franchising authority is not preempted or otherwise 
affected by 47 U.S.C. 542(b), which allows a franchising authority 
to collect up to 5 percent of gross revenues.° 


In the same way, an agreement by a cable operator not to 
exercise control over PEG access programming or facilities 
constitutes a valid contract, whereby an operator waives or 
conditions exercise of a permissive right. The operator has merely 
delegated to another entity the responsibility for administrating PEG 
access. The Act does not preclude an operator from agreeing not 
to exercise any powers it may have, and thus it does not invalidate 


* “Report and Order: Amendment of Subparts B and C of Part 76 of the 
Commission's Rules Pertaining to Applications for Certificates of 
Compliance and Federal-State/Local Regulatory Relationships,” 66 
F.C.C.2d 380, 403 n.24 (1977). 


* Similarly, other permissive rights may be waived by agreement by the 
operator or franchising authority. For instance, franchising authorities 
have not been deemed to be statutorily required to exercise their rights 
under 47 U.S.C. 531(a) to require cable operators to provide PEG channel 


Capacity . 


323 


an existing promise by a cable operator that it will not in any way 
interfere with PEG access use. 


B. , , , —_— 
Se ee | Over PEG A P 1 Faciliti 
Preempted. 


State and local activity is preempted by federal law only where 
(1) Congress has expressed a clear intent to preempt such activity: 
(2) Congress has completely occupied the field of regulation and has 
left no room for state or local activity; or (3) compliance with both 
federal and state or local law is impossible. Capital Cities Cable, 
Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 699 (1984). Where federal law can 
exist compatibly and consistently with state or local regulation, 
however, it is not preempted, and both remain in effect. Florida 
Lime and Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132, 142 
(1963) (federal regulation should not be deemed preemptive of state 
regulatory power in the absence of persuasive reasons). 
“Congressional regulation of one end of the stream of commerce 
does not, ipso facto, oust all state regulation at the other end.” /d. 
at 145. 


Congress did not in any way preempt the field regarding control 
over PEG access programming. It did not expressly prohibit 
franchising authorities and cable operators from reaching 
agreements with respect to control over PEG programming and 
facilities. Rather, federal law expressly allows such agreements. 
See, e.g. 47 U.S.C. § 544 (dl). Nor does Section 10(d) 
specifically require the FCC to allow operators to demand 
indemnities broader than those they may be able to obtain through 
valid contract negotiation. 


Congress did not “occupy the field” of regulation in this area. 
Rather, a cable operator’s right to exercise control over PEG 
programming is permissive rather than required (and even so is 
limited to three specifically enumerated types of programming). 
Further, a cable operator may be liable for PEG programming only 


324 


in cases where obscene material in aired, and even that potential 
liability may be strictly curtailed under FCC rules.’ 

Moreover, there is nothing inconsistent between the Act and 
state or local agreements that limit a cable operator’s control over 
PEG use. To the contrary, 47 U.S.C. $31(e) specifically prohibits 
a cable operator from exercising editorial control over PEG 
channels and 47 U.S.C. § 531(b) allows the franchising authority 
to specify “rules and procedures for the use” of PEG channels. In 
amending the federal cable law, Congress chose to retain these 
provisions. Thus, agreements by cable operators not to exercise 
control over PEG access programming or facilities are consistent 
with, and in fact, reaffirm, federal law. 


The fact that local or state activi addresses the same objectives 
as federal law does not necessarily require preemption. Florida 
Lime and Avocado Growers, 373 U.S. at 142. The Supreme 
has recognized, for instance, that a state may adopt in its own 


by the Federal Constitution. Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins, 
447 U.S. 74, 81 (1980).* Franchise agreements that limit contro! 
by and/or liability of cable operators over PEG access facilities are 
not in any way inconsistent with Section 10 of the Act. Rather, 
such agreements complement federal cable law. Nothing in the Act 
requires preemption of franchise or other agreements regarding 
PEG access facilities. 


See e.g., Comments of InterMedia Partners at 15-16 (urging FCC to 


adopt regulations imposing liability on cable operators only when they had 
actual knowledge that the programming contained obscene material). 


. In Pruneyard, the Supreme Court upheld free speech rights guaranteed 
by the State Constitution without deciding whether those rights were 
protected under the First Amendment. Similarly, franchise agreements 
that preclude a cable operator from exercising control over PEG access 
programming provide greater freedom of speech than is required by 
federal law. 


Continental's parent company has asked the Commission to 
sweep away all franchise provisions in which a cable operator has 
agreed to relinquish control over access programming and any 
provisions that indemnify cable operators for liability with respect 
to PEG access facilities, to the extent that such indemnity 
agreements limit a cable operator's control over obscene or indecent 
programming. Continental's parent company admits that such 
provisions are included in many franchise agreements .° 

In essence, the Commission is being asked to substantially alter 
a significant number of carefully negotiated agreements, and to 
eliminate part of the consideration provided by cable operators in 
exchange for obtaining (or retaining) cable franchises. This 
represents no small sacrifice for franchising authorities, PEG access 
users, and cable subscribers. The Commission should consider 
carefully the public policy implications of acceding to the request 
made by Continental's parent and others. 


The agreements that the cable operators ask the FCC to preempt 
are bargained-for concessions and constitute consideration by the 
operator. The City of St. Paul, for example, waived its claims to 
past, unpaid franchise fees, as well as certain other claims, specified 
in the Settlement Agreement, that the City might have raised against 
the cable operator, Continental. In exchange, Continental agreed, 
among other things, that it would not exercise any control over 
rules and procedures governing PEG facilities and equipment. This 
promise was a substantial element of the consideration provided by 
Continental, and constituted an integral and material part of the 
Settlement Agreement between the City and Continental. 
Continental's parent appears to be asking the FCC to eliminate part 
of its end of the bargain in St. Paul and elsewhere 


s 


Comments of Continental at 6-7. 


326 


There is no need for the FCC to unilaterally change those 
bilaterally-negotiated agreements, and indeed, it cannot do so fairly, 
preserving the relative balance between the parties. There is no 
justification for preempting contracts where, as here, there is no 
conflicting federal law, and where to do so would deprive 
communities and cable subscribers nationwide of the benefits of 
promises made by their local cable operators, without providing any 
Il. CONCLUSION 

For the foregoing reasons. the City of St. Paul, Minnesota 
respectfully requests that the Commission reject cable operator's 
request that it rule that state and local agreements regarding control 
over, and liability for, PEG access programming and facilities are 
preempted. 


327 


Letterhead of ACTV 21 Omitted 
FCC Caption Omitted 


_ 


REPLY COMMENTS OF 
Columbus Community Cable 
Access, Inc. (ACTV 21) 

The comments filed by the cable industry in this proceeding 
indicate that, if cable companies are given broad authority to 
implement the regulations adopted by the FCC pertaining to 
programming on access channels, many of them will exercise it 
broadly, even if the result is to prevent the use of access channels 
altogether. 

Such a result cannot possibly be reconciled with the basic 
purposes of the Cable Act, which include promoting diversity. As 
a result, ACTV 21 urges the Commission to reject any proposal that 
would leave the operator with broad discretion to ban programming 
on public access channels. Instead, as urged by the Alliance for 
Community Media and others, the FCC must adopt rules that 
carefully and narrowly define the circumstances under which access 
programming can be banned. 

There are several good reasons why this is so (aside from the 
constitutional and statutory reasons identified in the comments filed 
by the Alliance for Community Media). 


Several operators have suggested that, if they are given the 
broad authority to review PEG access programming for content, the 
result will be increased expense and delay in cablecasting 
programming. Many community programmers in Columbus would 
be denied the opportunity to speak on the public channel in a umely 
fashion. A few examples are: 1) several local commumity groups 
would not have been able to respond to and participate in the 


328 


discussion concerning anti-discrimination and zoning laws proposal 
by the Columbus City Council; 2) the open and frank health 
discussions about unsafe sex practices by community groups and 
health organizations could have been squelched; and 3) programs by 
and for young people about drug abuse which contain “street 
language” could have been banned. 


Some operators have proposed that they be allowed to pre- 
screen programming at will. A pre-screening rule, or any rule that 
permitted the operator to exercise advance approval over 
programming, could make access unaffordable. A significant 
percentage of the individuals who use the public was channel in 
Columbus earn less than $15,000.00 per year. Additionally, many 
community organizations and nonprofits which use the access 
channel have very small operating budgets. FCC-imposed rules 
mandating indemnification, certification, bonds or liability insurance 
will place unnecessary financial obligations onto these individuals 
and organizations which they will not be able to bear. The FCC 
must not place discriminatory price tags on the public's right to 
speak on an electronic public forum. 


Some operators have suggested that, if they are given broad 
authority, they will require access centers themselves to make 
certifications as to the content of programming. However, access 
center budgets are often fixed as a result of contracts with operators 
and/or cities, which specify what the access organization can and 
cannot do. Allowing operators to impose new obligations on access 
centers is not required by the amendments to the Cable Act, and 
would require access centers to take on new tasks without 
compensation. ACTV contracts with the City of Columbus to 
provide video traiming, outreach, promotion, equipment use and 
program scheduling functions for public access activities on a first- 
come, first-serve nondiscriminatory basis. ACTV’s annual funding 
comes, in part, from the 3% franchise fees paid to the City by the 
two local cable operators, Time Warner Entertainment Company, 
L.P. and Coaxial Communications Inc. ACTV’s City funding has 
not imcreased in three years while actual services provided have 
increased by as much as 77.5%. Added and unnecessary financial 
burdens for insurance, bonds or staff to perform pre-screening of 


329 


programs will have a major negative impact on services to the 
public. There is no reason to allow operators to so interfere with 
access operations, established and operating by mutual agreement. 
shown it is necessary to do so. In the course of negotiating the 
cable franchise, an indemnity clause between the City of Columbus 
and the cable operators was included in City Code, Chapter 595.08. 
Also, ACTV’s contract with the City also contains an indemnity 
clause. And another local provision is found in Columbus City 
Code Section 595.05 (E) which states: 


The operator shall have no control over the content and 
scheduling of access programs other than the prohibition of 
(1) any advertising material designed to promote the sole of 
commercial products or services including advertising, (2) 
lottery information; (3) legally obscene matter pursuant to 
applicable Federal, State, or City law. 


ACTV is unaware of any actions taken by the cable operators under 
Section 595.05(E) within the last 10 years. And it is reasonable to 
assume that action against “legally obscene matter” could occur 
only after a court of competent jurisdiction finds certain “matter” 
to be “legally obscene.” Additionally, Columbus City Code. 
Section 595.11(1) also requires the cable operators to provide 
“adequate technical means” to prevent reception by subscribers for 
the type of programming described in the FCC’s proposed rules. 
There is no reason to replace these agreements (or agreements 
where the operator has chosen to do without an indemnity) with a 
proposals by the cable industry that cable companies be granted 
broad authority to censor PEG programming, and adopt proposals 
made by the Alliance for Community Media. 
/s/ 
Carl Kucharski 
Columbus Community Cable Access, Inc. (ACTV 21) 
394 Oak Street 
Columbus, OH 43215 December 21, 1992 


330 


FCC Caption Omitted 


REPLY COMMENTS OF 
DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CONSORTIUM, INC. 
ON NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULE MAKING 


Denver Area Educational Telecommunications Consortium, Inc. 
(“DAETC”)' hereby submits the following reply comments in the 
Ce 


in that comments, contin ails Sanne 
Commission grant them undue latitude in implementing Section 10 
of the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 
(“1992 Act”). 

For instance, comments submitted by Cole, Raywid & 
Braverman (“Cole Raywid”) on behalf of certain cable companies 
(Acton Corp., et al) asked the Commission to rely extensively on 


programming. As well, Cole Raywid seeks to place cable 
operator decisions beyond the bounds of Commission er court 
review.’ 


Far from implementing Section 10 of the 1992 Act in the 
narrowest possible fashion, these proposals would assign broad 


As set forth in its Comments in this proceeding, DAETC is a non- 
profit corporation that programs leased access cable channels. DAETC's 
program service, known as The 90’s Channel, appears 24 hours a day on 
eight cable systems serving over 500,000 subscribers. 


Acton Corp. ef al at 2, 5. 
Id. at 4. 


331 


powers of censorship to private entities which have shown systemic 
hostility to leased access in general,‘ and insulate such entities, 
decisions from impartial review under law. Contrary to Cole 
Raywid's suggestion, the Commission must concern itself with the 
question of whether the content of barred programming is genuinely 
impermissible, rather than whether a cable operator has complied 
with a nebulous “good faith” standard. 

DAETC strongly recommends that the Commission rule that 
operator decisions regarding the withholding of programming under 
Section 10 of the 1992 Act are subject to Commission review, and, 
through appeal, judicial review. We exhort the Commission not to 
protect operators from civil liability they incur as a result of 
refusing to transmit programming that is not legally prohibited. 
Clearly, to do otherwise is to eliminate risks in censoring 
programming, while leaving potential danger in transmission. It is 
not difficult to foresee that such incentives will favor censorship 
over expression. 

Further, to adopt the proposals urged by Cole Raywid and 
certain other cable commentators is to undermine the principal 
intent of Congress in passing Section 612 of the Communications 
Act. As pointed out by The Alliance for Community Media, ef ai, 
the original and continuing purpose of Congress in Sections 611 and 
612 of the Communications Act is to establish channels of speech 
which are beyond operator control’ — a goal which directly 
contradicts Cole Raywid’s proposals to give operators unbridled 


C f Imo ing Section 10 of the 1992 
Certain cable operators have asked that parties other than cable 


operators bear the expense of cable company implementation of 
Section 10 of the 1992 Act.° DAETC has searched the statute and 


* See comments of DAETC at 4, 5. 
* Comments of the Alliance for Community Media, er al, at p. 3 


* See Comments of Continental Cablevision at p. ii and those of 
Intermedia Partners at p. i 


332 


legislative history in vain for any suggestion that others should bear 
the financial burden of implementation. As a non-profit entity with 
a limited budget, DAETC could well be forced out of business if 
required to pay for all or part of the implementation of Section 10 
by a cable operator.’ DAETC believes that given that the purpose 
of Section 612 is to expand the roster of speakers on cable 
television, it is not in the public interest to impose potentially fatal 
financial burdens on small leased access programmers. 


Constinutionality of the $ 


An expressed in DAETC’s comments in this rule making, 
DAETC believes the indecency provisions of Section 612 of the 
1992 Act are unconstitutional. We note with some satisfaction that 
a broad spectrum of other commenters have expressed similar 
views. Nonetheless, DAETC acknowledges that the commission 
must proceed with this rule making until the statute is stayed or 
overturned. 


John B. Schwartz, President 
P.O. Box 6060 

Boulder, CO. 80306 

(303) 442-2707 


Dated: December 18, 1992 


The irony here is that if the Commission adopts the suggestions of the 
more extreme cable commentators, DAETC and other leased access 
providers could end up paying the cost of private censorship of 
programming which Congress did not intend to prohibit. 


The Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. (“MPAA”) 
respectfully submits its reply to comments filed in the above- 
referenced proceeding. 

MPAA represents seven leading U.S. producers of motion 
picture and television programming. As program providers, 
MPAA’s members are potential users of leased access facilities, 
directly or indirectly. 

In the instant proceeding, the Commission proposes to adopt 
regulations dealing with, inter alia, restricting access by children to 
“indecent programming” on leased access channels of cable 
systems, as mandated by Congress in the Cable Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Act”). We confine 
these reply comments to that portion of the proceeding. 


We begin by declaring our agreement with the nearly universal 
view of the commenting parties that the entire censorial regime 
imposed by Section 10 of the 1992 Act and to be implemented in 
this proceeding is unconstitutional. The unobjectionable goal of 
protecting the child audience from exposure to unsuitable materials 
simply cannot justify these new highly intrusive and speech- 
and state obscenity laws under “harmful to minors” provisions.’ 


‘The exhibition of material, including any program delivered on a cable 
television system, fo @ minor may be proscribed only if it is “harmful to 
minors,” which requires a finding that the program depicts nudity, sexual 
contact, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse in a manner which 
“predominantly appeals to the prurient, morbid, or shameful interests of 
minors, which is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult 

(continued...) 


334 


Additionally, children in households with cable television have been 
protected for years wy the federal requirement that lockboxes be 
provided to subscribers upon request.’ 


Pending the inevitable court challenges that the operation of 
Section 10 will generate, the Commission must take every step 
necessary to minimize the harm that the statute and new regulations 
will cause to the dissemination of First Amendment-protected 
speech. The Commission must provide to cable operator/lessors 
and to programmer/lessees the greatest possible clarity and certainty 
in the implementation of the requirements of Section 10. While the 
Commission cannot cure the overbreadth of the statute through 
interpretation, it must at least seek to mitigate the harm. 


of this section in a manner not inconsistent with Congress’ other 
expressed intention: to promote a diversity of viewpoints through 
leased access.’ Congress has again expressed its commitment to 
leased access through requirements in Section 9 of the 1992 Act that 
are intended to encourage leased access use. By promoting 


'(...continued) 

community concerning what is suitable for minors and which is utterly 
without redeeming social importance for minors.” Ginsberg v. New York, 
390 U.S. 629 (1968). 

Regulations pertaining to restricting an adult’s access to material 
delivered via cable television face similar constitutional scrutiny: that 
materials can only be prohibited “if taken as a whole, appeal to the 
prurient interest in sex, which portray sexual conduct in a patently 
offensive way, and which, taken as a whole, do not have serious literary, 
artistic, political or scientific value. . .” Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15, 
21 (1973). The more recent U.S. Supreme court ruling in Pope v. 
Illinois, 481 U.S. 497 (1987), affirmed the Miller test, specifying that the 
proper inquiry in an obscenity prosecution is whether a “reasonable 
person,” as opposed to the “community,” would find that the material 
possesses serious value. 


2 47: U.S.C. Sec. 544(d)(2(A). 
> The First Amendment rationale for leased access is summarized in the 
comments of the Alliance for Community Media et al. at 3 ff. 


335 


unwarranted censorship or self-censorship, or by burdening leased 
access users with unjustified costs or potential liability, these new 
rules could have the effect of chilling the use of leased access 
channels, which is plainly unconstitutional.‘ It would be 
unfortunate indeed were the Commission to interpret its obligations 
in a way that discourages the freedom of expression that leased 
access was intended to foster, and precipitates a constitutional 
challenge. 

l. Definiti f “Ind P — 

In attempting to define “indecency,” the Commission is once 
again confronted with an extraordinarily difficult, delicate and 
ultimately futile challenge. Recent controversies over alleged 
“indecent” broadcast programming suggest the grave dangers 
inherent in attempting to regulate constitutionally-protected speech, 
and show the need for great clarity and certainty in any regulations 
adopted by the Commission. The potential financial liabilities, 
harm to reputation, and harm to First Amendment interests that 
could flow from violations of such regulations are extremely 
serious. ; 

These considerations compel the adoption of a narrow, uniform 
and workable definition of “ind ine” which should 
govern both in the context of (i) any “voluntary policy” on non- 
carriage of “indecent programming” that a cable operator may 
choose to adopt and (ii) what programming a cable operator who 
does not elect to bar “indecent programming” must relegate to 
“blocked” channels. The importance of uniformity is recognized 
by the National Cable Television Association (“NCTA”), which 
urges that the definition of “indecency” governing what a cable 
operator may choose to prohibit and the definition for purposes of 


‘ The Supreme Court has ruled many times that laws that, by creating 
the fear of legal consequences, promote self-censorship violate the First 
Amendment as much as laws that directly ban certain speech. See Smith 
v. California, 361 U.S. 147, 154 (1959). 


336 


determining what programming may be relegated to a “blocked” 
channel “should be the same.”° 


We concur with the view of Time Warner Entertainment 
Company, L.P. (“TWE”) that the definition should incorporate a 
community standard “for the cable medium,” that “the [appropriate] 
standard is that of the ‘average cable viewer’ on a nationwide 
basis. . .”, and that the determination of whether any content is 
“patently offensive” requires judgment “within the context of the 
whole program and the merit of the work.”® 

Any definition of “indecent programming” must also recognize 
the distinct technological and commercial differences between cable 
television and other electronic media. Cable is neither so 
ubiquitous, readily accessible or intrusive as the broadcasting or 
telephone media. Moreover, as noted above, the cable industry is 
already under an obligation to provide “lockboxes” to parents upon 
request. In view of these and other factors, we believe a narrower 
definition of “indecency” than is applied to those media can be fully 
justified. 

Any adjudicatory body attempting to apply this definition must 
also consider how the content in question compares with other 
content on non-leased access channels. Any new regulations must 
crate a presumption that any program material of a kind or type 
similar or identical to that which might appear on a non-leased 
access channel, and which would not be found “indecent,” should 
not be deemed “indecent” for purposes of the leased access 


* NCTA at 7. We note the valuable role that NCTA has played in 
promoting the adoption of voluntary uniform industry standards in such 
areas as Customer service, and believe such an effort would be appropriate 
in this context. The cable industry should be encouraged to adopt 
consistent industry-wide policies as to both certification requirements and 
voluntary exclusion of “indecent programming” in order to give fair notice 
to those who would use leased access facilities and to avoid a content- 
based balkanization that could render leased access useless for those 
seeking a national or regional audience. 

* TWE a 6-48 


337 


regulations. Absent such 4 standard, one must presume that the 
Congress has chosen to discriminate against leased access 
programming based on the identity of the programmer, not based 
on the alleged injurious nature of the program content for a child 
audience, which would only compound the constitutional infirmity 
of the new rules. 


Finally, the Commission must “clarify that all state and local 
franchise authority regulations, as well as specific franchise 
agreement provisions, that are inconsistent with the Act and the 
implementing regulations are preempted.”’ 

In summary, the Commission must adopt a national standard of 
indecency, must ensure that the definition is narrow, workable and 
non-restrictive of permissible speech as possible, and must preempt 
state and local regulation of content based on the same or similar 
concerns about the child audience. The Commission should also 
encourage the cable industry to promote uniformity in application 
of these standards. While a definition incorporating these elements 
would not necessarily pass constitutional muster, it would at least 
be somewhat more consistent with Supreme Court standards than 


that proposed in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. 
Il. The “Single Channel” Requirement 
In the instant proceeding, the Commission must interpret what 
Congress meant when it gave the cable operator the option of 
putting “indecent” programming on a “single channel. We support 
the argument by Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P., that 
Congress’ clear intention in passing this provision was to 
limit children’s access to indecent programming, and not 
necessarily to limit the amount of indecent programming to 
that which may fit on one channel. The Commission, 
therefore, should make clear that cable operators may, if 
they choose, place indecent commercial use programming 


Continental Cablevision at 6 


338 


on more than one channel as long as any channel that is 
designated for indecent programming is blocked.* 

Even if the Commission were not persuaded by that rationale, 
there are technological developments which may require a more 
expansive view. Many cable operators are now on the verge of 
introducing signal compression technologies which could increase 
the video carriage capacity of a standard 6 MHz channel by 
anywhere from four to ten times. As such technologies are 
introduced, the Commission should give the cable operator greater 
latitude in satisfying the spirit of the statute. Thus, even if the 
Commission determines that by “single channel” Congress meant 
a single 6 MHz block of spectrum, the Commission should presume 
that the cable operator who confines “indecent” programming to 
such multiple compressed channels (i.e., the several video channels 
compressed within the space of the single 6 MHz channel), where 
each of the compressed channels is otherwise subject to blocking, 
is operating within the intent of the statute. 


1. Matice snd Jodemeificntion Bowe 


We begin by reiterating our strenuous opposition on 
constitutional grounds to the entire censorship scheme imposed by 
Section 10 of the 1992 Act. Regulations requiring a First 
Amendment-protected speaker to self-censor or that impose, directly 
or indirectly, substantial potential liabilities for such protected 
speech constitute a direct prior restraint. However, for the purpose 
of assisting the Commission to mitigate the First Amendment harms 
of Section 10, we offer the following comments. 

Each cable operator should have in place within a reasonable 
period of time its voluntary policy on the carriage of “indecent 
programming,” and its compliance plan for carriage of such 
programming on “blocked” channels. We believe an acceptable 
time period would range from 120-180 days from the effective date 
of the new regulations. 


* TWE at 9. 


339 


Once the operator has taken the technical and other steps to 
accommodate requests for access to such a channel, the lessee 
should face no further delay. If the absolute right of a cable 
operator to voluntary bar all “indecent programming” from its 
system is indeed constitutional, and if an operator chooses not to 
exercise this right, it should be prepared to carry any non-obscene 
programming on its “blocked” channels on very limited notice. 
The seven days’ notice proposed by the Commission should be an 
absolute maximum. Lessees should also be permitted to provide 
“blanket notification” for multiple or regularly-scheduled programs. 


The cable operator should be given a reasonable period of time 
to satisfy subscriber requests for blocking of service. However, the 
time for satisfying such requests should have no bearing on the 
availability of the leased access channel to the lessee. If an operator 
wishes to ensure that subscribers are given satisfactory notice of 
their right to block certain channels, the operator can provide notice 
to existing subscribers during the 120-180 day implementation 
period described above, or to new subscribers at the time of 
sign-up. 


To further mitigate the effects of unconstitutional self- 
censorship, the Commission must take additional steps. 


First, a lessee should be permitted, but should not be required, 
to provide written notice to the cable operator of any programmning 
which the lessee believes may be found to be “indecent.” 
Requiring that such certification be in writing would amount to a 
Fifth Amendment violation. "° 


In the event that written notice is provided, the time period for record 
retention should not be more than 30 days from date of carriage, and the 
time period within which a complaint may be filed against an operator or 
programmer should be no longer than the record retention period. 

‘© We do not here address questions of certification of, or liability for, 
carriage of “obscene” programming because the MPAA member 
companies neither produce nor distribute programming that would violate 
any constitutionally valid definition of “obscenity.” 


340 


Second, the Commission can better satisfy the purposes of the 
Act while reducing the darnage to constitutional rights by permitting 
any lessee simply to request carriage on a “blocked” channel of any 
program." 


The cable operator has the absolute right not to carry any 
“indecent programming” on its leased access channels and, in 
adopting such a policy, will in fact bear editorial responsibility for 
its decision to exclude. If the cable operator waives that right, the 
operator must then ensure, based on information received from the 
lessee, that any “indecent” leased access programming is regulated 
to a “blocked” channel. This can be achieved without requiring the 
lessee to “certify” that programming is “indecent” — which will 
likely prove an impossible task — by simply allowing any lessee to 
request carriage on a “blocked” channel of any programming 
whatsoever. 


The cable operator can alleviate any remaining risk by requiring 
indemnification from all lessees against any liability flowing from 
the transmission of obscene or indecent programming, or permitting 
lessors and lessees to determine by contract who may bear certain 
specific costs of compliance with Section 10. The Commission must 
ensure that such requirements are not unreasonable and do not exist 
for the primary purpose of discouraging legitimate use of leased 
access channels. The Commission must also take any such 
requirements fully into account in establishing terms and conditions 
for leased access use, under regulations to be adopted pursuant to 
Section 9 of the 1992 Act. 


Any disputes between lessors and lessees as to the requirements 
of these new regulations should be subject to expedited review by 
the Commission. 

Finally, we support the position of cable industry commenters 
that cable operators should “retain the flexibility to use any 


‘' We believe that such an approach is as consistent with the 
requirements of the statute as the recommendation by Time Warner 
Entertainmen (and discussed above) that the Commission interpret the 
“single channel” requirement more broadly. 


34] 


reasonable method of blocking subscriber access that satisfies the 
goals of Section 10,” including partial blocking of mixed-use 
channels. '* 


IV. Sufficiency of Notice of Proposed Rules 


The record in this rulemaking demands that the Commission 
move with great caution in adopting rules which will impact First 
Amendment-protected speech. Due to the extraordinary 
constitutional delicacy of the issues at hand, and despite the tight 
statutory timeline imposed on the agency, the Commission cannot 
conclude the instant proceeding without sub ecting a final set of 
proposed rules, and its constitutional analysis underlying such rules, 
to an additional round of public comment. Respect for the First 
Amendment demands no less. 


Respectfully submitted, 


MOTION PICTURE ASSOCIATION 
OF AMERICA, INC. 


By: /s/ 
Fritz E. Attaway 
1600 Eye Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Telephone: (202) 293-1966 


Of Counsel: 


Joseph W. Waz, Jr. 

Senior Vice President and General Counsel 

The Wexler Group 

1317 F Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20004 

Telephone: (202) 638-2121 DATED: December 21, 1992 


? See, ¢.g., Tele-Communications, Inc. at 12 ff. 


REPLY COMMENTS OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS OFFICERS AND ADVISORS, 
NATIONAL LEAGUE OF CITIES, UNITED STATES 
CONFERENCE OF MAYORS, AND THE NATIONAL 


ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES, 


The National Association of Telecommunications Officers and 
Advisors, the National League of Cities, the United States 
Conference of Mayors, and the National Association of Counties 
(collectively, “Local Governments”) submit these reply comments 
in the above-captioned proceeding. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The Federal Communications Commission (“Commission”) has 
proposed a reasonable method of implementing Section 10 of the 
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 
(“1992 Cable Act”). In general, the rules strike an appropriate 
balance between Congress‘ desire that cable operators be permitted 
to limit certain programming on access channels, and provisions in 
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (“1984 Cable Act”) 
that prohibit cable operators from exercising editorial control over 
public, educational and governmental (“PEG”) access and leased 
access channels. See 47 U.S.C. 531(e) and 532(c)(2). 

Local Governments recommended in their initial comments, 
however, that the Commission take into account the unique role of 
PEG channels in permitting members of the public and others to 
provide important programming in the public interest and 
encouraging the free flow of information among all segments of the 
community. In particular, Local Governments recommended that 
the Commission allow PEG providers to: (1) make blanket, rather 
than program-by-program, certifications; and (2) certify that they 
have exercised reasonable efforts to ensure that their programs will 
not contain obscene or otherwise proscribed material. Finally, 
Local Governments recommended that disputes between cable 


343 


operators and programmers be resolved in the first instance by the 
judicial system. 


Local Governments urge the Commission not to adopt proposals 
by commenters that would upset the careful balance between the 
1984 and 1992 Cable Acts, and would increase the administrative 
and financial burdens on local governments, subscribers and PEG 
and leased access programmers. In particular, Local Governments 
urge the Commission not to adopt proposals that would: (1) grant 
cable operators editorial control over the content of PEG and leased 
access programming; (2) impose the cost of complying with the 
Commission’s rules on programmers or subscribers: (3) unduly 
burden members of the public and others that desire to distribute 
programming over access channels: and (4) restrict the ability of 
local governments to regulate the programming on PEG channels, 
and regulate obscene or indecent programming. 


il. DISCUSSION 
A. Cable Operators Should Bear the Costs of Complying 


Cable operators should bear the costs of complying with 
Section 10 of the 1992 Cable Act. Nothing in Section 10 suggests 
that such costs should be passed directly on to cable subscribers, or 
imposed on leased or PEG access users or subscribers ' 


The 1984 and 1992 Cable Acts impose a number of obligations 
on cable operators, including customer service standards, technical 
standards, equal employment opportunity reporting requirements, 
and other requirements. Nothing in these provisions suggests that 
a cable operator should be able to directly pass on compliance costs 
to cable subscribers. Section 623 of the 1992 Cable Act identifies 
the categories of costs that must be included in establishing rates; 
the cost of complying with Section 10 is not identified as a 
recoverable cost. 


' See, e.g., Comments of Tele-Communications Inc. at 5, Cox Cable 


Communications at 10-11, Continental Cablevision, Inc. at 10-11, and the 
Community Antenna Television Association, Inc. at 7. 


344 


The absence of language in the 1992 Cable Act permitting @ 
cable operator to “pass through” compliance costs onto 
programmers or subscribers makes clear that Congress intended for 
a cable operator to bear such costs, just as it must bear the costs of 
complying with other provisions in the 1984 and 1992 Cable Acts. 


B. Cable Operators Are Prohibited from Pre-Screening 
Programming _ 
The Commission should not adopt regulations allowing cable 
operators to pre-screen or monitor the content of access 
programming to determine if it is indecent or obscene.’ The 1984 
Cable Act explicitly prohibits cable operators from pre-screening oF 
monitoring programming to ensure that it does not contain such 
material. See 47 U.S.C. 531 (“a cable operator shall not exercise 
any editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental 
use of channel capacity provided pursuant to this section”); 47 
U.S.C. 532 (“a cable operator shall not exercise any editorial 
control over any video programming provided pursuant to this 
section, or in any other way consider the content of such 
programming”). Moreover, pre-screening by cable operators 
pursuant to regulations established by the Commission would have 
serious first amendment implications. 


The certification process proposed by the Commission, along 
with immunizing a cable operator from penalties the Commission 
might impose for violations of its rules, should provide cable 
operators sufficient assurance that prohibited programming will not 
be carried on their cable systems and that, if such programming 1s 
inadvertently carried, the Commission will not penalize cable 
operators that in “good faith” complied with the Commission's 
regulations. 


2 See, e.g., Comments of the National Cable Television Association at 
9. 


345 
C. The Commission Does Not Have the Authority to 


Preempt Local laws and Franchise Agreements = 


indecency laws, franchise provisions, and provisions in contracts 
between cable operators and public access organizations that are 
“meconsistent” with the Commission’s rules or address the same 
issues addressed by the Commission's rules’ 

Congress did not grant the Commission the auinority to preempt 
state and local laws, and franchise and contract provisions, in this 
area and there is no language in the 199? Cable Act's legislative 
history to suggest that this was Congress’ intent. Congress could 
have included a preemption provision in the 1992 Cable Act if 
Congress had intended for the Commission to preempt state and 
local regulation in this area. In the absence of such language in the 
1992 Cable Act, the Commission should not interfere with the 
operation of state and local laws and bargained-for franchise and 
contract provisions. Questions regarding whether a state or |ocal 
law or franchise provision is preempted by federal law will more 
appropriately be decided by a court on a case-by-case basis. 

D. na Covenants an Cragpammnere Ghewké Het Be 


Ths Commutecien cients ons cogtes toed govemmens ant 
cable programmers to provide indemnification, indemnification 
insurance, a bond, letter of credit or similar protection, to cable 
operators as a condition of carriage om access channels.‘ 
Moreover, local governments should not be required to indemnify 
cable operators for lawsuits challenging a cable operator's decision 


See, ¢.g., Comments of Continental Cablevision, Inc. at 6-8. the 
National Cable Television Association at 12, and Time Warner 
Entertainment Company, L.P. at 28. 


* See, ¢.g., Comments of Blade Communications, Inc., ef. al. at 12, the 
National Cable Television Association at 15 and Time Warner 
Entertainment Company, L.P. at 19 and 23 


346 


or indecent.’ 


The imposition of an indemnification requirement on local 
governments would undercut the purpose of — and may violate — 
the damages immunity provision in Section 24 of the 1992 Cable 
Act. Section 24 demonstrates Congress’ intent to grant local 
fees in legal challenges to their authority to regulate cable systems. 
The Commission should not allow cable operators to recover such 
damages, costs and fees indirectly by imposing on local 
governments an indemnification requirement. 

Moreover, the 1992 Cable Act does not authorize the 
Commission to impose an indemnification requirement on either 


constitutions and statutes that prohibit the imposition of open-ended 
indemnification requirements on local governments. See, ¢.g., 31 
U.S.C. 1341 (limits indemnification obligations of the federal 
government and the District of Columbia). 


Finally, indemnification requirements would have a “chilling 
effect” on the number of programmers that could use PEG or leased 
access channels, and on the regulation of such channels by local 
governments. Congress enacted leased and PEG access channel 
provisions in 1984 to promote its goal of “assur{ing) that cable 
communications provide and are encouraged to provide the widest 


public ” 47 U.S.C. 521(4). Congress reaffirmed this purpose in 
the 1992 Cable Act by: (1) authorizing franchising authorities to 
deny a franchise request if an applicant does not plan to provide 

facilities or support, 47 U.S.C. 541(a) 
(as amended by the 1992 Cable Act); and (2) requiring the 
Commission to establish reasonable rates, terms and conditions of 
leased access. 47 U.S.C. 532 (c) (as amended by the 1992 Cable 


* See, ¢.g.. Comments of Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. 
at 27. 


347 


Act). The Commission would undermine these Congressional 
policies and mandates if it enacted regulations that would unduly 
inhibit a programmer's use of such channels. Such a requirement 
may not be a “reasonable” obligation to impose on programmers, 
See, €.8., 47 USC. 532(c2\ii) (as amended by the 1992 Cable 

cularly on users of PEG channels who may not have 
the resources to provide indemnification to a private cable operator 


E. Courts Should Resolve Disputes Between Cable 
Operators and Programmers __ a 
local governments’ resolve disputes between cable operators and 
programmers. Others have suggested that 2 cable operator's 
decision on whether a program should be carried should be final 
and not subject to review.’ ) 
Local Governments oppose suggestions that a cable operator's 
actions not be reviewable. However, Local Governments believe 
that neither the Commission nor a local government should resolve 
such disputes. As stated in our initial comments, Local 
or local governments would merely delay a decision by a court on 
itl. CONCLUSION 


Local Governments believe that the Commission's approach is 
sound with respect to implementing Section 10 of the 1992 Act. 
The Commission should not implement suggestions by commenters 
that would undermine this approach. in particular, Local 
Governments urge the Commission not to adopt regulations thai. 
(1) gramt cable operators the authority to pre-screen access 


* See, ¢.g..Comments of Cox Cable Communications at 12. 


"See, e.g., Comments of Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P 
at 24-25. 


* See, e.g., Comments of Tele-Communications Inc. a 18. 


348 


programming; (2) impose the cost of complying with the 
Commission's rules on programmers or subscribers; (3) impose 
undue burdens on programmers; and (4) restrict the ability of local 
governments to regulate PEG channels and enforce laws and 
franchise provisions regulating indecent or obscene programming. 
Moreover, Local Governments believe that disputes between cable 
operators and programmers should be resolved in the first instance 


by the judicial system. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Ls/ 
Norman M. Sinel 
Stephanie M. Phillipps 
William E. Cook, Jr. 
ARNOLD & PORTER 
1200 New Hampshire Avenuc, NW. 


Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 872-6700 


December 21, 1992 


As NCTA pointed out in its initial comments, these changes to 
existing law only serve to highlight the First Amendment problems 
that are inherent in the Act’s public and leased access provisions. 
To require cable operators to carry material — indecent or 
otherwise — that they might otherwise choose not to carry 
ee ere ee 
certain types of programming that the government views as 
“indecent” or unfit for carriage raises First Amendment problems, 
too. To single out some non-obscene programming as “indecent” 
and therefore subject to discriminatory treatment is to engage in 
constitutionally suspect content regulation. The law continues to 
burden cable operators with restrictions on their editorial discretion, 
but now it also imposes a form of content regulation on providers 
of access programming. 

A number of commenting parties, primarily representing access 
programmers, are quite sensitive to the First Amendment 
implications of governmental efforts to restrict “indecent” 
programming on cable television. But these parties are, at the same 


350 


time, wholly oblivious to the First Amendment implications of 
forcing cable operators to carry such programming. Their solution 
— forcing cable operators to carry such programming, but also 
forcing them to provide all subscribers who do not want to watch 
such programming with lockboxes or other blocking devices — only 
exacerbates the unconstitutional burdens of access requirements. 


Respectfully submitted, 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEV’. 
SION ASSOCIATION, INC. 


By _ _/si 
Daniel L. Brenner 


ITS ATTORNEYS 
1724 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
(202) 775-3664 


December 21, 1992 


REPLY COMMENTS OF 
‘Olelo: The Corporation for Community Television 
‘Olelo: The Corporation for Community Television (‘Olelo), urges 


regulations proposed by the FCC pertaining to programming access 
impact as to include preventing protected speech and potentially 
Clearly this was not the intent of the act. Instead, consistent with 
identified in the comments filed by the Alliance for Community 
Media. 

In Hawai'i, State policy was established that the responsibility for 
all public access programming was the speaker and not the cable 
was created in law indemnifying the non-profit operator from 


352 


policy and procedure has worked well for Hawai‘i and relies upon 
existing laws to prosecute those who place unprotected speech onto 
the public access channels. There is no compelling reason for the 
FCC to intervene in the State policy and contractual agreement 
established between the State and the cable operator and the State 
and ‘Olelo. 


In cases were cable subscribers have objected to access 
programming being available in the home, our cable operators have 
provided lock boxes or filtering devices that remove any undesired 
channels, whether they are access or partially scrambled pay 
services such as Playboy. Again, this approach has worked without 
imposing the burdens of regulations that would chill speech such as 
pre-screening. 


Pre-screening of programming, whether by the cable operator or the 
non-profit facilitator would pose a significant cost and logistical 
burden. Highly competent staff with sound legal judgement would 
have to be hired to review each program requiring long lead times 
for submission of tapes. This would eliminate any live interactive 
programming and any programming that would be of a timely 
nature. This would mean for us, the elimination of educational 
distant learning programming that must be carried live for student 
interaction. 


In summary, the proposed rules must be reconsidered. The 


Commission should reject proposals whereby the cable operator is 
granted broad authority to censor PEG programming. We urge the 
Commission to consider and adopt the proposals made by the 
Alliance for Community Media. 

/s/ 


Richard D. Turner, 
Executive Director 


‘Olelo: The Corporation for Community Television 
960 Mapunapuna Street, 2nd Floor 
Honolulu, HI 96819 


December 18, 1992 


Viacom International Inc. (hereinafter “Viacom”) by its 
attorneys, hereby submits its Reply Comments in response to the 
above-captioned Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. Viacom owns 
and operates cable television systems and, accordingly, will be 
directly affected by the outcome of this proceeding. 


Viacom shares the concerns of many parties filing comments as 
to the serious First Amendment problems raised by the statutory 
provisions giving rise to this proceeding and the unavoidable 
practical difficulties that any implementing regulations must 
address. The purpose of this reply is to support approaches 
suggested by other comments that would minimize burdens and 
allocate responsibility for compliance in as fair and workable 
manner as possible given the fundamental flaws of the statutory 
requirements. Specifically, Viacom supports a system of 
certification as the starting point of the cable operator’s response to 
requests for channel time by either commercial channel lessees or 
PEG access programmers. In addition, Viacom believes that prior 
to airing an access program, the operator must have the right to be 
indemnified by the programmer against liability stemming from 
airing ana on the access channels. 


Viacom agrees with the many commenting parties who have 
pointed out constitutional flaws and severe practical problems in the 
mechanism Congress chose to restrict children’s access to indecent 
programming and to keep obscenity off of cable channels. The new 
Statutory provisions are a travesty for everyone involved in access. 
The rules mandated by the statute will subject cable operators to 
responsibility and liability for the content of programming over 
which they otherwise are intended to have no editorial control. 
Furthermore, however the Commission implements the law, it will 


354 


be almost impossible to avoid interfering with legitimate First 
Amendment rights of programmers who utilize the access channels. 


Congress and the Commission already have provided sufficient 
protection for children by mandating availability of parental control 
devices. See 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)(2)(A) and 47 C.F.R. § 76.11. 
Letting parents decide what their children should watch and giving 
them the technical means to implement those decisions certainly 
seems a more effective and constitutionally less restrictive way to 
achieve Congress’ objective than involving cable operators and 
programmers in an extremely burdensome if not impossible task. 


Recognizing, however, that Congress has mandated further 
Commission action, Viacom offers the following suggestions, which 
are intended to minimize the potential burdens of compliance. 

Vj 'sR lati 

1. Standard for Indecent or Obscene Material. Viacom 
believes that given the unique characteristics of the cable medium, 
the only fair and workable test of “contemporary community 
standards” for obscenity or indecency must be based on the relevant 
“community” of cable subscribers. Because viewers must take the 
action of subscribing to cable service in order to view its 
programming, it is neither relevant nor appropriate to base the 
determination of whether material is legally indecent or obscene on 
the standards of individuals who are not subscribers to the service. 
As other comments have suggested, a single national standard is 
both appropriate and effective. 


2. Prior Certification and Response: Like many of the 
commenting parties, Viacom believes that the decision of how to 
handle potentially indecent or obscene material in both leased and 
PEG access programming should start with certification. 
Programmers seeking to use access channels should be required to 
certify, in writing and in advance, whether the programming does 
or does not contain indecent or obscene material.' It would not be 


' Im the case of PEG access where an intermediate entity such as a 
nonprofit access group or governmental entity runs the channel(s), that 
(continued. ..) 


355 


unduly burdensome to place this responsibility on the programmer, 
which, in fact, is in a better position to know the content. The 
Commission has relied on programmer certification in other 
contexts for this very reason. (See, e.g., 47 C.F.R. § 76.225, 
Policies and Rules Concerning Children’s Television Programming, 
6 FCC Red 2111, clarified on recon., 6 FCC Red 5093, 5697-98 
(1991). 


(a) If a leased access programmer refuses to execute the 
certificate, the operator has no choice but to treat the programs as 
if they contain indecent or obscene material.? Accordingly, the 
programmer would be justified in keeping the programming off the 
system altogether. Moreover, the potential presence of obscene 
material and the penalties for distribution of such material in 
Sections 558 and 559 of the Act should be deemed grounds for 
keeping the programming off whenever confronted with a 
programmer’s refusal to certify. 


(b) If a leased access programmer certifies that the 
programming does contain indecent material, the operator either 
may keep it off the system pursuant to a written published policy or 
may place the programming on a sequestered, blocked channel to 
the extent that sufficient channel space is available’. If, on the 
other hand, the programmer certifies that the programming does 
contain obscene material, the cable operator may keep the 


programming off the system. 


‘(...continued) 
group should be required to certify to the operator and, in turn, also would 
have the right to obtain certification from channel users. 


> Cable operators should be entitled to rely on certification and should 
not be required to prescreen all access programming, because doing 
otherwise would entail great burden and expense, which, for PEG, could 
be reflected in higher basic subscriber rates; however, operators should not 
be prohibited from prescreening if they choose. 

* Viacom believes that operators be required to block no more than one 
of the channels designated for leased access for the purpose of distributing 
access programming pursuant to this provision. 


356 


(c) If a leased access programmer certifies that the 
programming does not contain indecent or obscene material, the 
cable operator may deal with the channel request in its usual 
manner, with the result that such program could be aired on the 
system on a regular, unblocked leased channel. Of course, if the 
operator has independent grounds for believing that the 
programming contains indecent or obscene material notwithstanding 
the certification (for example, through voluntary prescreening, 
should the operator in its sole discretion elect to do so), the 
operator should be able to sequester the channel, or if only an 
isolated instance of indecent material, to block its transmission if 
sequestering is impractical. Again, however, the operator would 
not be in violation for relying on a false or inaccurate certificate in 
accordance with its normal procedures, because there is no 
obligation to prescreen. 


(d) A similar approach should be followed for PEG access. 
Programmers seeking to use PEG channels should be required to 
certify, in writing and in advance, that their programming does or 
does not contain material of the sort prohibited by Section 532(c) 
of the Act. As in the case of leased access, when confronted with 
a request for PEG channel use, the operator’s response depends on 
whether the programmer certifies that the programming does 
contain prohibited material; certifies that the programming does not 
contain prohibited material or refuses to certify. 


3. Indemnification: Because the operator could be subject to 
serious liability in the event of an inaccurate or false certification, 
it is only fair that cable operators have the right to request 
indemnification from both leased channel and PEG programmers as 
part of the certification or channel use agreement. The operator 
should have the right to obtain appropriate indemnification before 
a program is aired. In addition, the operator should have the right 
to require reasonable assurance (through demonstration of a 
programmer's financial qualifications, insurance, bonds, or letters 
of credit, for example) that the programmer executing the certificate 
and giving the indemnification is not judgment proof. Absent such 
indemnification and assurance, the operator has a right to sequester 
the program or keep it off. 


357 

Conclusion 

Restrictions on access channel programming in the 1992 Act 
could impose untenable burdens on everyone involved. The 
Commission’s rules should be aimed at clarifying the operator's 
obligations in determining the appropriate treatment for access 
programming. Another important objective for the rules is a fair 
and effective apportionment of responsibility for the consequences 


of noncompliance. The Commission has the opportunity to advance 
both of these objectives by adopting Viacom’s recommendations. 


Respectfully submitted, 
VIACOM INTERNATIONAL INC. 


By: /s/ 
Lawrence W. Secrest, III 


/s/ 
Donna C. Gregg 


Its Attorney 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1775 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 429-7000 


December 21, 1992 


358 


COMMENTS OF NEW YORK CITIZENS 
COMMITTEE FOR RESPONSIBLE MEDIA 


The New York Citizens Committee for Responsible Media 
(“NYCCRM”) respectfully submits these reply comments in this 
proceeding to consider the Commission’s proposed rule 
implementing Section 10 of the Cable Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (“Cable Act of 1992”). 


Section 10 would: 


A) allow any cable operator to enforce a written and 
published policy prohibiting any leased access 
programming which they “reasonably believe” to 
contain “patently offensive” descriptions or depictions 
of sexual or excretory activities or organs; 


B) require cable operators to place all “indecent” 
programs, not otherwise prohibited, on a single, 
blocked channel, to which access is available only 
through a written subscriber request. 


C) require leased access programmers to inform the cable 
operator if their program contains “indecent” material, 

D) allow cable operators to prohibit any programming on 
public, educational, or government (PEG) access 
channels that contain “obscene material, sexually 
explicit conduct, or material soliciting or promoting 
unlawful conduct” . 


In addition, Section 10 holds Cable Operators liable for any 
programming that “involves obscene material” carried om 
mandatory access channels. 


NYCCRM is a not-for-profit, citizens group concerned with 
issues of public access to the electronic media and media 
democracy. Its membership includes access producers, community 


359 


orgarizations, independent video and filmmakers, and interested 
viewers. In the 1980s, NYCCRM New York City during the cable 
franchising process for the outer boroughs (Brooklyn, Queens, 
Staten Island, and The Bronx) and the renewal franchising process 
for Manhattan. Many of its policy recommendations for PEG and 
Leased Access were adopted by the City as its negotiating position 
with cable operators. We continue to safeguard the access to the 
cable medium achieved here in New York City, and work to expand 
the access concept to new, competing delivery systems that are 
being introduced in the 1990s. 

At the outset, NYCCRM questions the legislative intent of 
Section 10 of the Cable Act of 1992. This section was introduced 
consideration of the relevant House and Senate Committees _ Its 
primary sponsors were Senator Jesse Helms, (R-NC), who has a 
long record of attempts to censor the free expression of ideas, and 
Senator Tim Wirth (D-CO), whose re-election campaigns have 
always benefited from generous cable industry contributions. 


NYCCRM concurs with the comments filed by The Alliance for 
Communications Democracy, et. al. (“ACD”), that Section 20 and 
Nevertheless, NYCCRM recognizes the Commission's obligation to 
issue a rule implementing Section 10 and offers these brief reply 
comments to the initial comments on the proposed rule. 

I. MANHATTAN PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS HAVE 

BECOME A VITAL PUBLIC FORUM FOR LOCAL 

EXPRESSION DESPITE CABLE OPERATOR 


INDIFFERENCE AND HOSTILITY. 

As Manhattan Neighborhood Network (“MNN”) observes 
(MNN Comments at 2), public access has existed in Manhattan for 
more than 20 years, until recently under the administrative control 
of the two franchised cable operators who serve Manhattan ' 


‘Indeed, Manhattan was the first major urban area to be wired for 
other experience with cable public access in an urban setting. 


360 


of programming per week (MNN Comments at 3). The diversity 
of that programming is evident from the programming schedule in 
the June/July 1992 issue of ACCESS MANHATTAN! (See Exhibit 
A.) 


Manhattan’s public access channels offer narrowcast 
programming for every racial and ethnic group living in that 
borough of New York City. There are, for example, public access 
programs for African Americans (“Flo Kennedy”), Hispanics 
(“Latinos En Accion”), Jews (“Jewish Task Force”), and Russian 
Americans (“Russian-American TV”). There are also public access 
programs that target Manhattan's sizeable gay population (“Out in 
the "90s: Gay News Network” and “The Closet Case Show”). 
Another public access program addresses the concerns of the 
disabled (“Disabled Hotline”). Many public access programs are 
devoted to arts and culture (¢.g., “Egg Cream Theatre” and “Dave 
Channon’s Volcanic Video”). These include several programs that 
feature rap, dancehall reggae and world beat music (¢.g., “House 
of Rap” and “Viddyms Reggae & World Beat”). Finally, a number 
of public access programs address vital issues of local importance 
(e.g., “Interfaith Assembly on Homelessness and Housing”). 


programming needs largely ignored by Manhattan's franchised cable 
operators. Some public access programs even counter the cable 
operators’ propaganda accompanying monthly bills to cable 
subscribers (¢.g., “Inter-Active TV with Jim Chiadek”).? These 
channels thus provide an important public forum for those who live 
in Manhattan. 


> Another example of how public access channels have enabled cable 
subscribers to counter cable operators’ propaganda occurred several years 
ago on Long Island, where Cablevision had not renewed Madison Square 
Garden Network's carriage contract, thus depriving cable subscribers of 
Yankees’ games. A group of subscribers produced a public access 
program countering Cablevision’s version of its dispute with MSGN, 
which had aired on Long Island 12, Cablevision's local news channel. 


361 


The wealth of public access programming in Manhattan is even 
more impressive, when one considers the franchised cable 
operators’ disinterest in promoting such programming Over the 
years, for example, Manhattan Cable Television, Inc. (“MCTV”), 
the cable operator franchised to serve lower Manhattan during most 
of the 1970s and 1980s, never provided a studio for public access 
program productions nor did it list public access programs in its 

To be sure, Manhattan's public access channels feature some 
sexually explicit programming. But such programming may have 
aired on public access channels in late 1984, has long promoted safe 
Sex activity among gay men, often using explicit films of safe sex 
practices. A 1987 study sponsored by the Gay Men’s Health Crisis 
concluded that such sexually explicit programming was often more 


effective than other techniques in discouraging risky sexual 
behavior. Various segments of The Closet Case Show have 


regularly censored The Closet Case Show in violation of Section 
611(c) of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 
§ 531(c), which precluded such assertion of editorial control. (See 
Exhibit C.) 


The Commission is well aware that public access programs such 
as The Closet Case Show will almost certainly disappear from 
public (and leased) access channels if Section 10 of the 1992 Cable 
Act is implemented, notwithstanding the serious value of such 
programming. Just as broadcasters and cable operators have balked 


*  MCTYV also periodically preempted publi: access channel time to offer 
its own cable programming, in violation of its franchise agreement with 
New York City. On April 6, 1985, for example, it unlawfully preempted 
four public access producers during two prime-time hours to present The 
Nashville Network's live show from Radio City Music Hall. See Exhibit 
B 


362 


at airing graphic anti-abortion ads,‘ cable operators will henceforth 
censor sexually explicit programming over access channels, even if 
such programming concerns core political speech.’ 

i. SECTION 10 AND THES PROPOSED RULE VIOLATE 


NYCCRM agrees with ACD that Section 10 ofthe 1992 Cable 
Nevertheless, we believe that some of ACD’s analysis requires 
enntien enh daieion 

PUBLIC FORA. | ' 

ACD correctly observes that public access channels are locally 
created public fora, but suggest that they are designated rather than 
traditional public fora. (ACD Comments at 34-38.) To the contrary, 
we believe that public access channels fall in the latter category of 
public fora. 


. FCC Asked 10 Rule Ferus Image Indecent, Broadcasting, Aug. 3, 
1992, at 57; Abortion Political Ad Que-tion Back at FCC, Broadcasting, 
Sept. 7, 1992, at 30; Harbor for Abortion Ads, Broadcasting, Nov. 2, 
1992, at 26; FCC Drifts Toward Safe Harbor for Abortion Ads, 
Broadcasting, Nov. 9, 1992, at 48; Ga. Anti-Abortion Ads Spark 
Fireworks, Multichannel News, July 13, 1992, at 20; St. Louis Systems 
Run Anti-Abortion Ads, Multichannel News, July 27, 1992, at 38; 
Milwaukee Airs Anti-Abortion Ads, Multichannel News, Oct. 19, 1992, at 
20. 


* ‘There is a long tradition of mixing sexually explicit materials with 
core political speech. During the French Revolution, for example, a print 
entitied Grand DeBandement de L‘armee Anticonstitutionelle appeared in 
an ultra-royalist newspaper. it portrayed the royalist army dispersing 
because several women with revolutionary sympathies had lifted their 
several puns deriving from the various meanings of “debander,” which 
include “to disband” and “to lose one’s erection.” V. Cameron, Political 
Exposures: Sexuality and Caricature in the French Revolution in Eroticism 
and the Body Politic 90-95 (L. Hunt ed. 1991). 


363 


Traditional public fora consist of “places which by long 
tradition or by government fiat have been devoted to assembly and 
debate ... .” Perry Education Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ 
Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 45 (1983). The clearest examples of such 
public fora are public streets, sidewalks and parks. id.; Cornelius 
v. NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 
788, 802 (1985). But the category is not limited to such 
“quintessential” public fora. Perry, 460 U.S. at 45. Traditional 
public fora may include “’other similar public places.’” Hudgens 
v. NLRB, 424 U.S. 507, 515 (1976), quoting Amalgamated Food 
Employees Union Local 590 v. Logan Valley Plaza, Inc., 391 U.S. 
308, 315 (1968), overruled on other grounds, Hudgens v. NLRB, 
424 U.S. 507 (1976). See also United States v. Grace, 461 US. 
171, 177(198) (traditional public fora include “'public places’ 
historically associated with the free exercise of oppressive activities, 
such as streets, sidewalks and parks” (emphasis added)). 
Moreover, the category is not static, since it includes public fora 
“clearly held in trust, either by tradition or recent convention, for 
the use of the citizens at large.” Members of City Council of City 
of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789, 815 n.2 
(1984). Such “recent convention” may result from “government 
fiat.” Perry, 460 U.S. at 45. 


Public access channels clearly fall in the category of traditional 
public fora. Whether by “government fiat” or “recent convention,” 
or both, these channels have typically been available to the public 
ee ee Indeed, in recognizing 

that “[pjublic access channels are often the video equivalent of the 
speaker's soap box or the electronic parallel to the printed leaflet,” 
H.R. Rep. No. 934, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 30 (1984), reprinted in 
1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 4655, 4667, Congress virtually equated public 
speakers address crowds on soap boxes and hand out printed 
leaflets. 

The decision in Missouri Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Kansas 
City, Mo., 723 F. Supp. 1347 (W.D. Mo. 1989), is not to the 
contrary. Plaintiffs there argued that Kansas City’s public access 
channel was a traditional public forum. The court only assumed 


364 


“for the sake of argument” that the channel was merely a 
designated public forum. Jd., at 1352. 


B. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF LOCKBOX DEVICES 
THE BROADCAST AND TELEPHONE MEDIA. _ 
ACD also persuasively argues that the unique features of the 
cable medium make the content-based, “indecency” regulation 
upheld for the broadcast medium, FCC v. Pacifica Found., 438 
U.S. 726 (1978), inappropriate for the cable medium. ACD 
Comments at 38-42. Not only is there no “captive audience” for 
cable service, Sable Communications v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 127- 
28 (1989), since one “must make the affirmative decision to bring 
[cable service] into his home,” Cruz v. Ferre, 775 F.2d 1415, 1419 
(1ith Cir. 1985), but parents also have “the ability to protect 
children” from unsuitable cable programming through the use of a 
“‘lockbox’ or ‘parental key’” available from cable operators. Jd. 
at 1415, 1420. 


ACD neglects, however, to point out that lock-out features are 
now included in addressable converters, at no additional charge. 
The Time Warner cable systems in Now York City, for example, 
advise cable subscribers in the local editions of TV Guide, that 
“[yJour convertor is equipped with a device that allows you to block 
out any program you do not wish your children to watch.” (See 
Exhibit D.) Because every cable system will eventually be 
addressable, all cable subscriber will eventually have converters 
with lock-out features, enabling them to block offensive 

The effectiveness of cable lockbox devices not only 
distinguishes the cable medium from the broadcast medium, as 
ACD notes, but also distinguishes it from the telephone medium, 
for which the Commission has found customer premises blocking 
devices to be ineffective in enabling parents to monitor their 
children’s access to adult message services. Carlin 
Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 837 F.2d 546, 554 (2d Cir. 1988), 
cert. denied, 488 U.S. 924 (1988). The court decisions which 
uphold more restrictive regulation of indecent telephone 
communications, id. at 557, Dial Info Servs Corp. v. Thornburgh, 


365 


938 F.2d 1535 (2d Cir 1991), cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 966 (1992), 
are thus inapposite. 


C. THE GROWTH IN ADULT PAY PER VIEW 
PROGRAMMING AMPLY DEMONSTRATES THE 
UNDERINCLUSIVENESS OF SECTION 10 AND THE 
PROPOSED RULE. 

Recognizing a compelling governmental interest in the 
protection of minors from cable programming deemed unsuitable 
for viewing by their parents, we nevertheless agree with ACD that 
Section 10 and the proposed rules are underinclusive, given that 
they only concern sexually explicit programming on access channels 
(ACD Comments at 49-53). In reality, there is as much, if not 
more, sexually explicit programming on the other cable channels, 
including those dedicated to pay per view. 

Many cable operators now offer at least one adult pay per view 
channel. Playboy at Night is currently available to 7.6 million 
addressable subscribers on 239 cable systems, while Spice 
(originally named Rendezvous) is currently available to 5 million 
addressable subscribers on 123 cable systems. Database, 
Cablevision, Dec 14, 1992, at 51. Both have experienced rapid 
growth since their launches only three years ago. /d., Playboy at 
Night expects to double its current subscriber base within a year. 
Playboy May Go to Around the Clock Format, Multichannel News, 
June 29, 1992, at 6. While many cable operators initially offered 
Playboy at Night and Spice only during late night hours, some cable 
hours. Jd.; Keeping It Quiet, Cablevision, April 8, 1991, at 16. 
Night, doubtless because it has generated over $50 million in 
revenues for cable operators. Playboy Looks Good to Ops, - 
Cablevision, June 1, 1992, at 12. The adult pay per view channel 
recently introduced a new show, “Secret Confessions and 
Fantasies,” in which individuals described “their wildest sexual 
escapades — real or wished for — while the fantasies are reenacted 
by actors.” A(nother) New View of Playboy, Cablevision, Nov. 30, 
1992, at 22. Adult pay per view programming has proven to be so 
popular with cable operators and cable subscribers that two other 


366 


pay per view services have announced plans to launch adult pay per 
view channels. Jd. See also Request Television Eyeing an Adult 
Channel, Multichannel News, Oct. 5, 1992, at 26.° 


Given the dramatic growth in adult pay per view programming 
offered over cable channels, it is patently clear that Section 10 and 
the proposed rule — insofar as they purport to protect minors from 
programming which their parents deem unsuitable for viewing — is 
underinclusive. Simply put, the majority of sexually explicit cable 
programming is found on channels under cable operators’ editorial 
control, not on access channels. 


ACD suggest that the narrow focus of Section 10 and the 
proposed rule may reflect a bias against viewpoints expressed on 
access channels. (ACD Comments at 52-53.) We believe that it also 
reflects a willingness to protect cable operators from competition in 
the market for adult programming services. If cable operators are 
allowed to eliminate or restrict sexually explicit programming on 
access channels, there will be less competition for their own 
sexually explicit programming. Thus, cable operators may well 
censor sexually explicit access programming, but offer comparable 
programming on other channels. 


CONCLUSION 


NYCCRM agrees with ACD that Section 10 of the Cable Act 
of 1992 and the proposed rule (as best we can ascertain, given its 
broad and imprecise language) violate applicable First Amendment 
principles. They effectively grant private companies (cable 
operators) the power to act as public censors, a power traditionally 
reserved to government, and then only in very narrowly prescribed 
circumstances. 


Censorship of access channels is unnecessary since technology 
has made it possible to fulfill the only legitimate government 


® The Time Warner cable systems in New York City now offer both 
Playboy at Night and Spice during daytime hours. As already noted, cable 
subscribers are advised that “[yJour converter is equipped with a device 
that allows you to block out any program you do not wish your children 
to watch.” (See Exhibit D.) 


367 


interest, e.g., which is to ensure that parents have the ability to 
protect their children from obscene and indecent programming on 
PEG and leased access channels. Furthermore, we feel that this 
technology, lockboxes, places the decision making power over 
children’s viewing access where it belongs — with parents. 


Allowing a cable operator to censor access programming is not 
only unnecessary but is also harmful to true diversity, conferring 
such power on cable operators grants an active and interested party 
the ability to harass PEG and leased access producers for a number 


of purposes: 


1) to regain channel capacity that they can re-program for 
profit, 


2) reduce competition for their own premium and pay per 
view adult programming; and 
3) demand rate increases ostensibly to cover the technical costs 


of blocking channels or specific programs, and enforcement 
of censorship policies. 


lronically, adult pay per view channels, in which cable operators 
have a financial interest, would remain exempt from censorship, 
even though they raise the same parental concerns. 


Given the vague criteria for censoring access programming, it 
seems inevitable that many disputes will arise. Public and leased 
access was created to give voice to economically and politically 
disenfranchised citizens, who have been shut out of the dominant 
commercial media. Access producers are dedicated citizens and 
entrepreneurs, often working in their spare time, with limited 
resources. Whatever methods the Commission adopts for settling 
disputes between cable operators and producers over censorship of 
programming will inevitably be unfair and ineffective, given the 
vast disparity of economic and legal resources available to the 
disputants. Many access producers will simply give up and not 
bother to produce shows. In any event, these disputes will create 
unnecessary delays in the cablecast of timely programs and 
Seriously undermine the First Amendment goals of public and 
leased access. 


368 


NYCCRM urges the Commission to make lockboxes even more 
effective by encouraging access producers to provide descriptions 
of their programming prior to its presentation on access channels. 
Moreover, cable operators should be required to list access 
programs in all printed and electronic program guides. This will 
allow viewers to make informed viewing judgements, block 
whatever programming they deem necessary, or cancel their cable 
subscription. A review of lockbox provisions should be undertaken 
by the Commission to ensure their universal availability and cable 
operator promotion. 


In conclusion, NYCCRM feels that these suggestions represent 
the least intrusive method for effectively addressing parental 
concerns, and the best way to ensure the continued viability of PEG 
and leased access, the people’s voice. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Ls/__ 
Lawrence S. White 


Chairperson, NYCCRM 
370 West 30th Street, Apt. 4B 
New York, NY 10001 


_[s/ 
Robert T. Perry 


509 12th Street, Apt. 2C 
Brooklyn, NY 11215 
(718) 768-2209 


_/si 
Adam Rosenberg 
125 Stanton Street, Apt. 8 
New York, NY 10002 


December 22, 1992 


EXHIBIT D 


370 


\WO0S G6 FS BLA) EO HY 1 mous Gupnp 10 
(Op ULLD) CDS ONASIg Gus OF UY BEDEHT "C9 PUVOUD wd 
POQO VOYOUIO; GLA) YOIS PUD FBW AZOP 10 ind Z9T9-6LE-008-| 
0 Nay 0m, POSS eau GHP atk CPA BOD HIDEO Ol ad LHOIN 83d BIGUO O1 
eamestes **“"VTV9 FLL GOOD V 404 
now SAWY9 ALHONYN 
~-auous Ausus pus SASSIM HONIMA 
VLLVd4VAH A‘INSAVSH MYT FIDavAl 
SLYUG S\AGN OVE FHL 10 3dISsNni 
LUOSTU LSV1 AHL 74 Nada ; 
“aS LYHL TIV WUORUOIY 10qW8D00 JOO ere" Mee i 
SIVAN jyBiv 100 g6'rg Avo 10) yepunane 19,0 
OPI YjUOW SY) LUOOT:{ JO Guysoss “OO AjwOond doy puo swo6oid | 
SOINUAW 06 Ore Way EsORNUIrS © 1840 OM s.sUBIN by «.2QA0Ig AOfue YOD NOA inaes 
= » 4 v . ri ° sees 
| te fa Fs ot 
” ami * “% 
et . 
—~ , 
7. 
Lo y id 
se 
4 ) 
i = 
~ ‘> 
eo) AS weg - WOE.” 
: is €9 ISNNVHO 


- ANNE (TeMETHCHS DTT 


‘al — _— 


371 


itl 
UH bails 


seodbuuiGeedd 


| jh al 
iF 


if i Hi : 
: 


el 


= 


HHS i 
Hie 


(ide 


ertete Cate 1’ tao 


372 


sx as 


sarneay a * I~ ts le my — oe ™ 


SLEEPWALKERS ENCINO MAN 
SAM. 1AM, 1PM, 3PM, SPM. SAM, 11AM. 1PM. 3PM. SPM. 
7PM, 9PM. 11PM. 1AM, JAM 7PM, 9PM. 1 1PM. LAM. JAM 

cD FAR ALD AWAY 
TQAM, 1AM, 1230PM, 3PM. 5:30PM. 6PM, 10:30PM, 1AM 

©>| THECUTTING EDGE MY COUSIN VINNY 
SAM, 11AM, 1PM, 3PM, SPM, BZA, 1 1AM, 1:20PM. 4PM 

_ 11PM, 1AM, 2AM 6:30PM, 9PM. 11:20PM. 2AM 


Playoay at Figca Prog ameming my ey (BP MAM) S _. regny program grids or Getade 


Cutang Siec> Far and Sy Encino 
Edge wahors —. oa 
cies 6a, Ip w= 10 10a, 12n, 
So. 3a Far and a One Plow > >. 
Enano of Over... o>. Go. 
Man poy A tp, @p. 1p Op. 12m, ' 
ba One Flow 12398 leerang «=| 
Fa and Over the Ona Fie 
= =” |S 
Cutung 
Stoop soon. G Eaze 
wakes i.) 
39. 7p. 1a Encino Sweep 
Bourg wakers 
9p oto, t>, 12m, 
Sa | 4s 
St Tropez 
Sows 
0p. 2a 
You addressable channel selector is 8 Gevce Pal &.~s you & Diock of ary pro 
pene Se. 6 evadabie csstome: handbook 


YOu Wish to loch oul your account irom our sulormeied order system. cal $33-4722. 


To order «somebtcaly: witfen | hour betore the start of he move cal De tof-ree munber Twi cor- 
responds to he appropnate channel. Lisicn lor a message conhraung your order. 


Be sure to cal rom your home phone. These numbers are lor ordering onty. not tor mvormaton. 
Channets 56, 59. 60, 62 and 63 are orty avalabie to rescdenhal Customers r etudl areas. 


All bt movies $3.95. All adel movies $4.96. Playboy af Hight $4.95 per nici: (Cal betweee 7PM-JAM). 
Event: art Individually priced. Adal movies edited ber PPV. 


373 


opin’ sry 
‘Ya UT pegsr 
STI 30u 90 
iv Adyd - SS90d0y ITTaQn 
2 d 918 (TY 
91 Sleuue 
Y) :230N 


[ 


=) 


3/4 


C—O 
{ rs. i es. re ' 
- _— — = 


— . 


—— 


—— Te 
'— s? 
— — ss 


(mwa ig 


stow Vouk Retaghane Company and Siow Bastand Teteghens 
and Telegraph Company (the ~NYNEX Telephone Companies” or 
“NTCs”) respectfully ask the Commission to reconsider certain 
aspects of its First Report And Order released February 3, 1992.’ 
In particular, the NTCs are concerned that, by giving cable 
operators “wide discretion” in banning programming they deem 
indecem,, and by allowing cable operators to ban some but not al! 
to unreasonably deny access to leased channel capacity, and to 
discriminate among potential customers based on factors other than 
the indecency of their programming. In addition, by giving 
aggrieved customers access only to the courts for remedy if access 
to leased channels is unreasonably denied, the Commission 
abdicates its role under the Cable Act w provide expedited 
procedures for insuring reasonable terms and conditions for leased 
access channels. 


1 DISCUSSION 
The 1992 Cable Act permits Cable operators 


to enforce a written and published policy of prohibiting 
programming that the cable operator reasonably believes 
describes or depicts sexual or excretory activities or organs 


In the Matter of Implementation of Secuon 10 of the Cable Corsumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Indecent Programmung and Other 
Types of Materials on Cable Access Channels, MM Docket No. 92-258. 
First Report and Order, February 3, 1993. 


376 


in a patently offensive manner as measured by 
contemporary city standards ’ 


In its First Report and Order, the Commission stated that this 
provision gives cable operators “wide discretion” in classifying 
programming as indecent, and in enforcing a policy of prohibiting 
operators may adopt “any measures” appropriate for 
implementation of such a policy, and that cable operators “have the 
discretion to prohibit some, but not necessarily all, indecent 
programming.“‘ The Commission concluded that “the courts. 
rather than this agency. are the appropriate forums for resolution of 
any disputes concerning whether cable operators have properly 
denied access pursuant to section 10(a).~* 


These actions conflict with the Commission's obligations under 
other sections of the 1992 Cable Act. In particular, Section 9 of 
the Cable Act requires the Commission to make rules establishing 
reasonable terms and conditions for commercial use of leased 
channel capacity, and to establish procedures for the expedited 
resolution of disputes.* Section 11 requires the Commission to 
ensure that no cable operator can unfairly impede the flow of video 
programming from the video programmer to the consumer.’ In 
Comments on the implementation of Section 9, the NYNEX 
operators to offer channel capacity to unaffiliated entities on 


1992 Cable Act § 10 

First Report and Order ¢ 29 
* 44931 

id. 
* 1992 Cable Act § 9(b) 
‘1992. Cable Act § 1 lic). 


377 


a cable operator may not refuse a reasonable request for channel 
capacity * 

By giving cable operators “wide discretion” in determining 
what they believe is indecent and in enforcing their policies, 
unchecked by any Commission supervision, and by explicitly 
operators to unreasonably deny access to their channel capacity 
Thus, cable operators have a means to block programming from 
reaching subscribers based on factors unrelated to indecent 
programming. For example, the Commission's language allowing 
discrimination would appear to all » cable operators to ban 
indecemt programming provided by a competitor, while accepting 
the same programming provided by an affiliated programmer or 
another noncompeting entity. And, by giving customers 
unreasonably denied access under the guise of “indecency” recourse 
only to the courts, the Commission is perpetuating the problems of 
difficulty and delay in obtaining access to leased channel capacity 
that Congress sought to prevent in enacting Section 9.’ 

The Commission should remedy these aspects of the First 
discriminate among providers of like programming. Further. the 
operator “reasonably” believes it is indecent because it contains the 
elements listed in Section 10. Finally, the Commission should 
allow customers unreasonably denied access to leased channels 
rather than requiring them to go to court. 


* Comments of the NYNEX Telephone Companies, MM Docket No 
92-266, January 27, 1993, pp. 18-19 


* See House Committee on Energy and Commerce, H.R. Rep. No. 102- 
628, 102d Cong. 2d Sess. (1992) (“House Report”) pp. 39-40. 


378 


Il CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated herein, the NYNEX Telephone 
Companies respectfully ask the Commission to reconsider the First 
Report and Order, and to conform it with sections of the Cable Act 
mandating reasonable and nondiscriminatory access to leased 
channels. and expedited procedures for resolving disputes. 


Respectfully submitted, 


New York Telephone Company 
and 

New England Telephone and 
Telegraph Company 


By: ls 
Mary McDermott 
Shelley E. Harms 
120 Bloomingdale Road 
White Plains, NY 10605 
914/644-2764 


Their Attorneys 


Dated: March 15, 1993 


379 


FCC Caption Omitted 


OPPOSITION OF 
TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY, LP 
TO THE PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION 
OF THE NYNEX TELEPHONE COMPANIES 


Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. (“TWE”) opposes 
the Petition for Reconsideration filed by the NYNEX Telephone 
Companies (“NYNEX"). NYNEX offers nothing to explain its 
interest in this proceeding. Rather, it gratuitously suggests that the 
Commission ignore the language of § 10 of the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and, based on 
NYNEX’s view of the objectives of other parts of the Act, suggests 
that the Commission read into § 10(a) an unjustifiable limitation on 
the cable operator's discretion in dealing with indecent 
programming on leased access (commercial use) channels 

The Commission correctly determined from the language of 
§ 10, as well as the statements by the Section’s sponsor, that 
§ 10(a) was envisioned as giving cable operators “wide discretion” 
in formulating and implementing a policy prohibiting indecent 
programming. As the Section’s author indicated, § 10a) essentially 
returns to the cable operator a small part of its editorial discretion 
that is otherwise restricted by § 612(c\(2) of the 1984 Cable Act (47 
U.S.C. § 532(c)(2)). With respect to indecent programming, the 
cable operator is acting an a “private party”. (138 Cong. Rec 
§ 646 (Remarks of Sen. Helms, daily ed. Jan. 30, 1991; Report and 
Order, MM Docket 92-258, at ¢ 30 n.25)) As such, its editorial 
decisions should not be restricted unless a programmer can 
demonstrate that the cable operator has denied it access 
unreasonably under § 612(d) of the 1984 Cable Act. 

NYNEX offers no factual basis for us argument that the 
Commission should assume cable operators will misuse § 1((a) 
Moreover, its one example of possible misuse does not support its 
position. NYNEX posits that the Commission's interpretation of 


380 


§ 10(a) would permit a cable operator to refuse indecent 
programming from a competitor while accepting “the same 
programming provided by an affiliated programmer or another 
noncompeting entity”. (NYNEX Petition at 4) 


First, channel capacity used by programmers affiliated with the 
cable operator is not considered leased access capacity. Therefore, 
on leased access channels there can be no discrimination between 
affiliated programmers and other programmers. 


Second, in any event, It is difficult to envision how one could 
determine that different indecent programs are “the same”. Within 
the category of indecent programming there are infinite gradations 
of indecency ranging from the relatively tame to those that almost 
cross the line into obscenity. Therefore, cable operators should be 
permitted to discriminate among various indecent programs unless 
such discrimination can be shown to be inconsistent with the 
statutory goals. This is fully consistent with the approach under 
§ 612 of the 1984 Cable Act. Under § 612 price discrimination is 
acceptable among leased access users, and indeed encouraged by 
Congress. (H.R. Rep. No. 934, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 51, reprinted 
in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 4688).' 


Third, with respect to discriminating in favor of “noncompeting 
entit{ies]”, NYNEX does not explain what type of entities would be 
“competing” or “noncompeting”, or why an operator would want 
to take the latter’s programming in preference to the former’s. 


Finally, the Commission correctly noted that Congress did not 
appear to envision a role for the FCC under § 10(a), unlike § 10(b) 
where the statute specifically directs the promulgation of rules. 
Where the Commission has instituted regulations it often makes 
sense for it to oversee compliance. Where it has not, the converse 
is true. Therefore, it is perfectly consistent for the Commission to 
leave disputes arising under § 10(a) to be resolved in a court action 
under § 612(d). 7 


] 


Cable operators also exercise some level of discretion in allocating 
leased access time to programmers when demand outstrips supply. 


381 


Conclusion 
TWE respectfully suggests that the Commission deny the 
NYNEX Petition for Reconsideration. 


Respectfully submitted, 
TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT 
COMPANY, L.P. 


/s/ 
Stuart W. Gold 


Cravath, Swaine & Moore 
Worldwide Plaza 

825 Eighth Avenue 

New York, NY 10019 
(212) 474-1000 


Its Attorneys 


April 7, 1993 


382 


REPLY OF THE NYNEX TELEPHONE COMPANIES 
TO COMMENTS OPPOSING THEIR 


___ PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION ___ 


New England Telephone and Telegraph and New York 
Telephone Company (the “NYNEX Telephone Companies” or 
_ “NTCs”) filed their Petition for Reconsideration in pursuit of one 
purpose, that the Commission adhere to the goals of competition 
and protection set forth by Congress in the 1992 Cable Act.' To 
this end the NYNEX Telephone Companies have urged the 
Commission to adopt carefully tailored rules to assure that cable 
operators do not use the discretion granted th~m under Section 10(a) 
as a means to unreasonably deny access to leased channels to 
competitors in the guise of prohibiting indecent programming, and 
to assure that aggrieved customers have meaningful relief in the 
form of recourse to the Commission through expedited procedures 
established elsewhere in this rulemaking. 


1. DISCUSSION 


Only two parties have opposed the NYNEX Telephone 
Companies’ Petition, Time Warner Entertainment Company, L,P. 
(“Time Warner”) and the National Cable Television Association 
(“NCTA”). Each party claims that the NTCs seek to unjustifiably 
limit cable operators’ discretion in dealing with indecent 
programming on leased access channels. Such is not the case. The 
NTCs are simply asking the Commission to adopt measures which 


Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 
(“1992 Cable Act”) Pub. L. No. 102-385. 


383 


will assure that the discretion granted to the cable operators is not 
abused.’ 


Time Warner and NCTA each allege that the type of abuse that 
motivated the NTCs to file their Petition cannot occur. This is 
based on the strained argument that a cable operator cannot favor 
an affiliated programmer over a nonaffiliated programmer because 
an affiliated programmer is not considered a leased access channel 
customer. “Therefore, on leased access channels there can be no 
discrimination between affiliated programmers and other 
programmers. ”’ 


This argument merely serves to highlight the NTCs’ concerns. 
The type of discrimination to which the NTCs refer would take 
place across channel capacity, and is not limited to a cable 
operator's activities on leased access channels. A cable operator 
may, for example, decide to allow an affiliated programmer to run 
a particular program or class of programs over its own channels, 
while denying an unaffiliated programmer the ability to run the 
same or similar programs over a leased access channel. If cable 
operators indeed read the Act as isolating the potential for arbitrary 


Time Warner (at 1) and NCTA (at 1) question the NTCs’ interest in 
this proceeding. The cable and telecommunications industries are 
converging. It is certainly possible that the NTCs will be leasees of 
channel capacity in the future. The NTCs filed extensive comments and 
reply comments in the related Cable Rate Regulation Docket (MM 92- 
266). As set forth in those comments, the NTCs are concerned that the 
Cable companies are moving aggressively into the telecommunication 
market without constraints, and indications are that they may use their 
monopoly rents from cable television to subsidize the telephone ventures. 
NYNEX Comments at 3. By their comments the NTCs have consistently 
argued that reasonable and nondiscriminatory access to leased access 
channels is essential to creating a competitive market. Indeed by their 
Reply Comments, the NTCs raised their concerns that the wide discretion 
being granted in this proceeding could lead to the unreasonable denial of 
leased access channel capacity. Thus the NTCs have a clear and 
established interest in this proceeding. 
> Time Warner at 3; see also NCTA at 6. 


384 


discrimination to leased accessed channels, they will feel free under 
cover of the fig leaf provided by Section 10(a) to favor their 
affiliate programmers over non-affiliates who seek to use leased 
access to provide competitive offerings. 


Congress, in adopting the Act, recognized the potential for 
discrimination across channels. As noted in the Senate Report to 
the 1992 Cable Act, 


For irrefutable evidence of the failure of the leased access 
provision, one need look no further than the marketplace. 
Despite widespread instances of dropping of local broadcast 
stations and refusals to carry competitive program services, 
there is no evidence that excluded programmers have been 
successful in gaining access through Section 612 .... 


The cable operator is almost certain to have interests that 
clash with that of the programmer seeking to use leased 
access channels. If their interests were similar, the operator 
would have been more than willing to carry the 
programmer on regular cable channels. The operator thus 
has already decided for any number of reasons not to carry 


the programmer.‘ 


This excerpt from the Senate Report also refutes the claim that 
the NTCs raised only a spectre of harm,” or that its concerns lack 
a factual basis.° 


Both Time Warner’ and NCTA* argue that Section 10(a) 
restores editorial discretion otherwise restricted by Section 612(c)(2) 
of the 1984 Cable Act, and that as such the cable operator's 
discretion regarding indecent programming should be given broad 
berth. However, because it is the exception to the general rule, the 


* Senate Report 109-92 at p. 30. 
* NCTA at 2. 

Time Warner at 2. - 

Time Warner at 2. 

* NCTA at 4. 


385 


Commission should place at least some parameters around this 
discretion. 


The opposing parties state that the NTCs’ request that the FCC 
reconsider its rule to make certain that the cable operator may not 
discriminate among providers of like programming will be difficult 
to administer and should, therefore, be rejected by the Commission. 
Inconvenience should not in itself excuse the cable operators — or 
the Commission — from adopting measures to limit arbitrary 
discrimination that would impede the fundamental purpose of the 
Act, that is to promote competition. The Commission has required 
common carriers to administer equally unwieldy standards under 
even more difficult circumstances.° 


Administrative safeguards that allow the cable operators 
editorial discretion while protecting the leased access programmer 
can, and should be crafted. For example, similar to the proposal 
offered by Denver Access" in their comments in this proceeding, 
the cable operator could be required to give advance written notice 
of its determination, stating with precision what provision of the 
standard set forth in Section 10(a) led to the conclusion that the 
program was indecent. Such a procedure would not, in any way, 
limit the cable operator’s discretion, only make the operator 


* — The Commission need only look to the same “Indecency” issue as it 
has developed over recent years in the common carrier arena. Another 
example is the Commission’s recent order on telecommunications relay 
service that prohibits communications assistants “from intentionally 
altering a relayed conversation and, to the extent that it is not inconsistent 
with federal, state or local law regarding use of telephone company 
facilities for illegal purposes, must relay all conversations verbatim.... 47 
CFR § 64.604(a)(2). Thus the communications assistant is, in essence, 
required to make an on the spot determination that the telephone 
company’s facilities are not being used for illegal purposes. Clearly this 
is a much greater burden than requiring cable operators to justify what 
Section 10(a) elements a program allegedly violates. 


‘© See Comments of Denver Area Educational Telecommunications 


Consortium, Inc, (“Denver Access”), MM Docket No. 92-258, at 10. 


386 


accountable for its decision, and thus help assure that the decision 
is based on the elements contained in section 10(a). 


The NTCs have also petitioned the Commission to reconsider 
its decision to give aggrieved customers access only to the courts if 
access to leased channels is unreasonably denied. Denver Access’ 
comments, based on its experience, demonstrated that seeking 
recourse through the courts can be costly and time consuming, 
nearly rendering relief meaningless."' 


As the Commission itself recently noted 


Given the lack of focus on leased channel issues in this 
proceeding and the absence of Commission experience in 
administering rules of this type... [a]n expedited complaint 
process will be used to address complaints regarding leased 
channel rate and access issues." 


Clearly, the absence of experience with the open discretion 
being proposed for cable operators regarding indecent programming 
over leased access channels, coupled with the potential to abuse the 
discretion for anticompetitive purposes, should lead the Commission 
to extend its expedited complaint process to claims brought under 
Section 10(a). 


Il. CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth herein, the NYNEX Telephone 
Companies again respectfully ask the Commission to reconsider its 
First Report and Order, and to conform it with the sections of the 


Id. at 3-5. 


See FCC News Release re: MM Docket No. 92-266 “Summary of 
Rate Regulation Report and Order” para. 62 (April 1, 1993). 


387 


Cable Act mandating reasonable and nondiscriminatory access 
leased channels and expedited procedures for resolving disputes 


Respectfully submitted. 


New York Telephone Company 
and 

New England Telephone and 
Telegraph Company 


By S — 
Mary McDermott 
Carlos J. Sandoval 


120 Bloomingdale Road 
White Plains, NY 10605 
914/644-2764 


Their Attorneys 


Dated: May 6, 1993 


388 


IN THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


DENVER AREA EDUCATIONAL 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

CONSORTIUM, INC. and 

AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, 
Petitioners, 

v. No. 93-1171 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS 
COMMISSION and UNITED 
STATES OF AMERICA, 


Respondents. 


DECLARATION OF JOHN B. SCHWARTZ 
John B. Schwartz, under penalty of perjury, declares: 


1. I am the President of petitioner Denver Area 
Educational Telecommunications Consortium, Inc. (“The 90's 
Channel” or “DAETC”). I submit this declaration on personal 
knowledge to demonstrate the irreparable harm that the 
Commission's new cable access indecency rules will cause The 90's 
Channel, in support of petitioners’ motion for a stay. 

2. DAETC, a Colorado non-profit corporation, is a cable 
programmer operating a leased access cable service known as The 
90's Channel, currently reaching approximately 500,000 basic cable 
subscribers to cable systems owned by Tele~Communications, Inc. 
(“TCI”) in Arizona, California, Connecticut, Colorado, Maryland, 
and Michigan. 

3. The 90's Channel carries a wide variety of material, 
much of it both controversial and otherwise unavailable to viewers. 
It transmits documentaries and magazine programs on political, 
environmental, labor, and social topics, and many of its programs 
express opinions, which are generally progressive. 


4. The 90’s Channel does not carry pornography, and has 
never carried a full-length program that dealt with sexuality per se. 


389 


Most of its programming has no sexual content. Nonetheless, a 
small but important portion of its programming has dealt with such 
topics as arts censorship, gay rights, feminism, prostitution, and 
AIDS, and its coverage of those matters has on occasion 
inextricably included discussion of sexuality and the description or 
depiction of sexual activity. 

5. Among past programs that The 90’s Channel has pre- 
sented that I do not believe to be indecent, but which we would 
probably have self-censored had the Commission's new rules been 
in effect because of our concern (described at greater length in 
paragraphs 7-10 below) for the legal consequences and economic 
costs of defending against them, are: 


® “Self-help”, which shows a women’s health organization in 
Austin, Texas attempting to demystify gynecology, teaching 
women how to perform their own pelvic examinations. The 
intimidating nature of gynecological procedures are described, 
and an internal examination is shown. 

® “DiAna’s Hair Ego” is a video about a black hairdresser in 
South Carolina who provides her customers not only with 
grooming and neighborhood gossip but also with AIDS educa- 
tion, condoms, and safe sex advice. 


= “Mapplethorpe Exhibit,” exploring the controversy over the 
Robert Mapplethorpe exhibit at a Boston art museum. Inter- 
views with attendees are interspersed with images of many of 
the photos, including some of his most dramatic nudes. The 
view of one man that $30,000 ix sovernment funding was spent 
“to put picture frames around these hideously obscene pictures” 
is countered by a woman’s observation that nudes of women are 
common but Mapplethorpe is one of the few photographers who 
celebrates the beauty of the male body. The Museum's director 
discusses the public debate sparked by the exhibit about issues 
of racism and homophobia. 

® “Fertility Festival” is a National Geographic-type anthro- 
pological piece presenting images and sounds from the 
remarkable ancient annual fertility festival in luyama, Japan in 


390 


which local residents march through city streets with totems 
shaped like giant penises. 
6. Under the new statutory and regulatory scheme as | 


understand it, 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


(d) 


each cable operator is authorized to prohibit leased access 
programming “which, it reasonably believes, describes or 
depicts sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently 
offensive manner as measured by contemporary community 
standards,” and literally to censor programming identified by 
programmers as indecent, despite the injunction of 47 U.S.C. 
§ 532(c) that “[a] cable operator shall not exercise any editorial 
control over any video programming provided” over leased 
access cable channels; 


program providers must identify as “indecent” every leased 
access program that contains any description or depiction of 
sexual activity or organs that could be considered “patently 
offensive” for the average cable subscriber nationwide, and 
cable operators may further require programmers to certify al/ 
leased access programming as indecent or not, 


any program identified as indecent by the program provider not 
prohibited outright must be placed on a blocked channel, and 
viewers will be able to access such programming for themselves 
or their children only if they send a written request for 
unblocking, which the cable operator may take up to thirty days 
ee Because this will be widely viewed as a “porno 
” it will substantially impede access (which may well have 
png tem vp ee Any program identified as 
indecent by cable operators (if they exercise the prescreening 
power afforded by the Commission and do not prohibit 
“indecent” programs outright) may be blocked or channelled to 
“time periods of their choosing”; and 
operators have been stripped of their longstanding immunity 
from prosecution for programming on leased access channels 
“that involves obscene material,” thereby strongly inducing 
them to censor materials with sexual content. 


391 


7. Serious and irremediable harm threatens The 90's 
Channel (and other access programmers and viewers) if the rules 
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission ‘hat are 
the subject of this petition go into effect. As detailed below, the 
90"s Channel will have to use an extraordinarily encompassing 
definition of what is or is not indecent because of the drastic 
consequences that may befall The 90's Channel under the rules 

® if it fails to identify as “indecent” any programming that 

TCI “reasonably believes” or that the Commission finds 

describes or depicts sexual activities “in a patently offensive 

manner” for the “average subscriber to cable television” in 
the nation (see First Report and Order (hereafter “First 

Report) ¢ 37), or 


® if it certifies any program as not indecent and TCI disagrees 
with its judgment (assuming that TCI, acting pursuant to the 

Commission's authorization, requires The 90’s Channel to 

certify to the “indecency” or not of ail of its 

programming). 

8. The 90’s Channel will have to impose strict self- 
censorship because the consequences of a single error, or a single 
case of error as perceived by the cable operator, are so great. TCI, 
lessor to The 90’s Channel, expressed the following views in its 
comments on the FCC in the proceeding concerning implementation 
of Section 10 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Act”):' 


If a leased access programmer that has a contract 
for carriage has certified that its program is not 
indecent, and breaches that commitment, then the 
cable operator should have the full range of 
remedies available, including voiding the contract 
and discontinuing carriage. Here, again, no new 
FCC regulations regarding disputes are necessary 


MM Docket No. 92-256 


392 


because both parties have the normal ability to 
pursue their rights under the contract.’ 


In its First Report, the FCC essentially upheld TCI’s position, 
referring to “the wide discretion Congress afforded cable operators 
under this section,” and declining to take any role regarding denial 
of access under Section 10(a) of the Act.’ 


9. Thus, if TCI (or any cable operator leasing channel 
capacity) believes — rightly or wrongly — that a breach of 
certification has occurred through submission of a single putatively 
indecent program, it can apparently remove an entire program 
service permanently, subject (perhaps) to later judicial action 
ordering restoration. The prospect of the indefinite, possibly 
permanent, loss of our entire channel means that in practice we will 
have to withhold any program which the cable operator might 
perceive to be indecent.‘ 


10. Significantly, the First Report provides for where 
there are allegations of “under-identification” of indecency, but not 
where there are allegations of its “over-identification” by operators. 
The Commission advised that the rules “do not envision disputes 
arising from the content of programs on the leased access channel 
except where a program, not identified by a program provider as 
indecent, is carried on a non-blocked leased channel, and is alleged 
to be indecent.” First Report { 75. 


11. The basis for The 90's Channel's ability to present 
its alternative form of programming has been the statutory 
prohibition of operator censorship and involvement in any way in 
the content of our programming. The new rules alter that regime 
by granting operators who are hostile to leased access channels, as 
I believe TCI to be, the ability to censor any of our programming 


Comments of TCI at 18-19. 
* First Report ¢ 31. 


* In addition to private penalties imposed by cable operators, we are 
also subject to the imposition of financial penalties by the Commission (see 
First Report at ¢ 77). 


393 


with sexual content outright, knowing that TCI is protected by the 
“reasonable belief of indecency” standard and the expense of any 
legal challenge to that censorship or, worse, to terminate our Jeased 
access contract because of a certification or identification with 
which they purport to disagree. Leased access is the only effective 
outlet DAETC has to reach the hundreds of thousands of viewers 
that it now reaches. For some time TCI has been attempting to 
remove The 90's Channel from its systems, and the legislative 
history shows the general hostility of operators to access 
programmers. See generally DAETC Comments at 3-5, 7-10. 


12. The Commission's vague and opaque definition of 
indecency (or TCI’s private definition, from which no appeal may 
be available) are completely inadequate for programmers like 
myself to determine whether particular programs are “indecent” 
within the meaning of the Commission’s rules and subject to 
censorship. I have no idea what “contemporary community stan- 
dards for the cable medium” are, or how to find out. Based on the 
extent of R- and X-rated material on cable systems throughout the 
nation (e.g. on Time-Warner’s “REAL SEX” or THE PLAYBOY 
CHANNEL or on pay-cable adult services, one could conclude that 
under those standards material would have to be what is referred to 
as “hard core pornography” to be “indecent”; but I doubt that 
Section 10’s sponsors had that standard in mind when they per- 
suaded the Senate in less than a day, in an election year, to support 
their hastily drafted amendment, or that the Commission so 
believes, Since the Commission deliberately referred to standards 
“for the cable medium,” its decisions and rules concerning 
indecency in the broadcast context do not provide reliable guidance; 
indeed, the Commission’s broadcast indecency policy has been 
shifting so much in recent years as to give no guidance even in the 
broadcast context. Moreover, the rules subject our programming 
in the first instance not to the Commission's view of “indecency” 
but to TCI’s view, so long as some court (apparently a state court, 
in a breach of contract action) later finds that view “reasonable.” 


13. Program guides for the systems on which we 
Operate do not typically give viewers more than 30 days advance 
notice of programming. Even if we assume that operators wil! not 


394 


prohibit “indecent” programming outright but will only block it 
pursuant to the Commission’s rules, the new rules would still 
effectively preclude access to programs even by viewers who, 
having seen notice of a program on AIDS education or sex 
education, seek to obtain it. A subscriber request to unblock need 
not be honored until the 30th day after it is received, which as a 
practical matter censors the program even for the viewer who 
expressly seeks access to the program. First Report ¢ 67. Thus, 
for the asserted purpose of protecting young people (who could be 

“protected” if necessary by parentally-controlled lockboxes), the 
new rules effectively deprive not only children but also adults of 
much constitutionally protected programming. 


I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on March 8, 1993. 


ls/ 
JOHN B. SCHWARTZ 


> 
- 
< 
- : 
’ 
* 
‘ - 
: ” 


