October Term, 1995 


O’HARE TRUCK SERVICE, INC. and JOHN A. 
GRATZIANNA, 


Petitioners, 
vs. 


CITY OF NORTHLAKE, MAYOR REID PAXSON, and 
POLICE CHIEF SEYMOUR SAPOZNIK, 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENTS 


GARY M. FEIEREISEL 
Counsel of Record 
FRANK P. KASBOHM 
FRATERRIGO, BEST & BERANEK 
Attorneys for Respondents 
55 West Monroe Street 
Suite 3400 
Chicago, Illinois 60603 
(312) 782-9255 


(600) 3 APPEAL + (600) 5 APPEAL » (600) BRIEF 21 


30 |: 


II. 


III. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


The Elrod, Branti and Rutan holdings should not 
be extended to independent contractors. ...... 


A. Extending Elrod, Branti And Rutan Raises 
Unworkable Problems For Governmental 
Entities, Unnecessarily Restricting Their 
Effectiveness And Efficiency. ........... 


B. Such An Extension Of Elrod, Branti And 
Rutan Raises Unworkable Problems For The 
Judiciary Restricting Its Effectiveness And 
nn ceeded vcdiek ss 


Assuming, arguendo, this Court fashions a First 
Amendment test applying to independent 
contractors, it should be one based on a 
“reasonableness” rather than a “strict scrutiny” 
a be oekwkcscs 


This case presents the Court with the opportunity 
to overrule what has become unworkable 
precedent in Rutan, if not in Elrod and Branti as 
ä 0 


cc 


14 


15 


21 


23 


Contents 
Page 
TABLE OF CITATIONS 

Cases Cited: 
Branti v Finkel, 445 U.S. 507 (1980))))))))⸗ ů: passim 
Breuer v. Hart, 909 F.2d 1035 (7th Cir. 1990) ......... 18 
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601 (1973) ......... 1,15 
Brown v. Glines, 444 U.S. 348 (1980h́hji 21 
Civil Service Commission v. Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 548 

DT Skiveehes toca kt ck edccbhyosednccesooses | 
Connick v Meyers, 461 U.S. 138 (198 3)))) 16,19 
Downtown Auto Parks, Inc. v. City of Milwaukee, 938 F.2d 

705 (7th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 1005 

r ] ˙˙⸗¶˙. bee eee 10 
Elrod v. Burns, 421 U.S. 347 (19760)0!ũn:n „ passim 


Fox and Co. v Schoemehl, 671 F.2d 303 (8th Cir. 1982) .. 6 
Horn v. Kean, 796 F.2d 668 (3rd Cir. 1986) ........... 11 


LaFalce v Houston, 712 F.2d 292 (7th Cir. 1983), cert. 
denied, 464 U.S. 1044 (198c9))9)))))⸗e 6,7,8,9 


Contents 
Page 
Lundblad v. Celeste, 874 F.2d 1097 (6th Cir. 1989), 
vacated, 882 F.2d 207 (6th Cir. 1990), reinstated in 

part, 924 F.2d 627 (6th Cir. 199 11 11 
Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593 (19 )) 3 
Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 562 (1968) 

esse ee eee 15, 16. 17,21 
Public Worker's v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 (1947) 1. 15.21 
Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 497 U.S. 62 (1990) 

TV TTI TT TTT TT TT TTT TTT TTT TTT PTT eees eee ee passim 
Sele v. Letts, 5 F.3d 1040 (7th Cir. 1993) 18,19, 20 
Soderstrum . Town of Grand Isle, 925 F.2d 135 (Sth Cir. 

/ ese 18 
Ste gmaier v. Trammell, 597 F.2d 1027 (Sth Cir. 1979) 18 
Sweeney v. Bond, 669 F.2d 542 (8th Cir. 1982) ........ 6 
Tarplay v. Jeffers, et al., (7th Cir. Docket No. 95-2084) 

— ese eseeee 14 


Triad Associates, Inc. v. Chicago Housing Authority, 892 
F.2d 583 (7th Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 845 
ese ebe bees eee ess 9.10 


iv 


Contents 
Page 


Umbehr v. McClure, 44 F.3d 876 (10th Cir. 1995), argued 
November 28, 1995, sub nom. Board of 
Commissioners, Wabaunsee County, Kansas v. Umbehr 


2,14 


United States v National Treasury Employers Union. 
U.S. 11S S.Ct. 1003 (1995) )) 2... cece eee 1,16 


Vickery v. Jones, 865 F. Supp. 1313(S.D. Ill. 1994), appeal 
pending, Nos. 96-1055, 96-1153 (7thCir.) ...... 13,17,19 


Waters v. Churchill, U. S. . 114 S.Ct. 1878 (1994) 1.16 


United States Constitution Cited: 
err... „„ 0• passim 
Fourteenth Amendment 4 


1 
SUMMARY OFF ARGUMENT 


Elrod, Branti and Rutan mark a departure from this Court's 
prior decisions in Public Worker's v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 
(1947); Civil Service Commission v. Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 
548 (1973); Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601 (1973), and 
more recent decisions in United States v. National Treasury 
Employers Union, U. S 115 S. Ct. 1003 (1995) and Waters 


u Churchill. U.S. , 114 S. Ct. 1878 (1994). Instead of the 


deferential approach employed in this line of cases, Elrod, 
Branti and Rutan apply a strict scrutiny standard when analyzing 
First Amendment issues arising out of state and local 
employment. 


The strict scrutiny standard should not be extended to this 
First Amendment case arising from Petitioners’ work as an 
independent contractor in the City of Northlake. Such an 
extension of Elrod, Branti and Rutan in this case is not only 
inconsistent with the deferential approach described above, it 
also raises unworkable problems for local governmental entities 
and for the judiciary, restricting both in their effectiveness and 


efficiency. 


However, even if the strict scrutiny standard were applied 
here, Northlake did not unconstitutionally infringe on 
Petitioners’ First Amendment rights. Northlake’s action was, in 
fact, narrowly tailored to further a vital governmental interest. 
Northlake has no other ef*ective means to further the vital 
governmental interest of providing effective and efficient 
municipal services unless it has the power to terminate or not 
renew relationships with independent contractors pursuant to 
which such services are provided. 


Likewise, if the exception (recognized by Elrod, Branti and 
Rutan ) to the strict scrutiny standard is applied, Northlake did 
not unconstitutionally violate Petitioners’ First Amendment 


2 


rights. As independent contractors, who operate without 
supervision from the City of Northlake, Petitioners are 
analogous to the high ranking employees described in Branti and 
Rutan who may be dismissed for political reasons without 
violating the First Amendment. 


Under any First Amendment analysis, whether it be the 
deferential approach, the strict scrutiny test, or the exception 
thereto, Petitioners fail to state a claim. In addition, this Court 
may consider overruling at least Rutan, if not Elrod and Branti. 
as an alternative to extending those decisions into the context of 
First Amendment issues that arise between governmental 
entities and independent contractors. For all of the foregoing 
reasons, this Court should affirm the decision below of the 
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. 


ARGUMENT 
I. 


THE ELROD, BRANTI AND RUTAN HOLDINGS 
SHOULD NOT BE EXTENDED TO INDEPENDENT 
CONTRACTORS. 


This case, along with Umbehr v. McClure, 44 F.3d 876 (10th 
Cir. 1995) (94-1654, argued November 28, 1995, sub nom. 
Board of Commissioners, Wabaunsee County, Kansas v. 
Umbehr), provides this Court, for the first time, the opportunity 
to address the issue of what, if any, First Amendment rights an 
independent contractor has in the context of performing work for 
a governmental entity. 


Prior hereto, this court has addressed the issue of First 
Amendment rights in the limited context of a governmental 
employer/employee relationship. In that context, this Court has 


3 


struggled mightily with attempting to fashion not only a test to be 
applied in determining whether a constitutional violation has 
occurred but also in determining to whom such a test should be 


applied. 


For example, in Elrod v. Burns, 421 U.S. 347 (1976), this 
Court, ina plurality opinion, decided that a newly elected sheriff 
could not constitutionally replace certain office staff personal 
with members of his own party when the employees being 
replaced failed to support or affiliate with the party in power. 
Support for that holding was found in Perry v. Sindermann, 408 
U.S. 593 (1972), which held that the state’s refusal to renew a 
teacher's contract because he had been publicly critical of its 
policies, imposed an unconstitutional condition on the receipt of 
a public benefit. Nonetheless, the plurality in Elrod did 
acknowledge that a government has a significant interest in 
insuring that it has effective and efficient employees. 


This Court arrived at a similar conclusion in Branti v. 
Finkel, 445 U.S. 507 (1980), even though it decided that the First 
Amendment prohibited a newly appointed public defender from 
firing assistant public defenders because they did not support the 
party of which the newly elected public defender was a member. 


In both Elrod and Branti this Court carved out exceptions for 
certain employees. The exception outlined in Elrod provided 
that policymaking employees or employees in confidential 
positions could be dismissed on the basis of their political views. 
Elrod, supra, 421 U.S. at 367. In Branti, the court found that a 
state demonstrates a compelling interest for political firings 
when it can show that “party affiliation is an appropriate 
requirement for the effective performance of the public office 
involved.” Branti, supra, 445 U.S. at 518. 


4 


The third in this line of cases is Rutan v. Republican Party of 
Illinois, 497 U.S. 62 (1990). In that case, a sharply divided court 
extended the holdings in Elrod and Branti to promotion, transfer, 
recall and hiring decisions based on party affiliation and support. 
The exceptions found in Elrod and Branti were not an issue in 
Rutan as it was conceded that the employees involved in Rutan 
would not fall within the exceptions. Id. at 71, footnote 5. 


However, this Court, in Rutan, was sharply divided with 
Justice Scalia, who was joined by the Chief Justice and Justice 
Kennedy, in whole, as well as by Justice O’Connor, in part, 
authoring the dissent. In his dissent, Justice Scalia observed: 


Today the Court makes its constitutional 
civil service reform absolute, extending to all 
decisions regarding government 
employment. Because the First Amendment 
has never been thought to require this 
disposition, which may well have disastrous 
consequences for our political system, I 
dissent. 


Id., at 94. 
As cogently observed by Justice Scalia: 


Once it is acknowledged that the 
Constitution’s prohibition against laws 
“abridging the freedom of speech” does not 
apply to laws enacted in the government's 
capacity as employer in the same way as it 
does to laws enacted in the government's 
capacity as regulator of private conduct, it 
may sometimes be difficult to assess what 
employment practices are permissible and 


5 


what are not. That seems to me nota difficult 
question, however, in the present context. 
The provisions of the Bill of Rights are 
designed to restrain transient majorities from 
impairing long-recognized personal 
liberties. They did not create by implication 
novel individual rights overturning accepted 
political norms. Thus, when a practice not 
expressly prohibited by the text of the Bill of 
Rights bears the endorsement of a long 
tradition of open, wide spread, and 
unchallenged use that dates back to the 
beginning of the Republic, we have no proper 
basis for striking it down. Such a venerable 
and accepted tradition is not to be laid on the 
examining table and scrutinized for its 
conformity to some abstract principle of First 
Amendment adjudication devised by this 
Court. To the contrary, such traditions are 
themselves the stuff out of which the Court's 
principles are to be formed. 


Id. * 95-96. 


It is in that context that this case, involving whether a 
governmental entity may for political reasons terminate the 
services of an independent contractor, must be decided. 
Respondents submit that such considerations are 
constitutionally permissible and for this Court to hold otherwise 
would do nothing more than foster uncertainty, indecision, and 
second guessing which would result in the federal judiciary 
being inundated with lawsuits by any independent contractor 
who felt that the decision to retain or not retain its services was 
politically motivated. This Court’s decisions in Elrod, Branti 
and Rutan should not be extended to independent contractors. 


6 


The Rutan dissent and the weight of persuasive authority in the 
better reasoned opinions in the Courts of Appeals support that 
result. 


A. Extending Elrod, Branti And Rutan Raises Unworkable 
Problems For Governmental Entities, Unnecessarily 
Restricting Their Effectiveness And Efficiency. 


The first circuit to address this issue in the context of 
independent contractors was the Eighth Circuit in the cases of 
Sweeney v. Bond, 669 F.2d 542 (8th Cir. 1982) and Fox and Co. 
v. Schoemehl, 671 F.2d 303(8th Cir. 1982), 


In Sweeney, the plaintiffs alleged their dismissals were 
based solely on their political affiliation and argued they were 
protected from such dismissals by the holdings in Elrod, supra 
and Branti, supra. In deciding that the plaintiffs in Sweeney did 
not fall within the protection of Elrod and Branti, the Eighth 
Circuit found it dispositive that those two Supreme Court 
decisions were limited to dismissals of public employees for 
partisan reasons. /d., at545. Consequently, the Eighth Circuit 
was “not willing to extend the patronage decisions to cases 
which do not involve public employees.” Id., at 545. As a result. 
once it was determined that the fee agents in Sweeney were not 
public employees but more in the nature of independent 
contractors, the trial court’s holding that the plaintiffs were not 
protected from dismissal based on political affiliation was 
affirmed. 


The Seventh Circuit has, in a line of cases culminating in the 
instant case, repeatedly held that independent contractors are 
afforded no protection from removal based on political 
considerations. The first such case was LaFalce v. Houston, 712 
F.2d 292 (7th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 464 U. S. 1044 (1984). In 
that case the plaintiff had submitted a bid to the city of 


7 


Springfield on behalf of his business to install and maintain 
benches along city streets. He alleged that his bid was the most 
favorable to the city but that, nonetheless, the mayor had the 
contract awarded to another bidder who was one of the mayor's 
political supporters while the plaintiff was not. The district court 
dismissed plaintiff's complaint and that dismissal was affirmed 
by the Seventh Circuit. 


In affirming the district court’s dismissal, the Seventh 
Circuit observed that the practice of favoring political 
supporters and awarding contracts for public projects has along 
history at the federal as well as the state and local levels. It 
acknowledged as hardly open to question that such a practice 
could interfere with the free expression of political views 
whether directly or through its effect on campaign contributions. 
Id., at 293. Nonetheless, the court considered the extent of the 
likely interference as being outweighed by the consequences of 
trying to prevent it through an interpretation of the Constitution 
and held that political considerations in the awarding of public 
contracts to independent contractors are permissible. 


The Seventh Circuit noted that it is not the end of world if a 
government contractor does not get the particular government 
work which it seeks due to the fact that the contractor is on the 
outs with the incumbent as there are other sources of business for 
such contractors. Of note in that regard is that the Petitioners 
herein apparently have many sources of business as alleged in 
their complaint. (See appendix to Petition for Writ of Certiorari, 
page 21a) In paragraph two of Petitioners’ First Amended 
Complaint, they allege that O Hare Truck Service, Inc., in 
addition to other services, provides towing services at the 
request of municipalities throughout Cook and DuPage 
counties.” It is apparent that Petitioners rely only partially on 
any income from towing services received by being on the 
rotation list in Northlake. 


The Seventh Circuit further observed that because at least 
some government work is dispensed on a partisan basis, “modern 
American life has made it important for business firms to be on 
good terms with the major political groupings in the society. It 
seems unlikely that the cautious neutrality that characterizes the 
politics of American business would be altered even by an 
ironclad constitutional rule against allowing politics to 
influence the contracting process.” /d., at 294. That court 
further went on to explain: 


To attempt to purge government of 
politics to the extent implied ty an effort to 
banish partisan influences from public 
contracting will strike some as idealistic, 
others as quixotic, still others as 
undemocratic, but all as formidable. 
Patronage in one form or another has long 
been a vital force in American politics. Civil 
service laws. . . requiring public contracts to 
be awarded to the low bidder, laws regulating 
the financing of political campaign, and 
decisions such as Elrod and Branti have 
reduced the role of patronage in politics but 
have not eliminated it entirely. The 
desirability of reducing it still further raises 
profound questions of political science that 
exceed judicial competence to answer. . e 
are reluctant to tamper with political 
institutions when the competing First 
Amendment interests are as attenuated as 
they appear to be here. 


Id., at 294 (emphasis added) 


The court also noted there was a practical consideration in 


9 


its decision, that being that to hold otherwise would invite every 
disappointed bidder for a public contract to bring a federal 
lawsuit against the governmental entity involved. That could 
literally occur with respect to any item of governmental work 
performed by independent contractors as in virtually every 
instance there is more than one entity competing for that work. 


The next Seventh Circuit case addressing this was Triad 
Associates, Inc. v. Chicago Housing Authority, 892 F.2d 583 (7th 
Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 498 U.S.845 (1990). Triad was a 
security firm hired by the Chicago Housing Authority to provide 
security services beginning in 1982. After a change of 
administrations in Chicago, Triad alleged that the CHA began to 
intimidate, harass and ultimately drive it and other white 
employees and contractors from the ranks of the CHA and 
replace them with black employees and contractors who 
supported the political aspirations of the new administration. 
Triad filed a seven count complaint against the CHA, one of 
which alleged that the CHA’s actions violated Triad’s rights of 
free association and speech as guaranteed by the First and 
Fourteenth Amendments, allegations which are essentially the 
same as the Petitioners’ allegations in this case. 


Although the Seventh Circuit noted that the Triad case was 
not factually parallel to the circumstances in the LaFalce case it 
emphasized that the rationale underlying that decision was the 
difference that existed with respect to the business relationship 
of the parties involved. In affirming the district court’s dismissal 
of Triad’s First Amendment claim, the Seventh Circuit held that: 


The decisions in both LaFaice and Horn 
were grounded upon the distinction between 
“independent contractors” and “public 
employees” and the extent to which this 
distinction was dispositive of the First 


10 


Amendment issue. In that Triad is an 
“independent contractor” we, hold that our 
decision in LaFalce is binding and that Triad 
is not protected under the First Amendment 
in this context. 


Id., at 588. 


Petitioners have conceded in this Court that they are 
independent contractors as far as their relationship with the City 
of Northlake is concerned. See Petitioners brief, page 9. 
Consequently, as correctly decided in the court below, 
petitioner’s First Amendment claims should properly be 
rejected. The Seventh Circuit, subsequent to this Court's Rutan 
decision once again affirmed its position with respect to 
independent contractors in Downtown Auto Parks, Inc. v. City of 
Milwaukee, 938 F.2d 705 (7th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 502 U.S 
1005 (1991). In again refusing to extend the Elrod and Branti 
decisions to independent contractors despite the then recent 
holding in Rutan, the Seventh Circuit stated: 


While recognizing that Rutan has altered 
some of the assumptions upon which the 
LaFalce and Triad decisions were based, we 
affirm the continued validity of those earlier 
cases. Rutan did extend First Amendment 
protection, but only within the context of 
government employment... we continue to 
concur in the view taken by the other circuits 
and hold that political favoritism in the 
awarding in public contracts is not 
actionable. 


Id., at 710. 


As was very eloquently observed by the Third Circuit Court 
of Appeals in Horn v. Kean, 796 F.2d 668 (3rd Cir. 1986), when 
that court affirmed a motion for summary judgment in favor of 
various state of New Jersey officials and against independent 
contractors who were individuals removed from their positions 
solely because of their political affiliation: 


... [We] embrace the proposition that 
application of the First Amendment has never 
been considered as absolute dogma that runs 
roughshod over other fundamental values. 
We recognize that in adding the formidable 
gloss to the naked constitutional text of 
“Congress shall make no law. . .” the courts 
have applied a balancing approach. Having 
weighed interests implicated here, we are 
persuaded first, that the independent 
contractors in this case differ in significant 
respects from public employees and, second, 
that the distinctions lead to different first 
amendment treatments of the two 
classifications. As the force of a first 
amendment assault on state patronage 
practices moves from public employment 
into the outer spheres of political life, we are 
extremely hesitant to realign radically, in the 
name of the Constitution, a political 
constellation that has been with us since the 
Republic was formed. 


Id., at 677. 


The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals has also considered and 
followed these cases in Lundblad v. Celeste, 874 F.2d 1097 (6th 
Cir. 1989), vacated, 882 F.2d 207 (6th Cir. 1990), reinstated in 
part, 924 F.2d 627 (6th Cir. 1991) (en banc). 


12 


Affirming the Seventh Circuit's decision below eliminates 
the potentially “disastrous results” predicted by Justice Scalia in 
his Rutan dissent. For example, once a municipality lets an 
independent contract, its problems are not limited to First 
Amendment suits from unsuccessful bidders. The successful 
bidder could later seek a rate increase and simultaneously, 
publicly endorse the opposition. If the contract would then not 
be renewed by the incumbent, but instead was given to a lower 
bidder; under Petitioners’ theory, the municipality would face a 
First Amendment claim alleging that the contract was not 
renewed in retaliation for expression of political views or for 
political association. 


Furthermore, because most independent contracts are of 
limited duration, every new administration will have occasion to 
review, terminate or renew contracts made by the preceding 
administration. If anew administration decides to terminate or 
not renew its predecessors’ contracts; under Petitioners’ 
analysis, each such decision will subject each new 
administration to a federal First Amendment lawsuit. There is no 
basis in the Constitution to so encumber the governmental 
decision-making process. Presumably, the electorate expects 
change when voting in a new administration. The First 
Amendment should not provide vague and abstract restrictions 
on a new administration’s efforts to carry out such a mandate. 


For example, administrations are often voted out because of 
the electorate’s perception that public services are inadequate. 
This is true whether the voter perception is accurate or not. 
Under Petitioners’ analysis, an independent contractor who 
provided any of those public services and was replaced by the 
new administration would have the basis for filing a First 
Amendment lawsuit because, from its perspective, the only thing 
that changed was the administration. Therefore, contract non- 
renewal would have been based solely on political association 


13 


with the prior administration. Under this scenario, the new 
administration should not have to defend such First Amendment 
claims for simply following the expressed will of the electorate. 


Finally, the government loses direct control over a job that 
has been assigned to an independent contractor. The contractor 
becomes vested with the right to control the manner and method 
of how that job is carried out on a day to day basis. As a result, the 
government must retain some method of controlling the 
independent contractor without having to wait for a disruption of 
some type in service. See Vickery v. Jones, 865 F. Supp. 1313 
(S. D. III. 1994), appeal pending, Nos. 96-1055, 96-1153 (7th 
Cir.). Itis the government that is looked to by its citizens for the 
provision of certain public services and it is the government that 
is held accountable for any problems in the provision of those 
services. Consequently, control over independent contractors 
must be exercised by the government without having to resort to 
some tortured First Amendment analysis each time the services 
of a specific independent contractor are no longer needed or 
desired. As Justice Scalia commented in his dissenting opinion 
in Rutan: 


In sum, I do not deny that the patronage 
system influences or redirects, perhaps to a 
substantial degree, individual political 
expression and political association. But like 
the many generations of Americans that have 
preceded us, I do not consider that a 
significant impairment of free speech or free 
association. 


Rutan, supra, 497 U.S at 110. 


14 


B. Such An Extension Of Elrod, Branti And Rutan Raises 
Unworkable Problems For The Judiciary Restricting Its 
Effectiveness And Efficiency. 


The Tenth Circuit's recent decision in Umbehr, supra, 
acknowledges that its decision places it squarely in conflict with 
several other circuits. The Umbehr court's holding that an 
“independent contractor is protected under the First Amendment 
from retaliatory governmental action, just as anemployee would 
be” (Umbehr, supra, 44 F.3d at 883) is unworkable and will lead 
to a never-ending stream of lawsuits by any disgruntled 
contractor who has or was interested in doing work for a 
governmental entity but which no longer was doing so. 


On balance, extending the holdings in Elrod, Branti and 
Rutan, to also apply to independent contractors who work for 
governmental entities, would foster unlimited litigation due to 
the uncertainty in attempting to apply whatever rule of law that 
might be fashioned in this context. This is evidenced by making 
a simple comparison between the very small number of First 
Amendment cases involving independent contractors and the 
virtually unlimited number of First Amendment cases involving 
disputes between government employees and government 


employers. 


The ensuing flood of litigation would not be limited only to 
independent contractor cases. These same issues will have to be 
considered in the context state or local governments and their 
part-time as well as their temporary employees. In fact, these 
very issues are now pending before the Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals in Tarpley v Jeffers, et al. (7th Cir. Docket No. 95-2084) 
and in Vickery v. Jones, supra. There are a myriad of part-time 
and temporary employment decisions that, according to 
Petitioners, would also be subject to First Amendment claims 
under Elrod, Branti and Rutan. 


15 


To extend First Amendment protection to independent 
contractors in this context as is advocated by the Petitioners 
would only provide further extremely fertile grounds for future 
litigation, but any potential chilling effect on First Amendment 
rights by refusing to extend these rights to this case would be, in 
Justice Scalia's words, not a “significant impairment of free 
speech or free association.” Consequently, the Elrod, Branti and 
Rutan line of cases should not be extended to independent 
contractors and this Court should affirm the Seventh Circuit's 
opinion below which so holds. 


ASSUMING, ARGUENDO, THIS COURT FASHIONS 
A FIRST AMENDMENT TEST APPLYING TO 
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS, IT SHOULD BE ONE 
BASED ON A “REASONABLENESS” RATHER THAN A 
“STRICT SCRUTINY” STANDARD. 


There is ample precedent for applying a reasonableness 
standard in this context. Long before the Elrod decision, this 
Court had, in upholding legislation prohibiting political 
activities by federal employees, stated that it was not necessary 
that the activity regulated be anything more than an activity 
reasonably deemed by Congress to interfere with the efficiency 
of public service. See Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 
(1947). Likewise, in Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601 
(1973), this Court upheld restrictions on state employees even 
though those restrictions were directed at political expression 
that, if it had been engaged in by private individuals, would have 
been protected by the First Amendment. 


Similarly, a balancing test in the context of an adverse 
employment action against a public employee because of his 
speech was fashioned in Pickering . Board of Education, 391 
U.S. 562 (1968), where this Court stated: 


16 


the state has interests as an employer 
in regulating the speech of its employees that 
differ significantly from those it possesses in 
connection with regulation of the speech of 
the citizenry in general. The problem in any 
case is to arrive at a balance between the 
interests of the (employee), as a citizen, in 
1 commenting upon matters of public concern 
and the interests of the State, as an employer. 
in promoting the efficiency of the public 
service it performs through its employees. 


Id., at 568. 


More recently, in Connick v. Meyers, 461 U.S. 138 (1983), 
this Court gave a wide degree of deference to the employer's 
judgment when applying that balancing test. Most recently in 
United States . National Treasury Employees Union, U.S. 
—» 115 S. Ct. 1003 (1995) and Waters v. Churchill, U. 8s. 
114S.Ct. 1878 (1994), this Court again showed deference in the 
governmental employment context. So too, a governmental 
entity should be given wide deference in its decision-making 
process with respect to independent contractors. 


Despite the reasonableness standard evidenced in the public 
employer/employee free speech setting, the case law has 
unfortunately evolved to the application of a “strict scrutiny” 
standard in the public employer/employee freedom of 
association setting. See Elrod, Branti, Rutan, supra. In Rutan 
the five to four majority opinion written by Justice Brennan 
decided that “unless these patronage practices are narrowly 
tailored to further vital governmental interests, we must 
conclude that they impermissibly encroach on First Amendment 
freedoms.” Rutan, supra, 497 U.S at 74. As Justice Scalia points 
out in his dissenting opinion, “that strict scrutiny standard finds 
no support in our cases.” Id., at 98. 


17 


As stated above, Respondents urge this Court not to, in the 
instant case, extend the Elrod, Branti and Rutan line of cases. 
Assuming, arguendo, this Court decides to adopt any test at all, 
the test that should be applied in the independent contractor 
context should be one of reasonableness and deference under 
Pickering and its progeny, not the strict scrutiny test applied in 
Rutan. Nonetheless, even under the heightened standard applied 
in Rutan, Petitioners’ removal from the towing rotation list 
would not violate Petitioners’ First Amendment rights. 


The strict scrutiny standard within Elrod, Branti and Rutan 
provides that unless patronage practices are narrowly tailored to 
further government interests, they impermissibly encroach on 
First Amendment freedoms. Rutan, supra, 487 U.S. at 74 


With an independent contractor, a municipality can only 
effectively control conduct through the right to terminate or the 
right to not renew the contract. See Vickery v. Jones, supra. Any 
limitation on governmental ability to terminate, or not rehire, an 
independent contractor effectively destroys governmental 
ability to control public services. This right to terminate or not 
rehire is narrowly tailored; it is the only effective method 
available of government control over independent contractors. 
The right to terminate or not rehire furthers a vital governmental 
interest: efficiency and effectiveness of operation. 


Section I, ante, demonstrates numerous examples and 
practical considerations showing the right to terminate or not 
rehire an independent contractor furthers efficient and effective 
governmental operation. Those examples apply equally, but 
need not be restated, here. Therefore, because the right to 
terminate or not rehire is narrowly tailored and relates to a vital 
governmental interest, Respondents’ actions here do not violate 
the First Amendment even under strict scrutiny analysis. 


18 


In addition, the policy maker/confidential employee 
exception to this strict scrutiny standard outlined by this Court 
in Branti recognized that: 


party affiliation may be an acceptable 
requirement for some government 
employment. Thus, if an employee’s private 
political beliefs would interfere with the 
discharge of his public duties, his First 
Amendment rights may be required to yield 
to the State’s vital interest in maintaining 
governmental effectiveness and efficiency. 
In sum, the ultimate inquiry is not whether 
the label “policy maker” or “confidential” 
fits a particular position; rather, the question 
is whether the hiring authority can 
demonstrate that party affiliation is an 
appropriate requirement for the effective 
performance of the public office involved. 


Branti, supra, 445 U.S. at 517-518. 


Under that exception, a wide range of public employees 
have been found to hold positions in which the government was 
able to “demonstrate that party affiliation is an appropriate 
requirement for the effective performance” of the particular job 
involved. Those included a deputy sheriff (Breuer v. Hart, 909 
F.2d 1035 [7th Cir. 19900); a secretary to a police chief 
(Soderstrum v. Town of Grand Isle, 925 F.2d 135 (Sth Cir. 1991): 
a deputy clerk (Stegmaier v Trammell, 597 F.2d 1027 [Sth 
Cir.1979]); and a subdistrict superintendent for a highway 
department (Selch v. Letts, 5 F.3d 1040 [7th Cir., 1993). 


It should be without question that the political loyalty of 
independent contractors who perform governmental services is 


19 


related to the effective performance of the function involved. 
Since they do not have supervisors who monitor their work, they 
are similar to supervisors or decision makers which Branti 
allowed to be selected or dismissed based on political affiliation. 
See also, Vickery v. Jones, supra. 


The Seventh Circuit. in affirming the dismissal of the 
subdistrict highway superintendent in Selch, stated: 


Elected officials cannot implement the 
policies that they were elected to carry out 
and, hence, the will of the electorate cannot 
be effectuated, unless the officials can install 
their political allies in the most sensitive 
jobs. Id., at 1044. While there is no 
indication that Selch would not effectively 
perform his duties, “actual disruption nor 
disturbance need not be proved” (citation 
omitted) once the employee is classified (as 
exempt for First Amendment protection), he 
can be fired on political grounds even if there 
is no evidence that he would not serve his 
political superiors loyally and competently. 


Id., at 1046-1047. 


This observation is underscored by the Connick Court's 
statement that “we do not see the necessity for an employer to 
allow events to unfold to the extent that the disruption of the 
office and the destruction of working relationships is manifest 
before taking action.” Connick, supra, 461 U.S. at 152. 


One of Selch’s responsibilities was to handle various 
requests with respect to street maintenance and repairs, etc. The 
Seventh Circuit noted significant evidence in political life that 


20 


the failure to properly provide services such as snow removal 
from highways could adversely impact on the chief executive of 
a state or a government charged with providing such services. In 
particular, the Seventh Circuit observed that the incumbent is 
widely regarded as having lost the 1979 Chicago Mayoral 
election due to snow removal problems. 


That concept is of import in the instant case where an 
independent contractor is providing public services to the 
citizens of Northlake. As noted previously, an independent 
contractor has little or no supervision over the manner or method 
in which it performs its job. That coupled with Petitioners’ open 
support for Mayor Paxson's opponent (placing opposition 
campaign posters in Petitioners’ place of business) certainly 
provides Petitioners with the opportunity, in providing public 
services, to adversely impact the chief executive of Northlake, 
who is charged with providing those public services. In 
particular, as alleged by Petitioners in their First Amended 
Complaint (see Petition for Writ of Certiorari, page 21a), the 
public service being provided is “when the need arises for the 
towing of a vehicle, as a result of an accident, mechanical 
breakdown, abandonment or other reason, plaintiff (Petitioner) 
is contacted by the municipality where the vehicle is located and 
asked to provide towing services.” 


As the Selch court teaches, actual disruption or disturbance 
need not be proved. Once an employee is classified as exempt 
from First Amendment protection, political firings are 
constitutionally permissible even without actual evidence of 
disloyalty or incompetence. Similarly, in the instant case, the 
City of Northlake is not required to wait and see if the Petitioners, 
once the candidate they supported was defeated, would for 
political reasons attempt to disrupt or otherwise adversely affect 
municipal services. 


21 


As indicated above, however, it is Respondents’ position 
that if this court decides to apply a test in this area, it should be the 
reasonableness and deferential test discussed in Pickering and 
its progeny. That should be so whether the issue is freedom of 
speech or freedom of association. As observed by Justice Scalia 
in his Rutan dissenting opinion, “since the government may 
dismiss an employee for political speech “reasonably deemed by 
Congress to interfere with the efficiency of the public service,” 
(citation omitted), it follows, a fortiori, that the government may 
dismiss an employee for political affiliation if “reasonably 
necessary to promote effective government.” (citing Public 
Workers v. Mitchell, supra and Brown v. Glines, 444 U.S 348 
19800. 


As demonstrated above, under any test this Court may 
fashion, there is no First Amendment violation, and therefore 
this Court must affirm the Seventh Circuit's opinion below. 
which so holds. 


THIS CASE PRESENTS THE COURT WITH THE 
OPPORTUNITY TO OVERRULE WHAT HAS BECOME 
UNWORKABLE PRECEDENT IN RUTAN, IF NOT IN 
ELROD AND BRANTIAS WELL. 


It is difficult to find a more unworkable rule of law than that 
which has evolved from the Elrod, Branti and Rutan line of 
cases. The inconsistencies which these cases have spawned are 
discussed in considerable detail by Justice Scalia in his 
dissenting opinion in Rutan, supra at 111-113. If those and 
subsequent cases are not reason enough to overrule that line of 
cases, then the mere consideration that the line of cases could be 
extended to independent contractors, part-time and temporary 
employees should most certainly convince one of that necessity. 


22 


As observed by Justice Scalia, the “test” devised to implement 
Brantihas produced inconsistent and unpredictable results. That 
uncertainty undermines the purpose of both the non-patronage 
rule and its exception, Rutan, supra, 497 U.S. at 112. 


Obviously, this Court should not treat lightly a request to 
overrule past precedent in light of not only the importance, but 
the necessity, of the doctrine of stare decisis. Nonetheless, when 
a rule of law becomes unworkable, it should be corrected. As 
stated by Justice Scalia: 


Even in the field of constitutional 
adjudication where the pull of stare decisis is 
at its weakest, see Glidden Company v. 
Zdanok, 370 U.S. 530, 543 (1962)(opinion of 
Harlan, J.), one is reluctant to part from 
precedent. But when that precedent is not 
only wrong, not only recent, not only 
contradicted by a long prior tradition, but 
also has proved unworkable in practice then 
all reluctance ought to disappear. 


Rutan, supra, 497 U.S. at 110-111. 


In discussing the subject of party-based employment Justice 
Scalia makes this cogent observation on how that subject would 
be dealt with if these cases were overruled and why the federal 
judiciary should not be involved in dealing with this subject: 


The answer to that (party-based 
employment) will vary from State to State, 
and indeed from city to city, even if one 
rejects out of hand (as the Branti line does) 
the benefits associated with party stability. 
Indeed, the answer will even vary from year 


23 


to year. . the appropriate “mix” of party 
based employment is a political question if 
ever there was one, and we should give it back 
to the voters of the various political units to 
decide, through civil service legislation 
crafted to suit the time and place, which mix 
is best. 


Rutan, supra 497 U.S. at 113-114. 


Before continuing to subject state and local governments, 
and their political officials, to such an unworkable framework as 
has evolved from the Elrod, Branti and Rutan line of cases in the 
public employment context; and certainly before extending that 
line of cases to include independent contractors, this Court 
should re-evaluate the wisdom of continuing to enforce the legal 
theories which originated, and have evolved from, those cases. 
In doing so, the wisdom of placing the subject of party-based 
employment back into the hands of the voters and their elected 
representatives, to be decided at the state and local level, 
becomes apparent. 


Respondents defer to the Brief of Illinois State Officials as 
Amicus Curiae for more detailed argument on this issue. 


CONCLUSION 


Petitioner’s invitation to this Court to extend the Elrod, 
Branti and Rutan line of cases to give First Amendment 
protection to independent contractors should be rejected as 
unworkable and untenable. The Rutan dissent together with the 
weight of persuasive authority in the Circuit Courts of Appeals 
provide this Court with sound and reasoned precedent to reject 
Petitioners’ arguments and affirm the ruling below of the 
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. 


24 


Any other conclusion will result in giving independent 
contractors unfettered access to the courts by giving every 
disappointed independent contractor the ability to file a lawsuit 
based on the First Amendment. The potential for uncertainty in 
the law if any such extension is made is evident when considering 
aot only the number, but also the inconsistent results, in First 
Amendment cases that have been decided since Elrod in the 
employment context. Such uncertainty can, and should, be 
avoided by this Court affirming the ruling of both the District 
Court and the Court of Appeals below which dismissed 
Petitioners’ First Amendment challenge on the basis of their 
status as independent contractors. 


If this Court decides to extend independent contractors any 
First Amendment protection at all, the applicable analysis is one 
of reasonableness and deference as espoused by this Court both 
prior and subsequent to the Elrod, Branti and Rutan line of cases. 
Under such an analysis, Petitioners fail to state a claim. 
Likewise, even under the Elrod, Branti and Rutan strict scrutiny 
test or its exception, Petitioners fail to state a claim. 


Finally, before this Court decides to extend the Elrod line of 
cases to independent contractors who work for governmental 
entities, the Court should evaluate and review the unworkable 
framework and unpredictable results that have occurred in this 
area of the law. In so doing, this Court has the opportunity to 
overrule Rutan, if not Elrod and Branti as well and return the 
subject of party-based employment to the hands of the voters and 
their elected representatives to be decided at the state and local 
level. 


25 


For all of the above reasons, the decision of the Seventh 
Circuit Court of Appeals and the District Court for the Northern 
District of Illinois both of which rejected Petitioners’ First 
Amendment claims, should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


GARY M. FEIEREISEL 
Counsel of Record 
FRANK P. KASBOHM 
FRATERRIGO, BEST & 
BERANEK | 

Attorneys for Respondents 
55 West Monroe Street 
Suite 3400 

Chicago, Illinois 60603 
(312) 782-9255 


