Supreme Court, U.S. . 
(Q) FILED 
AUG 9 1995 


No. 94-1654 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


S 


GLEN HEISER and GEORGE SPENCER, 


Petitioners, 
vs. 


KEEN A. UMBEHR, 
Respondent. 


S 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Tenth Circuit 


o 


BRIEF OF PETITIONERS 


¢ 


*DONALD PATTERSON 

Steve R. FABert 
FisHer, PATTERSON, SAYLER & SmitH, L.L.P. 
534 S. Kansas Avenue, Suite 400 
P.O. Box 949 
Topeka, Kansas 66601-0949 
(913) 232-7761 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO,, 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 


yore 


‘ae 


4 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


1. The remedies articulated by this Court in Picker- 
ing v. Board of Education of Township High School District, 
391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 (1968) and its 
progeny should not be extended and amplified to protect 
the economic rights of government contractors whose 
services are terminable at will. 


2. The tests of Pickering and its progeny must be 
reformulated or redescribed to fit the circumstances of an 
independent contractor, if the rule of Pickering is to be 
extended. 


3. If independent contractors are to be given the 
same protections as employees under Pickering, at least 
the affirmative defenses now available to employers must 
remain available to the contracting agency. 


ii 
LIST OF PARTIES 


The parties to the proceedings are: 


Petitioners: 


GLEN HEISER and GEORGE SPENCER, in their official 
capacities as members of the Board of County Commis- 
sioners of Wabaunsee County, Kansas. 


Respondent: 


KEEN A. UMBEHR. 


iii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ........... i 
GE Ween bc6eb0s dep sbécceccccca; ii 
BE I CUP OUEEUEIED o ccc cccccccccccccccccecs iv 
eS eth rh eecccdecccccescecesccese 1 
STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION................... 1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED...... 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE................0ce00s: 2 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT.....................5. 8 
ST Lab Wed deuwesen Cbbecetescccccccccces 11 


1. The remedies articulated by this Court in Picker- 
ing v. Board of Education of Township High School 
District, 391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 
811 (1968) and its progeny should not be 
extended and amplified to protect the economic 
rights of government contractors whose services 


are terminable at will. ...............60.000000. 11 
A Review of Prior Decisions ................... 12 
Independent Contractor vs. Employee .......... 17 
A Per Se Rule for Independent Contractors... .. 23 


2. The tests of Pickering and its progeny must be 
reformulated or redescribed to fit the circum- 
stances of an independent contractor, if the rule 
of Pickering is to be extended.................. 26 


3. If independent contractors are to be given the 
same protections as loyees under Pickering, at 


least the affirmative now available to 
employers must remain available to the contract- 
BA BOTISY. 6 oc ce ccccccccccccccececccscccsceess 32 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases: 
Alexander v. United States, 509 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 
2766, 125 L.Ed.2d 441 (1993)......... 2. cece eeeeee 17 
Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 106 S.Ct. 
3172, 92 L.Ed.2d 568 (1986)........ 2... c cece eeeees 16 
Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 100 S.Ct. 1287, 63 
L.BG.26 GRE CRGGED. «oc ccccccccsccncesescssdseonses 13 
Bush v. Lucas, 462 U.S. 367, 103 S.Ct. 2404, 76 
L.BADS GED CRGGED. 20 ccccccccccceccececcsascsevess 34 
Civil Service Commission v. Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 
548, 546, 93 S.Ct. 2880, 37 L.Ed.2d 796 (1973) ..... 13 
Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., 501 U.S. 663, 111 S.Ct. 
2513, 115 L.Ed.2d 586 (1991)..........2cceeeeeeeee 17 
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 103 S.Ct. 1684, 75 
L.BG36 FED COIs cccccccccsascccecscosses 13, 15, 32 
Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 96 S.Ct. 2673, 9 
L.BG26 SH (ROVE. 2c cccccscosccccveseseece 13, 33, 34 
Employment Division, Department of Human 
Resources of Oregon v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 110 
S.Ct. 1595, 108 L.Ed.2d 876 (1990) ................ 17 
F.T.C. v. Superior Court Trial Lawyers Association, 
493 U.S. 411, 110 S.Ct. 768, 107 L.Ed.2d 851 
GRBGED oo occcccccccctcvcdetecetcsbceudsesddebadsece 17 
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 73 L.Ed.2d 396, 
OER GOR Bear GHG 0c ccvccccscccasééiesesestctno< 29 
Lake Country Estates, Inc. v. Tahoe Regional Planning 
Agency, 440 U.S. 391, 59 L.Ed.2d 401, 99 S.Ct. 
SEE GaP ep cc cvccccccscccccesceednednssanmmepnsnes 25 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


McKennon v. Nashville Banner Publishin 
__US.__, 115 S.Ct. 879, 130 L. ae Po 852 (1995) 


Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education 
v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274, 97 S.Ct. 568, 50 L.Ed.2d 
fet Sa A tga Mn Md db 13, 17, 33 


Pickering v. Board of Education of Township High 
Se District, 391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 
ey Ge WEG Senncaccecteeudotecevencecs passim 


Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75, 97 S.Ct. 556, 
BG De HEE CI Bena boncoucccccesieectaéscooss: 14 


Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 497 U.S. 62, 110 
S.Ct. 2729, 111 L.Ed.2d 52 (1990)........... 13, 14, 15 


State ex rel. Stephan v. Board of Sedgwick County 
Commissioners, 770 P.2d 455, 244 Kan. 536 (1989) .... 25 


A hs ao v. Consumers Union, 446 
“ts Aw 64 L.Ed.2d 641, 100 S.Ct. 1967 (1980) .... 25 


Tenney v. Brandhove, 341 U.S. 367, 95 L.Ed. 1019, 71 


soc ae 


SD ER bckncecsdugocddetchbebbocbecsccges 25 
Turner Broadcasting System v. F.C.C., 512 U.S. __, 

114 S.Ct. 2445, 129 L.Ed.2d 497..............-545. 27 
U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton, __U.S.__, 115 

S.Ct. 1842, 131 L.Ed.2d 881 (1995) ................ 24 
Umbehr v. Board of Wabaunsee County Commission- 

ers, 825 P.2d 1160, 16 Kan.App.2d 512 (1992)..... 1,5 
Umbehr v. Wabaunsee County Commission- 

wre, 643 P2d 176, 252 Kan, 30 (1 Swéetveteeoees 1,5 
Umbehr v. McClure, et al., 44 F.3d 876 (10th Cir. 

Bac ciccnccccccccecbeeseseccenecte otipenses aye 1 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 

Umbehr v. McClure, et al., 840 F.Supp. 837 (D.Kan. 

Bc v ccccccccscccocesentéscedecetetssdueeuasnnene 1 
United States v. Albertini, 472 U.S. 675, 105 S.Ct. 

2897, 86 L.Ed.2d 536 (1985)............ceeeeeeeees 16 
United States v. National Treasury Employees Union, 

__ -US. __, 115 S.Ct. 1003, 130 L.Ed.2d 964 

TEED «060060 0000eeesesedenenenebenenedaneeenes 13, 14 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 109 S.Ct. 

2746, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989).......... ee re 16 
Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 1878, 128 

LSE GES Geeisennccsccaspovenctenéoneanss 13, 34 
Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598, 105 S.Ct. 1524, 

OS CR Be Gs one0sosbbeesccntcpbsccanae: 16 
Unitep States CONSTITUTION: 
Pisst AGRGRMMRGRE. 2.0 cccvecccccccccccccosesecoess passim 
ee BS Fc cccucccéedekascdeeseen 2, 9, 23, 24 
Statutes CITED: 
BE UB. © TED cc ccccccpeccdcatepceuceusetetssdus 1 
DP Ws BH Tec cccceccoccuccsceactcbesesussaenedunds 1 
BD UG. © Fb heb sc covccddcvivecedesctecdesudect ibe 1 
BD Wie OF Ucacecosincscintdhsceundudubeceereunel 1 
GS Tian G Becnnccccecccsccéscncvesseubedsiemensee 1,7 
A, TREES GE GOD, cc cccccccccosecsecceceseoceseuers 25 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The decision of the U.S. District Court for the District 
of Kansas granting summary judgment to petitioners is 
reported as Umbehr v. McClure, et al., 840 FSupp. 837 
(D.Kan. 1993). The decision of the Tenth Circuit Court of 
Appeals, reversing the grant of summary judgment to 
petitioners in part and remanding the case for further 
proceedings against petitioners in their official capacities 
is published as Umbehr v. McClure, et al., 44 F.3d 876 (10th 
Cir. 1995). Parallel proceedings in state court between the 
same parties have resulted in two published decisions: 
see Umbehr v. Board of Wabaunsee County Commissioners, 
825 P.2d 1160, 16 Kan.App.2d 512 (1992) and Umbehr v. 
Board of Wabaunsee County Commissioners, 843 P.2d 176, 
252 Kan. 30 (1992). 


STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION 


Original jurisdiction in the U.S. District Court for the 
District of Kansas was based upon 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 
1343, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Respondent prosecuted a 
timely appeal to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
under the authority of 28 U.S.C. § 1291. This Court has 
jurisdiction to review the decision of the Tenth Circuit 
Court of Appeals under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


The judgment of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
was entered on January 4, 1995. A petition for rehearing 
was denied on February 10, 1995. 


¢ 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


United States Constitution Amendment 1: 


FREEDOM OF RELIGION, SPEECH AND 
PRESS 


Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press; or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Gov- 
ernment for a redress of grievances. 


United States Constitution Amendment 10: 
RESERVATION OF POWERS TO STATES 


The powers not delegated to the United 
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it 
to the States, are reserved to the States respec- 
tively, or to the people. 


+ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The named petitioners are two members of the three- 
person Board of County Commissioners of Wabaunsee 
County, Kansas, a sparsely populated county in east cen- 
tral Kansas. Petitioners are nominal parties, defending 
only in their official capacities as representatives of the 
people of the county. Although claims were made against 
them as individuals, they were granted summary judg- 
ment on the basis of qualified immunity. All claims 
against Petitioners as individuals were resolved by this 
Court’s refusal to grant the Cross-Petition for Certiorari 
on the qualified immunity issue. (Joint Appendix p.38). 


Respondent Keen Umbehr operated the municipal 
trash collection service for residents of six towns in the 
county under a contract negotiated through the Board of 
County Commissioners. Although no county refuse was 
collected under the contract, the county was a party to 
the agreement because its landfill was the expected ulti- 
mate resting place for the trash. (Joint Appendix p.22). 


Under the contract those towns which elected to 
participate would pay fees to Mr. Umbehr, and Mr. 
Umbehr would pay landfill charges for using the county 
dump. Each town agreed not to do business with any 
competing trash hauler. The contract was renewable 
annually, with an option for any party to terminate with 
60 days’ prior notice. (Joint Appendix p.22). The contract 
gave Mr. Umbehr the right but not the duty to dispose of 
the collected refuse at the landfill owned by the county, in 
return for his agreement to pay landfill charges under a 
schedule fixed by the county. The contract provided for 
termination for cause and included as cause the nonpay- 
ment of fees for depositing refuse at the county landfill. 
(Deposition Exhibit 3, pp. 138-152 of Supplemental 
Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). 


In early 1989 the Wabaunsee County Commission 
began discussing the need to raise landfill rates. The 
possibility of a rate hike was raised due to the feared 
impact of new environmental protection regulations, 
which were expected to impose requirements for poten- 
tially costly monitoring of pollution levels and more 
expensive methods of handling waste at the landfill. The 
expected costs were believed to be so great that the 
county might be compelled to close the landfill altogether 
and to send refuse generated in the county to a regional 


landfill some distance away. (Deposition Exhibit 27, pp. 
167-168 of Supplemental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of 
Appellee). 


Mr. Umbehr appeared at County Commission meet- 
ings and spoke against a general increase of user fees and 
any move to close the county landfill, which would have 
increased his own operating costs. Mr. Umbehr stated 
that he preferred increased fees to be paid out of other 
existing funds or through tax increases. (Deposition 
Exhibits 27, 28, and 31, pp. 167-170A of Supplemental 
Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). Mr. Umbehr was 
sufficiently concerned about this and other issues that he 
declared himself a candidate for an upcoming vacancy on 
the Board. (Umbehr contested the bid of Commissioner 
McClure for re-election.) (Deposition Exhibits 25 and 33, 
pp. 166 and 171 of Supplemental Appendix to 10th Cir. 
Brief of Appellee). 


During the course of his campaign Mr. Umbehr made 
public comments, both in and out of print, criticizing the 
individual members of the Board of County Commission- 
ers. As a result of some of his criticisms the official 
conduct of the members of the Board was investigated by 
the Kansas Attorney General. On December 29, 1989 the 
Attorney General reported the result of his investigation, 
which included an express finding that no member of the 
Board of County Commissioners had engaged in any 
misconduct. (Deposition Exhibit 10, pp. 157-159 of Sup- 
plemental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). 


In February, 1990 the Board voted 2-1 to terminate 
Mr. Umbehr’s trash collection contract. Commissioner 
McClure voted against termination. Because notice of 


termination was not given properly, the contract renewed 
automatically for another year. (Joint Appendix p. 13). 


In April, 1990 the Board voted to raise the rates for 
all landfill users, including Umbehr, effective June 1. 
(Deposition Exhibit 39, pp. 172-173 of Supplemental 
Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). Mr. Umbehr 
refused to pay the increased rates and filed both an 
appeal and a civil action in the District Court of Wab- 
aunsee County, Kansas seeking an injunction against the 
rate hike. (Deposition Exh. 69, pp. 178-181, and pp. 3-87 
of Supplemental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). 
This litigation was unsuccessful, and ultimately resulted 
in published decisions on appeal in the Kansas courts. 
See Umbehr v. Board of Wabaunsee County Commissioners, 
825 P.2d 1160, 16 Kan.App.2d 512 (1992) and Umbehr v. 
Board of Wabaunsee County Commissioners, 843 P.2d 176, 
252 Kan. 30 (1992). 


The Kansas Supreme Court ultimately held in the 
parallel proceedings that Umbehr had no right to appeal 
from the decision to raise the landfill rates absent proof 
of a violation of his constitutional rights or oppressive 
conduct. Their opinion noted that Mr. Umbehr had never 
alleged in those proceedings that his constitutional rights 
were violated by the decision to raise the rates for using 
the landfill. According to that opinion any decision by the 
Board which Mr. Umbehr could prove violated his consti- 
tutional rights would be set aside in a timely appeal. See 
252 Kan. at pp.36-38. 


Both Umbehr and McClure failed in their 1990 elec- 
tion bids, losing to a third candidate, Steven Anderson. 
Mr. Umbehr’s public criticisms of the Board members 


ceased after the election. (Petition for Writ of Certiorari, 
p. 9). 


The question of terminating the municipal trash haul- 
ing contract was again debated in January, 1991. Commis- 
sioners Spencer and Heiser voted to terminate, and 
Commissioner Anderson voted nay. (Joint Appendix p. 
13). Mr. Umbehr promptly negotiated exclusive contracts 
with five of the six participating towns, with higher rates 
payable to him. Mr. Umbehr made no attempt to appeal 
the board’s decision to terminate the contract as he had 
done from the rate hike. (Deposition Exhibits 78-82, pp. 
182-222 of Supplemental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of 
Appellee). 


At the time the vote was taken Mr. Umbehr had been 
in default in the payment of landfill charges for over six 
months. (Pp. 51-55 of Supplemental Appendix of Appel- 
lee). His default was not stated to be a motivating factor 
in the votes of the Board members, however. The reason 
for termination stated at the time was a desire to remove 
the county from the entanglement of a contract from 
which it received no benefit. (Depositions of Glen Heiser 
and George Spencer, pp. 323-373 and 492-516, Supple- 
mental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief of Appellee). 


Throughout the state court appeal Mr. Umbehr had 
refused to pay the increased fees mandated in the spring 
of 1990. On July 25, 1991, an order of the District Court of 
Wabaunsee County prohibited Umbehr from continuing 
to use the landfill until the delinquent payments were 
made. In August, 1991, Mr. Umbehr paid the overdue 
user fees for the period from June, 1990 to May, 1991. (Pp. 


— ae 


wy ae ee 


51-55 and 85 of Supplemental Appendix to 10th Cir. Brief 
of Appellee). 


The present action was filed in the U.S. District Court 
for the District of Kansas on May 15, 1991, alleging that 
the decision to terminate Mr. Umbehr’s monopoly trash 
hauling contract on January 28, 1991 was a violation of 
his First Amendment rights. Mr. Umbehr sued the three 
County Commissioners who held office in 1990 when the 
original decision was made to terminate his contract, 
even though only two of them had voted for termination. 
He did not sue Commissioner Anderson. (Joint Appendix 


p-1). 


A summary judgment motion was filed on behalf of 
all defendants on December 16, 1991. Summary judgment 
was granted on December 30, 1993. The District Court 
held that all claims against the defendants in their official 
capacities were barred because independent contractors 
are not entitled to the same protection as employees 
under the First Amendment. The claims against all defen- 
dants in their individual capacities were also found to be 
barred by the application of qualified immunity. The 
claims against defendant McClure were found to be addi- 
tionally barred because he had never voted to terminate 
the contract. The District Court reasoned that the termi- 
nation at will of a public contract could not, as a matter of 
law, give rise to a claim for money damages under 42 
U.S.C. § 1983, because public contracts are not analogous 
to employment relationships and because the economic 
injury claimed by Mr. Umbehr was too remote. (Joint 
Appendix pp. 1, 3-4, 10-20). 


On review the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
affirmed the decision with respect to all three defendants 
in their individual capacities, but reversed with respect to 
the official capacity claims. The Tenth Circuit disagreed 
with the reasoning of other circuits which had already 
ruled on the same issue, concluding that independent 
contractors are entitled to relief for the retaliatory termi- 
nation of at-will contractual relationships, so long as 
some potential economic benefit to the contractor, no 
matter how indirectly occasioned, is lost due to the termi- 
nation. In so holding the Tenth Circuit opinion expressly 
noted that its conclusion was “squarely in conflict with 
several other circuits, a posture we do not adopt lightly.” 
The opinion further noted the view of the panel that the 
issue is one in which Supreme Court guidance is partic- 
ularly needed. (Joint Appendix pp. 21-38). 


Petitioners’ motion for rehearing was denied and a 
timely Petitiun for Writ of Certiorari was filed and 
granted. (Joint Appendix pp. 8-9). 


¢ 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Pickering v. Board of Education of Township High School 
District, 391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 (1968) 
and its progeny recognize the legitimate right of govern- 
ment agencies to control their own operations for the 
purpose of assuring effective and efficient service to the 
public. Part of that right of control must be the power to 
delegate the task of delivering those services to private 
persons without losing control altogether. Because inde- 
pendent contractors are not subject to direct control in the 


same way as an employee, the right of control must 
include the power to revoke such a delegation with impu- 
nity. Any limitation on the right to terminate the delega- 
tion of government responsibilities to an independent 
contractor is a complete denial of the right of control, 
rather than a restraint justified by balancing the right of 
control against First Amendment rights. 


The decision to regain control of previously dele- 
gated government operations is inherently a policy deci- 
sion which is legislative in nature, deserving of full 
legisiative immunity. Such policy decisions will inevita- 
bly be based on political considerations, and should not 
be scrutinized by the courts. Allegations of improper 
motive are legally irrelevant to the assessment of the 
constitutionality of any exercise of legislative authority. 
Retaliatory intent should thus not invalidate the policy 
decision to transfer direct responsibility for services back 
to the government from an independent contractor. 


The decision of any government agency to regain 
direct control and supervision over government services 
which have previously been delegated to private contrac- 
tors is presumptively reasonable and politically debata- 
ble, and must therefore be subject to ultimate control by 
the people as voters. Any attempt by the courts to inter- 
fere with the discretion of a unit of government to exer- 
cise control over the details of the performance of its own 
services, in preference to leaving control of those func- 
tions in the hands of private persons who do not have the 
trust of the people or their elected representatives, would 
usurp the political power guaranteed to the people them- 
selves by the Tenth Amendment. 


10 


The actions of government officials in deciding 
whether to terminate a contractual delegation of govern- 
ment services should be judged on an objective standard. 
Attacks on their personal motives should not be allowed 
to control the validity of their votes. Where a reasonable 
public official could conclude that termination of a con- 
tract serves the public interest, psychological motives 
should be deemed irrelevant as a matter of law. Retalia- 
tory motive should be relevant, if at all, only after the 
contractor has established that no public interest was 
served by the termination of the contract. Even then the 
question of motive should be limited to suits against 
officials as individuals, and should have no relevance in 
actions against the government itself. 


Independent contractors do not need a money dam- 
ages remedy for retaliatory termination of their contracts. 
The public interest requires that the discretion to delegate 
or not should be exercised without fear of penalty. Where 
an articulable public benefit from the termination of the 
contract exists, the interest of the public must outweigh 
the private financial interest of the contractor as a matter 
of law. If no legitimate public benefit can be articulated, 
then the termination should be set aside by the courts. 
The contractor should not have the privilege to forego 
reinstatement of the contract and elect to sue for loss of 
profit. 


—p= 


11 


ARGUMENT 


1. The remedies articulated by this Court in Pickering 
v. Board of Education of Township High School Dis- 
trict, 391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 
(1968) and its progeny should not be extended and 
amplified to protect the economic rights of govern- 
ment contractors whose services are terminable at 
will. 


This case squarely confronts the Court with the need 
to determine the scope of the rights and duties of persons 
who provide public services through contract arrange- 
ments with local government, rather than serving directly 
as governmental employees. This Court has not previ- 
ously decided whether the free speech protections 
afforded to governmental employees will be extended to 
persons who provide services to the public less directly, 
as non-employee contractors. 


The Court should now decide that the policies under- 
lying its decisions limiting the rights of public employees 
apply with even greater force where the relationship is 
one of pi. cipal and independent contractor. Because the 
only means available to exert control over the actions of 
an independent contractor is to terminate the contract, 
any restraint on the right of termination would destroy 
the government's right to control the public services per- 
formed under the contract. 


The decision of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
must not be allowed to stand. The Tenth Circuit Court of 
Appeals has decided that the federal courts should give 
legal protection to the profits of those who provide public 
services as non-employees, no matter how tenuous the 


12 


contractual relationship with the government may be and 
without regard to the unqualified contractual right of the 
government to terminate the relationship at will. The 
Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals nas imposed on local 
units of government an obligation to avoid economic 
injury to government contractors whose statements on 
issues of public concern may have irritated public admin- 
istrators, even if the clearly expressed will of the people 
demands otherwise. 


This Court has never construed the Constitution to 
provide a guarantee of continued profit at public expense 
to persons who exercise their free speech rights. Neither 
public employees nor persons who otherwise profit from 
the performance of public service have been allowed to 
tie the hands of responsible government officials exercis- 
ing reasonable control over the delivery of government 
services. This Court’s decisions have always recognized 
the right of responsible public officials to take the steps 
necessary to maintain effective control over those who 
perform the basic work of government. There is no reason 
to back away from these precedents now. 


A Review of Prior Decisions 


A substantial body of case law has developed to 
establish the rights of public employees to express them- 
selves freely on matters of public concern. This Court has 
recognized the practical necessity of some limitation on 
the work-related speech of government employees in 
order to assure the orderly operation of governmental 
functions. The relative rights and responsibilities of the 
government employer and government employee have 


13 


been articulated in a series of cases spanning more than 
twenty-five years: See, for example, Pickering v. Board of 
Education, 391 U.S. 563, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 
(1968); Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 100 S.Ct. 1287, 63 
L.Ed.2d 574 (1980); Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 103 
S.Ct. 1684, 75 L.Ed.2d 708 (1983); Rutan v. Republican Party 
of Illinois, 497 U.S. 62, 110 S.Ct. 2729, 111 L.Ed.2d 52 
(1990); Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 1878, 128 
L.Ed.2d 686 (1994); United States v. National Treasury 
Employees Union, __ U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 1003, 130 L.Ed.2d 
964 (1995). These cases hold that free speech rights of 
government employees may properly be subjected to lim- 
itations which could not permissibly be applied to the 
general public. Even express prior restraints, and not just 
post hoc sanctions, may sometimes be justified under the 
Pickering balancing test. See Civil Service Commission v. 
Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 548, 546, 93 S.Ct. 2880, 37 L.Ed.2d 
796 (1973) and discussion in National Treasury Employees at 
130 L.Ed.2d p.980. 


One overriding concern in such cases is avoiding the 
creation of a constitutional right of employee tenure. The 
Court has afforded wronged employees only those 
remedies which are necessary to place them in no better 
and no worse a position than they would have been in 
had the protected comments never occurred. See Mt. 
Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, 429 
U.S. 23. 97 S.Ct. 568, 50 L.Ed.2d 471 (1977). 


This court has struggled with the proper application 
of the First Amendment to political patronage practices. 
From Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 96 S.Ct. 2673, 49 
L.Ed.2d 547 (1976) to Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 100 
S.Ct. 1287, 63 L.Ed.2d 574 (1980) to United States v. 


14 


National Treasury Employees Union, supra, there has been 
dissension among the members of the court concerning 
the extent to which the First Amendment should be hos- 
tile to the practice of providing special employment 
favors to the political supporters of those in power. Most 
recently in U.S. v. National Treasury Employees Union, 
supra., it was suggested that the conflict might be 
resolved by the application of different standards of scru- 
tiny to cases involving political patronage, especially 
those involving potential prior restraint, versus disciplin- 
ary actions taken against individual employees based on 
after the fact determinations. See discussion at 130 
L.Ed.2d p.979 et seq., compared with the comments of 
Justice O’Connor in her opinion concurring in part and 
dissenting in part at 130 L.Ed.2d pp. 988 et seq. 


The members of this court have not been in full 
agreement concerning the test to be applied when a gov- 
ernment employer expressly regulates the content of its 
employees’ speech. Some members of the Court have 
strongly suggested that the historical standard applied in 
such cases is more lenient than the constitutional stan- 
dard applicable to restraints on the speech of members of 
the general public. See Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 
497 US. 62, 110 S.Ct. 2729, 111 L.Ed.2d 52 (1990), dissent- 
ing opinion of Justice Scalia at 497 U.S. pp. 98-102 (joined 
by the Chief Justice and Justices Kennedy and O’Connor). 
It was there noted that this court’s decisions consistently 
follow the standard laid down in Public Workers v. Mit- 
chell, 330 U.S. 75, 97 S.Ct. 556, 91 L.Ed. 754 (1947), requir- 
ing only a reasonable conclusion that the regulation 
would enhance the efficiency of the government's provi- 
sion of services. The majority opinion in Rutan concluded 


15 


that blatant political patronage did not meet the constitu- 
tional test, whether it is phrased in these terms or in 


stronger language. 


Whatever the resolution of the ongoing dispute con- 
cerning the standard for review of patronage practices 
may be, that dispute need not in any way affect the 
court’s decision in this case. Cases which involve neither 
prior restraint nor political patronage should be governed 
by the more lenient standard of review originally stated 
in Pickering. There has never been any suggestion that Mr. 
Umbehr’s contract was terminated so that he could be 
replaced with a political ally. His contract remained in 
place for many years despite his lack of political affilia- 
tion with petitioners or their supporters. The purported 
retaliation occurred after he made his public comments, 
without prior restraint. The dispute between the majority 
and the dissenters in Rutan therefore should not be a 
source of division here. 

In the cases discussed in the dissenting opinion in 
Rutan, supra, the balancing to be performed by the court 
is not to weigh the personal interests of the worker 
against the alleged improper motives of his superiors. 
Instead the test balances the interest of the public in 
assuring discourse on a matter of public concern against 
the public’s competing interest in seeing that the services 
entrusted to the employing agency are performed effec- 
tively and efficiently. It was expressly noted, tor example, 
in Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 103 S.Ct. 1684, 75 
L.Ed.2d 708 (1983) that not all of the employee’s First 
Amendment rights are relevant, but that only discourse 
on matters of public concern should be considered. Con- 
nick concluded that employee communications which 


16 


relate solely to personal concerns or workplace condi- 
tions cannot provide a basis for objecting to sanctions 
imposed by the employer, even though the comments 
would be protected by the First Amendment if they were 
made outside the employer/employee relationship. See 
461 U.S. at p. 147. If the comments relate to the desires of 
the employee for different working conditions than the 
employer wishes to provide, discipline may be imposed 
without any need for constitutional justification. See 461 
U.S. at pp. 148-149. 


Even if the test of Pickering is not applied to any 
relationship except that of employer and employee, a 
similarly relaxed standard of review would apply to deci- 
sions which are content neutral and which only inciden- 
tally burden speech. A standard only slightly different 
from the Pickering balancing test has traditionally been 
applied to government actions which happen to result in 
a restriction of free speech but are not primarily intended 
to do so. This court repeatedly has held that persons who 
engage in activities protected by the First Amendment do 
not thereby become automatically immune to all adverse 
action by agencies of government. The fact that enforce- 
ment of the law will have the incidental effect of inhibi- 
ting or even precluding the complaining party’s First 
Amendment activities does not by itself permit the courts 
to nullify otherwise legitimate exercises of government 
power. Examples of permissible incidental effects can be 
found in numerous decisions, including United States v. 
Albertini, 472 U.S. 675, 105 S.Ct. 2897, 86 L.Ed.2d 536 
(1985); Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598, 105 S.Ct. 1524, 
84 L.Ed.2d 547 (1985); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 
697, 106 S.Ct. 3172, 92 L.Ed.2d 568 (1986); Ward v. Rock 


17 


Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 109 S.Ct. 2746, 105 L.Ed.2d 
661 (1989); F.T.C. v. Superior Court Trial Lawyers Associa- 
tion, 493 U.S. 411, 110 S.Ct. 768, 107 L.Ed.2d 851 (1990); 
Employment Division, Department of Human Resources of 
Oregon v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 110 S.Ct. 1595, 108 L.Ed.2d 
876 (1990); Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., 501 U.S. 663, 111 
S.Ct. 2513, 115 L.Ed.2d 586 (1991); and Alexander v. United 
States, 509 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 2766, 125 L.Ed.2d 441 (1993) 


Independent Contractor vs. Employee 


Assuming arguendo that a higher standard applies to 
broad regulations which imposing express prior 
restraints on the political speech of civil servants as a 
whole, application of that standard cannot be justified 
where complaint is made by an independent contractor to 
whom the performance of some part of the government's 
responsibility to its citizens has been delegated. 


If independent contractors are allowed to prevent the 
cancellation of their contracts so long as they publicly 
criticize the public officials who control the decision to 
cancel or not, the public services they perform will be 
placed beyond any regulation or restraint. If criticism of a 
government decisionmaker prevents public control over 
government services, the result will not be the elimina- 
tion of wrongs but the grant of property rights. The 
independent contractor would have greater rights as a 
result of his comments, contrary to the rule of Mt. 
Healthy, supra, if objectionable speech could create tenure. 


The rule of Pickering would be stood on its head if an 
independent contractor could obtain greater First 
Amendment protection by seeking to compare himself to 


18 


an employee, since employees have less protection than 
the general public, not more. Because of the special rules 
limiting control over the operations of independent con- 
tractors, their rights should be even more limited than 
those of employees. 


The relationship between an employer and an 
employee differs significantly from the relationship 
between a principal and an independent contractor. An 
employee is hired to render a service without a guarantee 
of results. In exchange for relief from the burden of 
guaranteeing a result, the employee gives up control over 
the day to day operations on the job. Employers maintain 
day to day control of the details of the manner in which 
the work is performed by employees. 


When the public is dissatisfied with the quality of 
services performed by employees, they need only make 
the fact known to the elected representatives who wield 
authority over those employees. An effective response 
can be assured without delay. The employee is legally 
obligated to obey corrective directions from higher up. 


Government control of the performance of public 
services is heavily impaired when the job is delegated to 
a private contractor. Where a task has been delegated to 
an independent contractor, the contractor exercises the 
right to control the details on a daily basis. By delegating 
public services to an independent contractor the govern- 
ment temporarily loses direct control over the perfor- 
mance of the services and retains only the ultimate right 
to terminate the relationship. 


Although a government agency may entrust part of 
its operations to an independent contractor, it does not 


19 


also delegate the ultimate responsibility for the service. 
The people remain entitled to look to the government 
when they are dissatisfied with those services, and to 
demand changes if the service is inadequate for any 
reason. But the government cannot issue orders directly 
to the independent contractor or his employees to change 
the manner in which the service is performed. Control is 
exercised only indirectly, by threatening the termination 
of the contract if the contractor will not voluntarily cor- 
rect the objectionable practice. 


Where the relationship between the parties is one of 
principal and contractor, there is no flexibility available 
when it becomes advisable to redistribute the relative 
powers and responsibilities of the parties. If the principal 
decides that greater control is required, the contract must 
be terminated. A new and different contract, perhaps a 
contract of employment, may thereafter be negotiated 
between the same parties. But before such a contract can 
be negotiated, the old relationship that denies a right of 
control to the principal must be abolished. 


In the factual context presented here, the difference 
between an employee and an independent contractor is 
highly significant. Because Mr. Umbehr was an indepen- 
dent contractor and not an employee, he was free to 
decide how many trucks to operate, how many 
employees to hire, what wages to pay, the schedules to be 
followed in collecting trash from residential customers, 
and the means of disposing of the accumulated refuse. 


As an independent contractor Mr. Umbehr ran the 
risk of failing to make a profit if his decisions on these 
subjects were unwise. Because Mr. Umbehr’s contract 


20 


gave him discretion over methods and procedures, he 
was free to increase his personal profit by devising more 
efficient methods for the performance of the service. 


Because his contract did not obligate him to use the 
county landfill, but merely guaranteed him the privilege 
to use it if he elected to do so, Mr. Umbehr was free to 
find a more profitable disposal site elsewhere, if he so 
desired. Because there was no guarantee that the trash 
hauled by Mr. Umbehr’s trucks would be deposited at the 
county landfill, the Board had no assurance that revenue 
from that source could be used to finance its operations. 
Continuation of the existing contract therefore under- 
mined the county’s ability to plan for the future of its 
citizens’ waste disposal needs. 


Had Mr. Umbehr been an employee he would merely 
have had supervisory authority over subordinate staff 
whose activities were ultimately controlled, even in slight 
detail, by the Board of County Commissioners. The Board 
and not Mr. Umbehr would have decided how many 
trucks to operate, the schedules for trash pickup, and the 
ultimate destination of the collected refuse. The risk of 
adopting different means and methods would have fallen 
on the County, not on Mr. Umbehr. Control of those 
means and methods would also have remained with the 
county, however. 


As an independent contractor Mr. Umbehr had a 
potential conflict of interest with the people of the 
County. If there was any opportunity to increase his 
profit margin by having the citizens subsidize the cost of 
using the county landfill, he was motivated to work 


21 


toward that end rather than absorb additional costs him- 
self. That conflict became real when the question of 
increasing user fees became a subject of debate before the 
County Commission. Mr. Umbehr yielded to the conflict 
and spoke out in favor of an increase in taxes, rather than 
an increase in user fees, to pay mounting costs for operat- 
ing the landfill. 


So long as Mr. Umbehr’s contract remained in place, 
Petitioners were not free to make ultimate policy deci- 
sions concerning the wisdom of maintaining a county 
landfill. For example they were not free to close the 
landfill altogether, since to do so would be a breach of the 
contractual provision guaranteeing Mr. Umbehr access to 
the site. Similarly, the Board of County Commissioners 
was not free to decide that the landfill would accept only 
certain types of refuse, or only limited volumes. 


In order to regain control over the long term plan- 
ning for the use of the landfill, the Board of Wabaunsee 
County Commissioners was required to relieve itself of 
the contractual obligation to continue to operate the land- 
fill in a manner consistent with Mr. Umbehr’s chosen 
operating methods. Only upon termination of the con- 
tract could the county again become free to decide how to 
operate the landfill, and free to decide to close it alto- 
gether if public health, safety and welfare required that 
result. 


All of these decisions would have remained under 
the control of the Board of Wabaunsee County Commis- 
sioners if Mr. Umbehr had been employed as a supervisor 
of a government department entrusted with the same 


22 


tasks, rather than operating under an independent con- 
tract. They would have retained the right to abolish his 
position in anticipation of the closing of the county land- 
fill. Had he been an employee he could have been fired 
for insubordination for the remarks he made in county 
commission meetings, despite the public interest in the 
issues at stake, under the balancing test of Pickering. 


The same considerations that apply to reassertion of 
control over government services may not apply to retal- 
iatory acts against persons who are not performing ser- 
vices for the public as a surrogate for the government, 
but are merely regulated by the government along with 
others doing similar work. Nor do they apply in the same 
manner where the contract is terminated solely in order 
to reassign it to a political supporter. Although the legal 
relationship between a friendly contractor and an 
unfriendly one is the same, the likelihood that objection- 
able practices will be corrected in response io polite 
advice is greatly increased where the contractor is a polit- 
ical ally. Political strife may therefore be indirectly rele- 
vant in assessing the need for a reassertion of direct 
government control. Where political differences prevent 
the amicable resolution of public complaints about the 
contractor’s services, termination may be the most effec- 
tive means of assuring proper service to the public. 


The discussion in the decision of the Tenth Circuit 
Court of Appeals in this case, as well as the discussion in 
the opinions from other Circuits noted by the Tenth Cir- 
cuit, overlooks the considerations outlined above. 
Because Pickering expressly requires a balancing of the 
government’s need for control against the First Amend- 
ment’s guarantee of free and open discussion of matters 


23 


of public concern, the analysis set forth above is much 
more relevant than some of the reasoning in the conflict- 
ing opinions of the various Circuit Courts of Appeal. The 
degree of financial dependence of the contractor or the 
similarity of the dispute to a workplace grievance, for 
example, simply have no bearing on the weight to be 
given to the government's right to control the perfor- 
mance of its own services to the public. If this right of 
control is ignored it is not possible to perform the Picker- 
ing balancing test rationally. If the right of control is 
considered it is difficult to imagine a circumstance where 
the contractor’s right to speak would prevail over the 
government’s right to assert control over its own opera- 
tions. 


A Per Se Rule for Independent Contractors 


The First Amendment cannot reasonably be con- 
strued to require the delegation of governmental powers 
to private citizens who have outspokenly criticized public 
decision makers merely because the decision to do other- 
wise would result in economic loss to them. If a legal 
right to compensation for economic loss resulting from a 
political decision to change the distribution of authority 
over local services is granted to all persons who vocally 
oppose that political decision, the inevitable result will be 
a wholesale transfer of power from elected representa- 
tives and their duly appointed administrators to the 
courts. This result not only is not compelled by the First 
Amendment, it is prohibited by the Tenth. 


The Tenth Amendment is not a dead letter. It was 
applied very recently to guarantee the political rights of 


24 


the people of the several states to have unfettered control 
over the identity of their elected representatives. See US. 
Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton,___U.S.___, 115 S.Ct. 1842, 131 
L.Ed.2d 881 (1995). In that case the efforts of a state 
legislature to place limits on the right of constitutionally 
qualified candidates to run for national office were struck 
down as an improper interference with the Tenth Amend- 
ment guarantee that the people themselves exercise the 
power to choose their representatives. 


It is questionable whether the Board of County Com- 
missioners would have had the authority to agree to an 
irrevocable delegation of control of refuse disposal opera- 
tions to Mr. Umbehr. Any attempt to do so would have 
cut off the people’s right to control local government. 
Certainly the United States Constitution does not give the 
federal courts control over local trash service. When the 
people refused to elect Mr. Umbehr to the Board and 
instead elected representatives who chose to terminate 
his authority over basic local services they exercised their 
constitutionally guaranteed rights. Neither Mr. Umbehr 
nor the courts have any right to divest the people of that 
right of control, either to keep power in his hands or to 
deliver it into the hands of a judge or jury. 


If the refusal of the people to elect Mr. Umbehr to a 
position of official authority is not recognized as an exer- 
cise of constitutionally protected authority, then the 
Board’s independent decision to cancel the contract 
should be recognized in its own right. When the board 
terminated the trash hauling contract it made a policy 
decision on behalf of the people, if that decision was not 
yet made clearly enough. Under Kansas law the Board 
performs all of the county’s executive and legislative 


25 


functions, and exercises some quasi-judicial authority as 
well. Under Kansas law counties have sovereign author- 
ity within their own borders, subject only to the state 
constitution and some limited control by the state legisla- 
ture, under a system known as home rule. See State ex rel. 
Stephan v. Board of Sedgwick County Commissioners, 770 
P.2d 455, 244 Kan. 536 (1989) and K.S.A. 19-101 et seq. 
Both the District Court and the Court of Appeals recog- 
nized that the application of legislative immunity to the 
Board’s actions was a “close question”. See Joint Appen- 
dix at pp. 14, 38. The question should not be a close one. 
The vote to terminate was a clear exercise of discretionary 
sovereign power, with which the courts should not inter- 
fere. 


Under the doctrine of legislative immunity no lia- 
bility attaches for votes on legislative issues, even if the 
votes are cast with a malicious intent to cause harm. See 
Tenney v. Brandhove, 341 U.S. 367, 95 L.Ed. 1019, 71 S.Ct. 
783 (1951). Legislative immunity applies to state and local 
officials acting in a legislative capacity. See Lake Country 
Estates, Inc. v. Tahoe Regional Planning Agency, 440 U.S. 
391, 59 L.Ed.2d 401, 99 S.Ct. 1171 (1979) and Supreme 
Court of Virginia v. Consumers Union, 446 U.S. 719, 64 
L.Ed.2d 641, 100 S.Ct. 1967 (1980). 


The same policy considerations which support abso- 
lute immunity for legislative votes should apply to pre- 
vent judicial interference with the decision to perform 
government functions directly, through contractors, or 
even to forego providing them at all. These decisions go 
directly to the basic policy choices of big budgets versus 
small ones, big government versus small government, big 
bureaucracy versus privatization, which cannot be 


26 


decided in the courts. Because decisions of this nature 
may depend upon unforeseeable practical and political 
considerations, they must remain reversible if it appears 
that a mistake has been made or if circumstances change. 
The political process is far better suited to make these 
decisions and readjustments than the courts. 


2. The tests of Pickering and its progeny must be refor- 
mulated or redescribed to fit the circumstances of an 
independent contractor, if the rule of Pickering is to 
be extended. 


If the Court does not categorically reject all claims by 
government contractors, it should adopt the least strin- 
gent rule compatible with the right of the people to 
control the operations of government, rather than trans- 
ferring control to private interests or the courts. Where no 
prior restraint is involved and no express attempt to 
regulate any speech is apparent, the least stringent test of 
constitutional limitation is obviously appropriate. That 
test can be applied without inquiry into the personal 
motives of the public officials responsible for the ques- 
tioned decision. The courts should not assess the relative 
interests of the parties on a case by case basis, other than 
to look for a rational basis which justifies the incidental 
restraint on free speech. 


Whether the same test is applied to all contract can- 
cellations or not, there surely is no need to impose a 
stricter standard of scrutiny where an independent con- 
tractor complains of economic injury than is applied to 
claims by members of the general public for injuries of 
the same kind. 


27 


The rule applicable to alleged infringement of the 
rights of the general population requires only that an 
incidental restraint on freedom of speech be no greater 
than is reasonably necessary to achieve the public pur- 
poses unrelated to regulation of speech which afford a 
general justification for the government's actions. See 
Turner Broadcasting System v. F.C.C., 512 U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 
2445, 129 L.Ed.2d 497, especially the discussion at 129 
L.Ed.2d pp. 530-531. A governmental employer is allowed 
somewhat greater discretion and power in the control of 
the actions of its own employees than would be allowed 
under Turner Broadcasting, whether the employer 
expressly seeks to impose a prior restraint or whether 
disciplinary action is imposed after the fact. Certainly 
where no content-based prior restraint is involved, nei- 
ther an employee nor a member of the general public can 
demand that the needs of the public take a back seat 
under either test. 


Even where blatant political patronage or prior 
restraint may be alleged, this Court must be extremely 
cautious in opening the courthouse door to profitseekers 
whose real purpose is to avoid the legitimate result of 
public debates and elections. Only political opponents of 
public officials will have standing to sue for alleged retal- 
iation, if such suits are allowed, because only they will 
have done anything to invoke First Amendment protec- 
tion. No matter how beautifully crafted this Court’s rule 
of decision might be, that rule will only be applied when 
the parties are in court. Small units of government can 
rarely afford to litigate a case like this far enough to get a 
favorable decision on the merits. They are strongly moti- 
vated to yield to the demands of potential plaintiffs to 


28 


avoid expenses. Any rule of law which requires much 
more than a motion to dismiss on the pleadings to defend 
against this sort of abuse will fail its essential purpose. 


There is no constitutional policy which would justify 
favoring political enemies over political friends in gov- 
ernment contracting. If the Constitution recognizes little 
or no value in awarding spoils to the electoral victors, it 
must also recognize even less value in providing court 
ordered spoils to the losers at the polls. If no public 
purpose is served by having elected officials appoint 
their political friends to lower offices, then neither is 
there any public purpose to be served by requiring them 
to appoint their political opponents. Complaints by dis- 
gruntled losers must be recognized as the self-interested, 
anti-democratic, profit-motivated ploys that they really 
are, and not as the public-spirited defense of basic liber- 
ties that they pretend to be. 


If government contractors are to be given the right to 
sue for termination of their rights under some circum- 
stance, the triggering event should not be the existence of 
a retaliatory motive engendered by harsh political debate. 
To do so would inspire contrived conflicts with political 
opponents for the sole purpose of generating a factual 
basis for lawsuits. Such contrived conflicts would provide 
disgruntled contractors with leverage to coerce favorable 
decisions from their political opponents to avoid litiga- 
tion. Such political blackmail must not be encouraged. 
Whatever rule is adopted, the risk of such blackmail must 
be avoided by requiring a significantly higher initial bur- 
den of pleading and proof than the establishment of 
personal conflicts between the parties. 


29 


Eliminating consideration of alleged retaliatory 
motive is also favored by separate policy considerations. 
This Court has decided as a matter of public policy to 
protect government officials from burdensome and 
harassing inquiries into their personal thought processes 
in the context of qualified immunity. The alleged pres- 
ence of a retaliatory motive cannot defeat a claim of 
qualified privilege. In Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 73 
L.Ed.2d 396, 102 S.Ct. 2727 (1982) this Court recognized 
that earlier qualified immunity cases had allowed the 
imposition of liability where the defendant acted with the 
malicious intention to cause a deprivation of constitu- 
tional rights. See discussion at 457 U.S. pp. 815-818, 
where the so-called “subjective element” was rejected 
and the test of qualified immunity was reduced to a 
solely objective standard. Harlow also specifically noted 
that the doctrine of qualified immunity is available in 
addition to, and not as an alternative to, other recognized 
doctrines of absolute immunity. See 457 U.S. at p. 818, 
footnote 30. 


The subjective element of the qualified immunity test 
was removed for the stated reason that it was undermin- 
ing the intended purpose of the qualified immunity doc- 
trine, the resolution of insubstantial claims at or before 
summary judgment. The Harlow opinion specifically dis- 
allowed discovery concerning the intent of the individual 
defendants until the threshold question of the objective 
state of the law had been determined. See discussion at 
457 U.S. 818. The recognition of a right to sue whenever 
an alleged retaliatory motive taints an otherwise legiti- 
mate decision to terminate a government contract would 
undermine the goals of the Harlow decision. 


30 


Adopting any principle of judicial suspicion toward 
termination of contracts with vocal political opponents 
would threaten to convert far too many of the daily 
decisions of local government into lawsuits. The courts 
do not have the resources to decide petty political dis- 
putes over contracts for everything from street cleaning 
to vending machines to trash disposal, even if the Consti- 
tution permitted it. Not only does the Constitution not 
mandate such micromanagement, it prohibits it. Votes at 
the polls, not in the jury room, must ultimately decide 
these mundane affairs. If all of these matters were subject 
to resolution in the courts, there would be no purpose in 
having a public debate. Only the judge and jury would 
decide what to do, so only they would need to be 
informed of the pros and cens on any issue. 


State and local units of government need to have at 
least as much freedom and discretion to regulate the 
means employed in providing services to the general 
public as the courts allow to federal agencies. As the 
politically motivated process of downsizing and decen- 
tralizing government continues, more and more of the 
important functions of government will be performed at 
the state or local level. The change of geographical loca- 
tion of the responsibility for performing such services 
should not increase the degree to which the courts are 
prepared to intervene in government administrative deci- 
sions. 


Every government decision to enter into or to termi- 
nate a contract with a private service provider is a poten- 
tial subject for public debate protected under the First 
Amendment. Every decision whether or not to delegate 
some part of the responsibilities of government, every 


31 


decision to have the government stop performing a par- 
ticular service altogether, and every decision to spend 
public funds can lawfully be opposed in public debate. 
Every decision to reverse a prior decision on these same 
matters is equally debatable. If the mere fact of opposi- 
tion, coupled by a decision contrary to the expressed 
wishes of opponents of the policy ultimately adopted, can 
transfer to the courts the ultimate decision on matters of 
public policy, then the First Amendment will have been 
converted into a mechanism for the dismantling of all 
units of state and local government and the transfer of 
their powers to the federal courts. Every political debate 
will be converted into a court case, unless this Court 
recognizes that the losers of such debates must simply 
live with the economic consequences inherent in public 
policy decisions rather than suing for damages. 


The First Amendment does not guarantee the right of 
any citizen to control political decisions. Neither does the 
First Amendment guarantee to individuals the right to 
operate public agencies for their personal profit. Instead 
the First Amendment contemplates the full and fair pub- 
lic debate of matters of public concern, including the 
appropriate means for performance of public services, 
followed by a decision by the peoples’ elected representa- 
tives determining the correct policy to follow. 


It is an inherent part of the process contemplated by 
the First Amendment that the policy ultimately chosen 
will have been opposed by a minority. In many instances 
the opposition will have been motivated in part by an 
expectation of financial gain or loss to the advocates on 


32 


either side of the issue. The existence of a potential finan- 
cial gain or loss cannot be allowed to convert an ordinary 
political decision into a constitutional wrong. 


In any debate over matters of public concern it is not 
only expected but appropriate for the decision maker to 
consider public statements both for and against the policy 
ultimately adopted. The fact that an opponent’s argu- 
ments have been considered and rejected cannot be 
allowed to convert the adverse decision into an unlawful 
act of retaliation which guarantees financial compensa- 
tion to the political loser. 


3. If independent contractors are to be given the same 
protections as employees under Pickering, at least 
the affirmative defenses now available to employers 
must remain available to the contracting agency. 


A number of defenses have been recognized to apply 
to claims of employees for wrongful termination. All of 
these defenses, without exception, should be available to 
a government agency accused of wrongfully terminating 
an independent contractor’s rights. 


The rule of Connick v. Myers, supra, that termination is 
always permissible in response to expressions of dis- 
agreement with workplace policies which do not impli- 
cate issues of general public concern, should apply 
equally to employees and contractors. Mr. Umbehr’s 
comments relating to the use of the county landfill would 
qualify as personal matters under this test. 


Every independent contractor should be subject to 
lawful termination for cause on the same grounds as an 


33 


employee. Failure to perform the agreed services compe- 
tently obviously should justify termination of a contrac- 
tor, just as it would justify termination of any employee, 
including one with contractual tenure. See Elrod v. Burns, 
supra. 


This Court has held that money damages are not 
available to an employee from the date when the 
employer is aware of facts which would support a lawful 
termination for cause. See McKennon v. Nashville Banner 
Publishing Company, __U.S.__, 115 S.Ct. 879, 130 L.Ed.2d 
852 (1995). A similar rule should apply to the termination 
of an independent contract. In this case objective grounds 
for terminating the contract abounded, separate and 
apart from any attempt by Mr. Umbehr to engage in 
public discourse on any issue. Mr. Umbehr’s continuing 
failure to abide by the terms of his contract and pay the 
lawful landfill rates, even after a final money judgment 
was entered against him for those amounts, were grounds 
for termination of the contract for cause. Although this 
cause was not expressly invoked at the time the Commis- 
sioners voted, it nonetheless existed and was well known 
to them. 


Even if no objective good cause for termination 
exists, a government employer has the right to establish 
that its employee would in fact have suffered the same 
consequences even if no protected speech act had 
occurred. See Mt. Healthy City School Dist. Bd. of Ed. v. 
Doyle, supra. The same requirement of causation in fact 
should be recognized where the plaintiff is an indepen- 
dent contractor rather than an employee. 


34 


Employees whose responsibilities include policymak- 
ing may be terminated on the basis of political affiliation. 
See Elrod v. Burns, supra. An independent contractor 
whose responsibilities include the formulation of policy 
should be equally terminable without independent cause. 


An employer is only required to make a reasonable 
investigation to determine whether First Amendment 
rights are at stake before taking adverse action against an 
employee. In Waters v. Churchill, supra, it was held that no 
liability would be imposed if the employer reasonably 
believed on the facts available that no First Amendment 
issue was presented. Contractors should also be protected 
only where their rights are reasonably known to the 
contracting agency. 


In this case the lower courts have already established 
that the applicability of First Amendment guarantees to 
Mr. Umbehr’s complaints was not reasonably established, 
thereby justifying a grant of personal immunity to them. 
Only a rule of strict liability for the government agency, 
rather than the test of reasonable appearances adopted in 
Churchill, could justify a money judgment against the 
government agency. As a matter of law the rule of 
Churchill should prevent the plaintiff from prevailing 
against the government agency on these facts. 


This court has held that an action for money damages 
should not be implied in favor of a government employee 
whose First Amendment rights have been violated, when 
an adequate remedy already exists by way of administra- 
tive appeal or otherwise. In the case of Bush v. Lucas, 462 
U.S. 367, 103 S.Ct. 2404, 76 L.Ed.2d 648 (1983) this court 


35 


refused to give federal civil service employees the com- 
mon law right to money damages because a constitu- 
tionally adequate remedy was already available to them 
under federal civil service regulations. 


Independent contractors such as Mr. Umbehr already 
have a constitutionally adequate remedy by way of direct 
appeal in the state courts. Mr. Umbehr’s own appeal in 
the parallel proceedings clearly established just such a 
right. In Umbehr v. Board of Wabaunsee County Commission- 
ers, 843 P.2d 176, 252 Kan. 30 (1992) the Kansas Supreme 
Court held that orders of state agencies which would 
otherwise not be appealable could be reviewed by direct 
appeal if the complaining party could demonstrate either 
an illegal or an oppressive act. Illegal acts were defined 
there as procedurally irregular acts or acts beyond the 
scope of the government agency’s authority. Oppressive 
acts were defined to include anything which “subjects a 
person to cruel or unusual hardship through misuse or 
abuse of authority or power or when it deprives a person 
of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by our 
Constitution or laws.” See 252 Kan. at pp. 36-37. Under 
Kansas law Mr. Umbehr had the right to challenge the 
termination of his contract as a violation of his rights 
under the First Amendment by way of a direct appeal. 
Had he established a violation of any constitutional right, 
or in the alternative a personal hardship inflicted through 
abuse of authority, the Kansas courts would have ordered 
his contract reinstated. 


Mr. Umbehr chose to file a federal civil rights action 
in U.S. District Court rather than seeking any relief by 
way of appeal to the Kansas State Courts. He did so for 
the obvious reason that the new contracts with five of the 


36 


six towns previously served by him are more lucrative 
than the old contract. By permitting the old contract to be 
canceled and then suing for damages he created an 
opportunity to profit twice. His unilateral decision to 
waive the right to reinstate the contract and to seek 
redress in the federal courts should not create a federal 
remedy where there otherwise would be no need for one. 
Mr. Umbehr should not be allowed to waive his right to 
compel the continuation of the contractual relationship 
and instead seek money damages to be determined by a 
federal jury. 


CONCLUSION 


The analysis followed by the Tenth Circuit Court of 
Appeals ignores the significance of the obligations owed 
by an independent contractor, and focuses solely on the 
contractor’s economic interests. It ignores the respon- 
sibilities of local government to the people, and focuses 
solely on the inferred intent of individual decision 
makers. 


By ignoring these considerations, the Tenth Circuit 
Court of Appeals reached the absurd conclusion that the 
people of Wabaunsee County should pay Mr. Umbehr 
damages for an alleged spiteful act of their elected repre- 
sentatives, even though these representatives are not per- 
sonally responsible for the economic harm he alleges. 
This result cannot and must not stand. 


If the vote to terminate Mr. Umbehr’s contract did 
not promote the health, safety and welfare of the people 
of Wabaunsee County, it was reviewable in state court as 


37 


an arbitrary or oppressive act. Plainly there was more 
than enough evidence confronting the Board of County 
Commissioners to determine that the people would be 
benefited by the termination of the contract. Any attempt 
to reevaluate that evidence and reach a contrary conclu- 
sion in a jury trial would be a substitution of the federal 
court as the sovereign authority in the county, contrary to 
the Tenth Amendment requirement that the people and 
the states retain such power. 


The will of the people, clearly expressed at the polls, 
rejecting Mr. Umbehr as a proper person to control gov- 
ernment policy in Wabaunsee County, cannot be overrid- 
den by resort to U.S. District Court. Nor can the people 
be punished for their votes by being required to pay Mr. 
Umbehr damages, as if they had taken from him a prop- 
erty interest in the trash hauling contract by reposing 
their trust in persons who disagreed with his policies. 


The people of Wabaunsee County have wronged no 
one. They do not deserve to be punished simply because 
Mr. Umbehr may prove to the satisfaction of a court and 
jury that he succeeded in fomenting a personal vendetta 
with elected officials. 


The decision of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
should be reversed, and the judgment of the United 
States District Court for the District of Kansas granting 


38 


summary judgment to Petitioners on all claims should be 


reinstated. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Steve R. FABERT 

DONALD PATTERSON 

FISHER, PATTERSON, SAYLER & 
SmitH, L.L.P. 

534 S. Kansas Avenue 

Suite 400, P.O. Box 949 

Topeka, Kansas 66601-0949 

(913) 232-7761 

Attorneys for Petitioners 


