
=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 3 ===
3

In the aftermath of Pacifica, the FCC limited its in-
decency regulation to “the repeated use, for shock value,
of words similar or identical to those satirized in the
Carlin ‘Filthy Words’ monologue.” In re Infinity Broad-
casting Corp., 3 F.C.C.R. 930 (1987), vacated in part
sub nom. Action for Children’s Television v. FCC
(“ACT I”), 852 F.2d 1332 (D.C. Cir. 1988). Broad-
casters were permitted to “channel” material containing
those words to a “safe harbor” period after 10 p.m. /d.
In view of the FCC’s very restrictive definition of what
was “indecent,” which had caused the FCC to reject
every indecency complaint filed in the years immediately
following Pacifica, broadcasters did not challenge the
extent of the safe harbor.

In 1987, the FCC substantially expanded its regulation
of broadcast indecency. See Public Notice, 2 F.C.C.R.
2726 (1987). The FCC announced that its indecency
enforcement would no longer be limited to the particular
words at issue in Pacifica. Instead, the FCC would deem
“indecent” any “language or material that depicts or de-
scribes, in terms patently offensive as measured by con-
temporary community standards for the broadcast me-
dium, sexual or excretory activities or organs.” Id. at
2726. The FCC indicated that enforcement under this
new standard would encompass a wide range of material *
—including news,’ informational programs,” political ad-

1 The FCC did not in each of the following instances find the
particular material to be indecent, but it did make clear that these
types of programs are not exempt from its indecency regulation.

2 See, ¢.g., KSD-FM, Notice of Apparent Liability, 6 F.C.C.R.
3689 (1990) (“while the newsworthy nature of broadcast material
and its presentation in a serious, newsworthy manner would be
relevant contextual considerations in an indecency determination,
they are not, in themselves, dispositive factors”) ; see also Report
and Order, /n re Enforcement of Prohibitions Against Broadcast
Indecency in 18 U.S.C. § 1464, 8 F.C.C.R. 704, 709 (1998) (1998
Report and Order”) (noting petitioners’ “request to make news
and public affairs programs entirely exempt from indecency en-
forcement” without granting request).

* See, e.g., FCC Investigating; Group W Says Indecency Finding
Against KYW-TV Philadelphia Would Be Censorship, Communica-

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 4 ===
4

vertising,* serious drama,’ motion pictures,* musical re-
sociological themes." Although noting that “consideration
of context is critical in all indecency cases,” the FCC
refused to “single [serious merit] out for greater weight
or attention” in determining whether material is indecent,
or to exempt news and public affairs programs from the
reach of the definition. /nfinity, 3 F.C.C.R. at 932, 937
& n.28. The FCC also limited “indecent” broadcasts to
times when there was no “reasonable risk” of children in
the audience, a limitation that appeared to cover all hours
of the day. 2 F.C.C.R. at 2726.

for “indecent” programs was necessary, but narrowed it
to the hours between midnight and 6 a.m. Infinity, 3
F.C.C.R. 930. The FCC made clear that its indecency
tions Daily, Apr. 26, 1998, at 8 (report on FCC investigation of
local television program dealing with Philadelphia adult establish-
ment); Letter to Mr. and Mrs. Roland Orle from Chief, Mass
Media Bureau (Apr. 7, 1988) (informational program on sex edu-
cation for teenagers).

4 See, e.g., Letter to Hon. John E. Bourne, Jr., from Chief, Mass
Media Bureau (Apr. 7, 1988) (political advertisement concerning
the word “clocksucker” in reference to mayor’s desire to purchase
clock for City Hall).

* See, e.g., Pacifica Foundation, Inc., 2 F.C.C.R. 2698 (play
dealing with AIDS and homosexuality), reconsideration and clarifi-
cation granted in part, denied in part sub nom. Infinity Broadcast-
ing Corp. of Pa., 3 F.C.C.R. 980 (1987), vacated in part and
remanded sub nom. ACT I, 852 F.2d 1382; Letter to Thomas Byrne
from Chief, Mass Media Bureau (Apr. 7, 1988) (radio presenta-
tion of Ulysses was not “indecent” because of its considerable
duration).

"See, ¢.9., Kansas City Television, Ltd., Order, FCC 88-274
-* 1988) (film Private Lessons), vacated, 4 F.C.C.R. 6706
( <

1 See, ¢.g., KLUC-FM, Notice of Apparent Liability, 6 F.C.C.R.
3695 (1990) (recording of song “Erotic City” by Prince).

* See, ¢.g., WLIZ, Notice of Apparent Liability, 6 F.C.C.R. 3698
(1989) (song parodies satirizing male attitudes toward sexuality).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 6 ===
6

challenge to this new indecency ban was awaiting judi-
cial review, this Court decided Sable Communications >f
California, Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115° (1989), which
held that a ban on indecent dial-a-porn services violated
the First Amendment. aes ane te nes
the challenge to the broadcast indecency “in light of
. . . Sable,” again directing the FCC to “conduct a full
and fair hearing” to justify its indecency regulation. Ac-
tion for Children’s Television v. FCC, No. 88-1916,
Order (D.C. Cir. Sept.13, 1989).

In the remand proceeding, petitioners submitted evi-
dence demonstrating that the indecency ban was not a
narrowly tailored means of protecting unsupervised chil-
dren, because most persons under age 18 are in the
Presence of parents or other adults during many hours of
the day. See Comments of Action for Children’s Tele-
vision, et al, MM Docket No, 89-494 at 32-33 & Appen-
dix C (Feb. 20, 1990). For example, during the 8 p.m.-
to-6 a.m. safe harbor period then being used by the FCC
under a stay granted by the Court of Appeals, 98% of
all young people are under adult supervision, at school
or asleep.

The FCC issued a report in support of its prior con-
clusion that a complete ban on broadcast indecency was
justified. Enjorcement of Prohibitions Against Broadcast
Indecency in 18 U.S.C. § 1464, 5 F.C.C.R. 5297 (1990).
The FCC asserted that the government has an independ-
ent interest in shielding children from “indecent” broad-
casts, even during hours when parents are available to
supervise their children’s viewing and listening. /d. at
5299. The FCC concluded that the ban was “narrowly
tailored” because “significant numbers of children are in
the audience at all times”—many of whom were not re-
ceiving “effective” or “meaningful” supervision, since
their parents were not “co-viewing” or “co-listening” with
them. Id. at 5302, 5305-06.

On review, the Court of Appeals (Chief Judge Mikva,
then-Judge (now-Justice) Thomas, and Judge Edwards)

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 9 ===
9

government to make a factual showing that the indecency
ban addresses an actual harm and is narrowly tailored.
App. 16a-17a. The Court identified two “compelling” in-
terests served by the indecency ban: first, “supporting pa-
rental supervision of children,” and second, “shielding them
from the influence of indecent broadcasts,” which could
lead upon “persistent exposure” to “the coarsening of
impressionable minds.” App. 16a-17a. The court then
concluded that the indecency ban was “narrowly tailored”
to serve those interests, because “large numbers of chil-
dren view television or listen to the radio from the early
morning until late in the evening.” /d. at 2la. As for
adults’ interest in receiving material that might be deemed
“indecent,” the court noted that some adults remain in
the television and radio audience late at night and, in
any event, that “adults have alternative means of satisfy-
ing their interest in indecent material.” /d. at 24a.

The court held that Section 16(a) was unconstitutional,
however, to the extent that it established an earlier safe
harbor for public broadcasters who sign off the air by
midnight. App. 30a. The court explained that Congress
and the Commission had offered no adequate justification
for this differential treatment of certain public broadcast-
ers. Id. The court did not strike down Section 16(a)
based on this unconstitutionality, but instead effectively
rewrote Section 16(a) to allow indecency regulation only
between the hours of 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. /d. The court
signaled to Congress, however, that the indecency safe
harbor could begin as late as midnight, so long as it
applied to all broadcasters.

Four members of the Court of Appeals dissented. Chief
Judge Edwards emphasized that the government had
“offer{ed] no evidence that indecent broadcasting harms
children,” and thus had not justified its “independent”
App. 38a ( J., dissenting). He also noted that
the government had not given adequate consideration to
less “speech-restrictive” alternatives. Jd. at 38a, 61a.

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 10 ===
10

Judge Wald, writing for herself and Judges Rogers and
Tatel, emphasized that broadcasters and adult audiences
need a “meaningful safe harbor,” especially in view of
the “quite substantial” “chill” caused by the FCC’s in-
decency enforcement activities. App. 66a-67a (Wald, J.,
dissenting). As a result of the subjective and case-specific
nature of the FCC's determinations of what is “indecent,”
she explained, “broadcasters have next-to-no guidance in
making complex judgment calls.” Jd. at 67a. “And even
@ ‘serious’ presentation of newsworthy material,” she
noted, “is emphatically not shielded from liability.” /d.
at 68a.

The FCC's indecency enforcement activities—the ones
found by Judge Wald to be so “chill{ing]"—have con-
tinued during the pendency of the ACT cases. Since 1987,
the FCC has issued some 36 indecency forfeiture orders
against broadcasters, all of them for material contained
in radio programs. See Action for Children’s Television
v. FCC (“ACT IV"), 59 F.3d 1249, 1264 (D.C. Cir.
1995) (Tatel, J., dissenting) (also reported as South Fork
Broadcasting Co. v. FCC). Because these “orders take
from two to seven years to get to court, if they get there
at all,” broadcasters have yet to obtain judicial review
of a single FCC determination that a broadcast was “in-
decent.” Jd. In the meantime, broadcasters who are the
subjects of indecency forfeiture orders have faced esca-
lating fines, public condemnation by FCC commissioners,
and even the threatened loss of their licenses, all in an
effort to pressure them to conform to the FCC’s notions
of “decency.” Id.; see id. at 1252 (majority opinion)
(“agree[ing} that the FCC's implementation of its enforce-
ment scheme is potentially troubling in some respects”).”

REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT

This case presents important questions concerning the
content-based suppression of indecent, but not obscene,
Fev seen, Set Congress, he FCC, and apparently

majority of the Court of Appeals consider of little

°? A separate petition for certiorari will be filed in the ACT /V
ase

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 11 ===
.
i

value. Yet, this is speech that broadcasters have a First
Amendment interest in presenting, and adult viewers and
listeners have a First Amendment interest in receiving.
The government's effective prohibition of such speech—
by channeling it to hours when it is unavailable to the
majority of adults—implicates serious First Amendment
concerns. The prohibition encompasses news broadcasts,
dramas on subjects such as the AIDS epidemic, and
live “talk” shows on radio.” It affects the programming
decisions that broadcasters make every day at the 11,965
radio stations and 1,542 television stations across the
country. It thus affects the material available to tens of
millions of adult viewers and listeners, many of whom
rely upon the broadcast medium as their principal source
of news and entertainment.

The decision below sustaining a 6 a.m.to-10 p.m.
indecency ban cannot be reconciled with decisions of
this Court, including its emphatically narrow holding
in FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726 (1978).
The Court of Appeals failed to subject Section 16(a) to
the rigorous analysis that this Court requires in the First
“independent” assessment of the constitutionality of the
statute, but instead simply deferred to the assessment of
Congress and the FCC. The court did not demand that
the government make a factual showing, as this Court has
required, that the statute is directed at “real” harms and
is narrowly tailored.

The Court of Appeals also misconceived the relevant
by Section 16(a). The government has no “independent”
interest in protecting children from “indecent” material.
Nor does the government have any interest in determining

1 The court below sought to equate broadcast indecency to “hard-
core pornography.” App. lla. There is no evidence in the record
that the material that the FCC has deemed “indecent” in the
broadeast medium remotely constitutes “hard-core pornography.”
Se re Oe. S

).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 12 ===
12

how parents should supervise their children’s television
dismissed adult viewers’ and listeners’ interest in receiving
“indecent” broadcasts, relying, contrary to the decisions
of this Court, on the supposed availability of similar ma-

Finally, in holding that the FCC's definition of “in-
decency” is not unconstitutionally vague, the Court of
Appeals again acted contrary to the decisions of this
Court. The issue was not, as the court below held, de-
cided by Pacifica. The First Amendment requires that the
government provide a clear and precise definition of what
speech it seeks to proscribe. Here, given the narrowness
of the safe harbor provided by Section 16(a), such preci-

I. IN DEFERRING TO CONGRESS AND FAILING TO

REQUIRE EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT THE INDE-
CENCY BAN, THE DECISION BELOW IS IN
FUNDAMENTAL CONFLICT WITH DECISIONS
OF THIS COURT.

The indecency ban embodied in Section 16(a) is a
content-based restriction on speech and, accordingly, may
be sustained only if it advances a “compelling interest”
by “the least restrictive means.” Sable Communica-
tions of Calif., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989).
The Court of Appeals recognized that Sable provided the
tion 16(a) was to be scrutinized. App. 9a. However,
rather than independently assessing whether the govern-
ment’s ends were compelling and whether the govern-
ment’s means were narrowly tailored, the court deferred
to Congress's and the FCC's assessments, without requir-
ing any evidence to support them. As this Court has made
clear, such deference is improper in the First Amendment
area.

In explaining how courts are to analyze statutes chal-
lenged on First Amendment grounds, the Court has articu-

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 18 ===
18

This absence ‘of any récord evidence of children’s ex-
posure to “indecent” broadcasts was noted by the dis-
senters in the Cotitt of Appeals. As Judge Wald pointed

Ser aL meetin. Oe rae ote Sew Seams
or seen or heard by children inside or outside the
safe harbor. Thus, even if the government were
allowed to presume harm from mere exposure to
ind : ly it ivel: Z
the safe harbor in the absence of any indication that
ing regime.
App. 70a (Wald, J., dissenting); see App. 61a (Edwards,
J., dissenting) (“The Commission presents no program-
specific data of what children watch, despite the existence
of this data.”).
C. The Court Failed To Require Proof That Section
16(a) Is Narrowly Tailored.

The Court of Appeals also failed to require the gov-
ernment to demonstrate that Section 16(a) is “narrowly
drawn” to avoid “unnecessarily interfering with First
Amendment freedoms.” Sable, 492 U.S. at 126 (quota-
tion omitted). Instead, the court expressly stated that
“we defer to Congress’s determination of where to draw
the line” as to which hours to include within the indecency
ban. App. 26a.

This was contrary to the “independent judgment” man-
dated by this Court in Sable of “the facts bearing on an
issue of constitutional law.” 492 U.S, at 129. Indeed,
as in Sable itself, there were “no legislative findings” that
could justify a conclusion that the statute was narrowly
tailored. Id. Section 16(a), like the ban on indecent
“grazing,” to the extent that it occurs at all among children, results
in significant unrecorded exposure to “indecent” programs. See
App. 73a (Wald, J., dissenting) (“There is no evidence .. . that
‘grazing’ is leading to any significant viewing of indecency.”).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 19 ===
7
19
dial-a-porn communications in Sable, “was introduced on
the floor,” and thus was unaccompanied by any “com-
mittee report” justifying its breadth and rejecting other
alternatives. Id. at 130. And as in Sable, “[nJo Con-
gressman or Senator purported to present a considered
judgment with respect to how often or to what extent
minors could or would circumvent” a narrower restric-
tion. Id. (emphasis added).
The Court of Appeals should have required the gov-
ernment, in accordance with this Court’s authorities, to
demonstrate why a narrower indecency ban would not
suffice. But the court did not demand any such showing.
As Chief Judge Edwards noted:
[T]he Government offers no data on actual parental
supervision, parental preferences, or on the effec-
tiveness of parental supervision at different hours of
the day and night. . . . Without this kind of data,
the Commission’s decision to ban indecent broadcast-
ing during the extensive period here in question is
not narrowly tailored to serve the asserted interest of
facilitating parental supervision.

App. 61a (Edwards, J., dissenting).”

The court did not demand any showing that, for ex-
ample, problems requiring government intervention had
arisen during the existing 8 p.m.-to-6 a.m. safe harbor.
According to survey evidence submitted in the FCC rule-
making on Section 16(a) and included in the record
below, 98% of persons under 18 are with parents or
other adults, at school, or asleep during that period. Yet,
the court did require the government to show that adult
supervision, as opposed to official censorship, was inade-
quate to shield young people from “indecent” broadcasts

1 The Court of Appeals held on two prior occasions that the FCC
had to accumulate these sorts of data in order to justify the scope
of its indecency regulation. See ACT 11, 982 F.2d at 1510; ACT I,
852 F.2d at 1341-83. The FCC never conducted the “full and fair”
hearing directed by those cases.

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 20 ===
20

after 8 p.m. See App. 73a (Wald, J., dissenting) (“the
government needs to give more careful consideration to
those hours in the evening when parental control could
reasonably be relied upon in lieu of censorship”), Nor
would not suffice during those hours when children and
teenagers are at school.” Indeed, the court conceded
that “during school hours . . . children are presumably
subject to strict adult supervision,” but held that the First
Amendment did not require “fine tuning” the indecency
ban to exclude those hours.”

In sum, the decision below conflicts with this Court's
decisions directing that statutes suppressing speech be
scrutinized independently and rigorously. The Court's
intervention is necessary in order to resolve this conflict.

Aside from whether the decision below accords too
much deference to Congress with Trespect to the constitu-
tionality of a broad indecency ban, the Court should
consider whether the decision accords too little defer-
ence in effectively rewriting Section 16(a), which was
a task “properly left to Congress.” United States v.
National Treasury Employees Union, 115 S. Ct. 1003,
1019 (1995). After concluding that Section 16(a)
was unconstitutional to the extent that certain public
broadcasters were allowed to present “indecent” material
beginning at 10 p.m., the Court of Appeals did not strike
down Section 16(a) as unconstitutional, but instead re-
wrote the statute to allow all broadcasters to air “in-
decent” material at 10 p.m. In so doing, the court again
acted contrary to this Court's decisions, which have em-

“The survey evidence demonstrated, for example, that more
than 99% of all persons under age 18 are with parents or other
adults, asleep, or at school throughout the morning “drive-time”
hours of 6 a.m. to 10 a.m.

* The court also observed that “[t]he Government’s concerns,
of course, extend to children who are too young to attend school,”
App. 26a. But no showing was made that parental supervision
would be inadequate for such young children.

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 23 ===
23
B, The Court Of Appeals’ Misconception Of The Gov-
commen, beterees Ta. Eaeg Cate! taterny
Conflicts With Court's Decisions.

The court below misconceived the nature of the other
governmental interest that it relied upon to justify Sec-
tion 16(a): the government's interest in “supporting
parental supervision of children.” App. 17a. As this
Court's decisions in Meyer, Pierce, and Yoder recognize,
a have different approaches to child-
rearing. government's proper interest is in accom-
modating these varying approaches. It is not in dictating
which approach to child-rearing is the proper one for all

parents and all children.
The FCC and the court below assumed that there is
only one proper way for parents to exert authority over
their children’s viewing and listening: to remain in the
same room with their children while they are watching
television or listening to the radio, and thereby to make
sure that their children do not switch the dial to a pro-
is at the heart of the government's rationale for a broad
indecency ban and at the heart of the Court of Appeals’
decision. The indecency ban is designed to spare parents
from engaging in “co-viewing’ ” or “colistening”—even
during hours when they are present in the home—by
simply removing “indecent” programs from the airwaves.
The FCC and the court failed to recognize that paren-
tal supervision over children’s exposure to the broadcast
modiom may sepropciatly whe ee wih th Some
parents indeed to view or listen with their chil-
sets, or prevent children from having televisions or radios
in their own rooms. Others set rules for their children’s
use of television and radio, without constantly monitoring
what programs their children are selecting. There is no
basis in the record to conclude that parents cannot en-
gage in meaningful supervision by any of these means
during the many hours of the day when they are present

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 24 ===
24
in the home. Nor does Pacifica provide any support for
such a conclusion. Yet, Congress, the FCC, and the
court below have denied parents the opportunity to use
these means of supervision—means that leave open the
opportunity for adults to watch or listen to ‘indecent”
programs at reasonable hours.

As Chief Judge Edwards noted below, “the FCC has
preempted, not facilitated, parental control in enforcing
section 16(a)."" And “preemptiing] . . . parental con-
trol” is precisely what Meyer, Pierce, and Yoder forbid.
The Court should grant review in order to resolve this
conflict.

C. The Court Of Appeals’ Heavy Reliance On The
Availability Of Indecency In Other Media Conflicts
With Bolger And Shad.

The Court of Appeals acknowledged that Section
16(a) “burden[s} the rights of many adults.” App. 24a.
Yet, even though the court recognized that Section 16(a)
would deprive adults of access to “indecent” material
in the broadcast medium, the court nonetheless upheld
the statute, because “adults have alternative means of
that pose no risk to minors.” /d. at 24a. The court's
reliance on the availability of indecency in other media
is contrary to the decisions of this Court.

This Court has recognized on a number of occasions
that a content-based restriction on speech cannot be jus-
tified on the ground that the same or similar material is
available elsewhere. In Bolger, for example, the Court
rejected the government's argument that a prohibition on
the mailing of contraceptive advertisements “does not
interfere ‘significantly’ with free speech because the stat-
ute applies only to unsolicited mailings and does not bar
other channels of communication.” 463 U.S. at 69 n.18.
The Court relied on the well-settled principle that “ ‘one
is not to have the exercise of his liberty of expression in
appropriate places abridged on the plea that it may be

= App. 55a-56a (Edwards, J., dissenting).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 25 ===
25
exercised in some other place.'” Jd. at 69-70 1.18
(quoting Schneider v. State, 308 US. 147, 163 (1939));
see Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens
Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 757 n.15 (1976)
(restrictions on speech cannot be justified merely because
“the speaker's listeners could come by his message by
some other means”); Shad v. Borough of Mount Ephraim,
452 US. 61, 76-77 (1981); Southeastern Promotions,
Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. $46, 556 (1975).”

Not only was the Court of Appeals reliance on adults’
“alternative means of satisfying their interest in indecent
material” erroneous under this Court's decisions. It was
also erroneous as a matter of fact. Much of the material
at issue here—news and documentaries, topical “talk”
shows, and dramatic and satiric programs—is not read-
ily available in other media. In fact, the FCC's indecency
regulation has been directed in recent years almost ex-
clusively at live radio programs, which have no analogue
outside the broadcast medium, whether one considers the
general program format or the individual program
content.

The court's reliance on adults’ ability to obtain “in-
decent” material from non-broadcast sources cannot be
justified by Pacifica. To be sure, the Court observed in
that case that “[ajdults who feel the need may purchase
tapes and records or go to theaters and nightclubs to hear
these words.” 438 U.S. at 750 1.28; see id. at 760
(Powell, J., concuring). As noted above, unlike the
Carlin monologue in Pacifica, most of the material that
the FCC has deemed “indecent” is not available in other
media. More significantly, Pacifica did not suggest that
adults may effectively be denied “indecent” material on
radio and television simply because “indecent™ material is
available elsewhere. Instead, Pacifica emphasized adults’
ability to obtain the Carlin monologue and other “inde-
= This principle of First Amendment law has been recognized
by other Cireuits. See, ¢.g., Crowder v. Housing Awth. of City of
Atlanta, 990 F.2d 686, 583 (1ith Cir. 1998); Hobbs v. Hawkins,
968 F.2d 471, 481 (Sth Cir. 1992).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 26 ===
26

cent” material on television and radio during the evening

hours. See id. at 750 n.28, 760."

Accordingly, the Court should grant certiorari in order
to resolve the conflict between its own decisions and the
decision below concerning the governmental and private
interests implicated by Section 16(a).

IL. IN HOLDING THAT THE FCC'S DEFINITION OF
“INDECENCY” IS NOT UNCONSTITUTIONALLY
VAGUE, THE COURT OF APPEALS’ DECISION
CONFLICTS WITH DECISIONS OF THIS COURT.

The Court of Appeals summarily rejected petitioners’
vagueness challenge to the FCC's definition of broadcast
indecency based on its earlier decision in ACT J. App.
8a-9a." The court’s decision did not rest on the
merits of petitioners’ position, but on its view that this
Court in Pacifica “ ‘dispelled any vagueness concerns at-
tending the (Commission's) definition.’” Jd. (quoting
ACT Il, 932 F.2d at 1508); accord ACT I, 852 F.2d
at 1339. The court's treatment of the vagueness issue re-
flects a misunderstanding of this Court's authorities.

Pacifica was concerned only with the FCC's specific
ruling that the Carlin monologue in that case was in-
decent. The FCC had made clear that it was not purport-
ing to articulate a standard of general applicability. See
Pacifica Foundation, 56 F.C.C.2d 94, 99 (1975). This
Court, in turn, made clear that it was not deciding the
broader question of the constitutionality of the indecency
definition. Justice Stevens, writing for the majority, stated
that the FCC's order “was issued in a specific factual con-
™ In any event, Pacifica predated the Court's decision in Bolger,
which clarified that a content-based ban on speech cannot be sus-
tained on the ground that “other channels of communication”
remain open. 463 U.S. at 69 n.18.

%* The FCC defines broadcast indecency as “language or material
that, in context, depicta or describes, in terms patently offensive
as measured by comtemporary community standards for the broad-
cast medium, sexual or excretory activities or organs.” App. 118s
1.10 (1993 Report and Order).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 27 ===
r "a
27

text,” that “questions concerning possible action in other
contexts were expressly reserved for the future,” and that

the FCC’s “specific holding was carefully confined to the
monologue ‘as broadcast.’” Pacifica, 438 U.S. at 734;

see id. at 742 (the Court’s “review is limited to the ques-

tion whether the Commission has the authority to pro-

scribe this particular broadcast”) (plurality opinion). In ;
his separate concurrence, Justice Powell similarly noted

that “{t}he Court today reviews only the Commission's
holding that Carlin’s monologue was indecent ‘as broad-
cast.” Id. at 755 (opinion of Powell, J.). He further
explained that the Court was not addressing broader
questions raised by the FCC's indecency regulation, “con-

tional issues unnecessarily.” Id. at 756.

While in the years immediately after Pacifica, the FCC
provided significant clarity by limiting “indecency” to
the words in the Carlin monologue, the FCC's indecency
regulation since 1987 has reintroduced confusion. The
FCC's orders have been typically conclusory, frequently
inconsistent,” and generally incapable of providing signifi-
cant guidance to broadcasters. Moreover, the FCC has
instructed that because its indecency orders are “highly
fact-specific” and are made “on a case-by-case basis,”
broadcasters cannot rely on them “unless both the sub-
stance of the material they aired and the context in which
it was broadcast were susbtantially similar.” Sagittarius
Broadcasting Corp., 7 F.C.C.R. 6873, 6874 (MMB 1992).
As Judge Wald noted below, “conscientious broadcasters
and radio and television hosts seeking to steer clear of
indecency face the herculean task of predicting on the
basis of a series of hazy case-by-case determinations by
the Commission which side of the line their program will
fall on.” App. 67a (Wald, J., dissenting).

% Compare WCKS Broadcasters, Ltd., Notice of Apparent Lia-
bility, 9 F.C.C.R. 4871 (MMB 1994) (advertisements that rock
radio station “keeps it harder, longer”) with Letter to Julie
— (rejecting complaint concerning song

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 28 ===
28

This Court has elsewhere demanded that speakers be
given clear and precise guidance as to which speech is
proscribed so that they do not “ ‘steer far wider of the
unlawful zone’” than necessary. New York Times Co. v.
Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 279 (1964) (quoting Speiser v.
Randall, 357 U.S. 513, 526 (1958)); see Hynes v. Mayor
of Oradell, 425 U.S. 610, 620 (1976); Grayned v. City
of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-09 (1972). The Court
has repeatedly struck down statutes that sought to regulate
sexually explicit speech as unconstitutionally vague. For
example, in Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S. 58
(1963), the Court held unconstitutional a state law that
created a Commission that was to “educate the public
concerning {materials} containing obscene, indecent or
impure language, or manifestly tending to the corruption
of the youth.” Id. at 59. Finding that the law was un-
constitutionally vague and that the Commission had done
nothing to make it more precise, the Court explained that
“[tJhe distributor is left to speculate whether the Com-
ful to juvenile morality.” Id. at 71. And in Rosenfeld v.
New Jersey, 408 U.S. 901 (1972), the Court summarily
vacated and remanded a conviction under a disorderly
persons statute that prohibited the use of “offensive,”
“profane,” or “indecent” language in a public place.”

The Court has not made clear whether the same vague-
ness standards apply to the electronic media. The federal
courts of appeals are divided on the subject. The Tenth
Circuit has upheld a district court’s determination that a
State statute prohibiting “indecent material” on cable tele-

7 See alao, ¢.g., Brown v. Oklahoma, 408 U.S. 914 (1972) (sum-
marily vacating and remanding conviction under statute barring
“any obscene or lascivious language or word in any public place
or in the presence of females”); Lewis v. City of New Orleans,
408 U.S. 918 (1972) (summarily vacating and remanding convic-
tion under breach of peace statute prohibiting wantonly cursing,
reviling, or uaing “obscene or opprobrious language” toward police
officers) ; Cohen v. California, 408 US. 16, 19 (1971) (statute that
prohibited “offensive” speech and conduct did not provide sufficient
notice “that certain kinds of otherwise permissible speech or con-
duct would nevertheless . . . not be tolerated in certain places”).

=== PRINTED PETITION PAGE 29 ===
29

vision was “ ‘unconstitutionally overbroad and vague.’”
Jones v. Wilkinson, 800 F.2d 989, 990 (10th Cir. 1986)
(per curiam) (quoting Community Television of Utah,
Inc. y. Wilkinson, 611 F. Supp. 1099, 1117 (D. Utah
1985)), aff'd mem., 480 U.S. 926 (1987). Two circuits
have rejected vagueness challenges to the term “indecent”
in the federal dial-a-porn statute, relying in significant
part on the D.C. Circuit's holding in ACT / that Pacifica
resolved the issue. See Dial Information Servs. v. Thorn-
burgh, 938 F.2d 1535, 1541 (2d Cir. 1991), cert. denied,
502 U.S. 1072 (1992); Information Providers’ Coalition
for Defense of First Amendment v. FCC, 928 F.2d 866,
875 (9th Cir. 1991)”

The Court should grant certiorari in order to consider
whether the FCC’s regulation of broadcast indecency,
under a definition that the Court of Appeals previously
recognized to be “inherent{ly]” vague, ACT I, 852 F.2d
at 1344, can be reconciled with Bantam Books and simi-
lar authorities. The Court’s resolution of this issue is
especially important given the narrow safe harbor sus-
tained by the court below.

CONCLUSION
The petition for writ of certiorari should be granted.
Respectfully submitted,
pf d a
Sam
Capreat, Crruma/ ABC, Inc. Barsaza McDOWELL
TT West 66th Street Jonns, Day, REAvis & Poovr
New York, New York 10023 1450 G Street, N.W.
Howas F.3 Washington, D.C. 20005
(202) 979-8989
CBS Inc.
51 West 52nd Street Counsel for Petitioners and
New York, New York 10019 yi lag ca icaleaae

%* See aleo United States v. Evergreen Media Corp. of Chicago,
882 F. Supp. 1188, 1187 (N.D. Tl. 1998) (rejecting vagueness
yoda rte ep ttm ota ela
