U> ) 
ca 


No. 95-509 iT ED 


IN THE | ue 1999 


Supreme Court of the United States. 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


cC 


PACIFICA FOUNDATION; NATIONAL FEDERATION OF 
COMMUNITY BROADCASTERS; PUBLIC RADIO INTERNATIONAL; 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLLEGE BROADCASTERS; 
INTERCOLLEGIATE BROADCAST SYSTEM; 

PEN AMERICAN CENTER; ALLEN GINSBERG, 

Petitioners, 
V. 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
AND UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondents. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


HARVEY SILVERGLATE ERIC M. LIEBERMAN 

SILVERGLATE & GOOD Counsel of Record 

83 Atlantic Avenue LAURIE EDELSTEIN 

Boston, MA 02110 LAURENCE R. HELFER 
RABINOWITZ, BOUDIN, STANDARD, 

JOHN CRIGLER KRINSKY & LIEBERMAN, P.C. 

HALEY BADER & POTTS 740 Broadway - Fifth Floor 

4350 North Fairfax Drive New York, NY 10003-9518 

Suite 900 (212) 254-1111 


Arlington, VA 22203 
Counsel for Petitioners 
(On Behalf of the National 
Emergency Civil Liberties 
Committee) 


December 8, 1995 


PRESS OF BYRON 8S. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 


—_—e, os 


i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
TORRE Ge PSC UMD 6 ne eee eet eee es il 
er ere ee ee re ear er ere l 
Se Sos cose bk ee kee Pe ek 10 


il 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES 
PAGE 

AIDS Action Committee of Massachusetts, Inc. v. 

Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, 42 

Pa BE: fe BP Se reer ee 3 
Action For Children’s Television v. FCC, 59 F.3d 

1249 (D.C. Cir. 1995), petition for cert. 

Sod Gut: UB, Tite <8 os hae eee ees 3,9 
Action for Children’s Television v. FCC, 852 F.2d 

aon Go. CR. See 05 rane een eee 2, 6 
Alliance for Community Media v. FCC, 56 F.3d 105 

(D.C. Cir. 1995), cert. granted, No. 95-227 

Ota. TA, FRR sins 88 oa ee veda 8 
Alliance for Community Media v. FCC, 

cert. granted, No. 95-227 (Nov. 13, 1995) ...... 1,8 
Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products Corp., 463 U.S. 60 

HOG sini ve tucaceceuenee eee eee 5,8 


Brown v. Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc., 68 F.3d 
SSS (ies GR APS) ok k ce ivi oc kee es eos 5 


Carey v. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 
GFR CEST) 6k 0 6 eh 4 0084 eee eee 8 


Denver Area Educational Telegraph Consortium v. FCC, 
cert. granted, No. 95-124 (Nov. 13, 1995) ...... 1,8 


ee eye 


ill 


Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205 


es Oe re s'h snk cada ces 8 
FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U.S. 364 
EES Pe 4 
Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629 a 3, 4 
Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 
ye ee ee ek 6 
Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co, __ U.S. __, 115 S. Ct. 
GE Sr ee 4 
Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 
en oes kbc check aw ecen 6 
Schneider v. State, 308 U.S. 147 (1939) ............. 7 
Shad v. Borough of Mt. Ephraim, 452 U.S. 61 (1981) ... 7 
Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 129 
nr sy ou ko a ws o xe cc as 3 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, __ USS. 
ee eS | 4, 6 
STATUTES 


Public Telecommunications Act of 1992. 
Pub. L. No. 102-356, §§ 10, 16 
ESI l 


ee 3 


REPLY BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Respondents’ response to the petition avoids the 
important constitutional questions this case raises. Respondents 
defend the decision of the court of appeals by studiously 
ignoring that Congress’ broadcast ban extends to works of 
unquestioned political, social, literary, and artistic merit. They 
also invoke "common sense" and out-dated precedents that have 
little if any bearing on the issues presented for review. (Opp. 
11, 12.)” Respondents begrudgingly urge the Court to defer 
consideration of the instant petition until it has resolved a 
challenge to a related provision of the Telecommunications Act 
of 1992 governing indecent cable transmissions.” See Denver 
Area Educational Tel. Consortium v. FCC, No. 95-124; 
Alliance for Community Media y. FCC, No. 95-227, cert. 
granted (Nov. 13, 1995). By recognizing the partial overlap 
among these cases, respondents unintentionally underscore the 
seriousness of petitioners’ constitutional claims and identify 
additional reasons why the Court should issue a writ of 
certiorari in this case to undertake a concurrent review of 
Congress’ indecency regulations as applied to both the broadcast 
and cable media. 

1. Respondents would have the Court believe that the 
only speech prohibited by the 6 a.m. to midnight broadcast ban” 


VV 


References to "(Opp. __)" are to the pages of the Brief for the 
Respondents. References to "(Pet. _)" are tc the pages of the Petition. 
¥ Section 16(a) of the Act regulates indecent programming broadcast 
over radio and television stations; section 10(a) regulates indecent 
programming transmitted over leased access and public access cable 
television channels. (Opp. 18.) 


/ 


Respondents incorrectly suggest that petitioners Pacifica Foundation 
et al. challenge only the 6 a.m. to midnight broadcast ban and not the 
narrower 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. ban. (Opp. 9, n.3.) Although the thrust of 


2 


is little different than rank obscenity and thus has only marginal 
constitutional value. (Opp. 3-4.) As petitioners have shown, 
however, Congress’ broad and vague definition of indecency -- 
heretofore unreviewed by the Court -- encompasses broadcasts 
of serious literary and artistic works as well as discussions of 
significant political and social issues such as AIDS, rape, war, 
and adult sexuality. (Pet. 12-14.) The FCC’s enforcement 
actions themselves demonstrate beyond cavil the wide range of 
meritorious expression it may censor. (Pet. 13 & n.6.) 
Moreover, numerous broadcasters, including in particular non- 
commercial radio stations, have in the past and are likely again 
in the future to engage in self-censorship of meritorious 
programs to avoid adverse action by the FCC. (Pet. 14.) It is 
precisely because the combination of the FCC’s regulatory 
scheme and its sweeping definition of indecency cuts such a 
wide swath across protected core speech that a meaningful safe 
harbor period must be permitted. See Action for Children’s 
Television v. FCC, 852 F.2d 1332, 1335 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
(Ginsburg, J.).% 


petitioners’ argument focuses on the broader ban, their assertion that there 
are lesser restrictive means than channeling available to regulate broadcast 
indecency -- in particular separate regulation of public radio, channel or 
station-specific restrictions, and use of the so-called "V-chip" (Pet. 28-30, 
& nn.16,17) -- necessarily implies that the slightly broader safe harbor 
crafted by the court of appeals is as constitutionally defective as the 18- 
hour broadcast ban. 

Moreover, the court of appeals expressly affirmed the constitu- 
tionality of the 6 a.m. to midnight ban precisely because Congress, the 
FCC, and the parties to this litigation have all focused their arguments 
(including those of the government here) on the 18-hour broadcast ban. 
Thus, the government’s assertion (Opp. 8-9) that the constitutionality of 
the wider ban is not presented for review is without merit. 


“ Respondents’ assertion that certiorari should be denied because other 
courts of appeals may review the application of section 16(a) in the 
context of a forfeiture proceeding fails to acknowledge that the District 
of Columbia Circuit is given exclusive jurisdiction over a wide variety of 


3 


2. Respondents’ arguments concerning the burden the 
government must meet to uphold a content-based regulation of 
protected speech are similarly flawed in that they are based on 
a misreading of out-dated case law and a failure to apply the 
principles the Court has articulated in recent decisions 
addressing the First Amendment. 

a. Respondents rely on Ginsberg v. New York, 390 
U.S. 629, 642 (1968) for the proposition that the government 
need not provide evidence of a "causal link" between indecent 
speech and harm to minors, but instead may regulate such 


FCC actions involving broadcasting. See 47 U.S.C. § 402. Moreover, 
indecency forfeiture proceedings are rarely, if ever, subject to judicial 
review and then only after years of delay. See Action For Children’s 
Television v. FCC, 59 F.3d 1249, 1254 (D.C. Cir. 1995), petition for cert. 
filed, Oct. 16, 1995 (reported as South Fork Broadcasting Corp. v. FCC 
in advance copies of federal reporter). Given the numerous obstacles to 
judicial review, the circuit split contemplated by respondents is unlikely 
to develop, allowing the restriction and associated chill of First 
Amendment freedoms to continue unchecked by the Court’s review. 
Under these circumstances, the sharp divisions within the District of 
Columbia Circuit, both as presently and formerly constituted, cry out for 
review by the Court. 

In addition, although no other court has reviewed the 
constitutionality of this latest version of section 16(a), recent decisions by 
other courts of appeals addressing indecent speech generally are in tension 
with the District of Columbia Circuit’s treatment of that category of 
expression. See, e.g., AIDS Action Committee of Massachusetts, Inc. v. 
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, 42 F.3d 1, 9, 13 (ist Cir. 
1994) (in striking down on First Amendment grounds transportation 
authority's refusal to run controversial AIDS prevention advertisements 
described as "sexually explicit" and “patently offensive," court concluded 
that the ads “are most certainly mot obscene, and fall well within the 
heartland of speech that we, as a society, should be willing to tolerate in 
the marketplace of ideas"); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 
129, 136 (6th Cir. 1994) (striking down on First Amendment grounds city 
ordinance that “prohibits all public nudity, including live performances 
with serious literary, artistic or political value"). This tension provides 
further support for reviewing the court of appeals’ decision in this case. 


4 


speech based on “common sense." (Opp. 11.) Fatally, 
respondents ignore that Ginsberg concerned obscenity and that 
as a result the Court only considered whether the statute’s 
regulation of obscenity had a "rational relation" to the 
government’s objective of safeguarding minors from harm. /d. 
at 643. Manifestly, the Court did not address the burden the 
Constitution imposes when speech fully protected by the First 
Amendment is at issue. See (53a-54a) (Edwards, C.J., 
dissenting.) On that question, numerous cases decided since 
Ginsberg have held that the government "must do more than 
simply posit the existence of the disease to be cured." Turner 
Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2470 
(1994). Rather it must "demonstrate that the recited harms are 
real, not merely conjectural, and that the regulation will in fact 
alleviate these harms in a direct and material way." Jd. See 
also, e.g., Rubin vy. Coors Brewing Co., US. __,__, 115 
S. Ct. 1585, 1592-93 (1995); FCC v. League of Women Voters 
of Cal., 468 U.S. 364, 391 (1984). Respondents ignore these 
recent precedents which, on their face, compel the rejection of 
their appeal to "common sense" where First Amendment 
freedoms are at stake. 

b. Moreover, sven “common sense" compels 
rejection of the regulatory scheme at issue. As we have shown, 
materials potentially falling within the statute’s broad definition 
of indecency not only are easily accessible to teenagers in our 
society, but often are made available to them in the nation’s 
public schools. (Pet. 25.) “Common sense" dictates that such 
materials, which include, inter alia, major works of literature, 
sexual education materials, and discussion of topics relating to 
sexuality and public health, necessarily cannot be deemed 
harmful to minors when teachers and educators widely conclude 
that the materials are of considerable educational value.” 


* As recent court decisions make clear, schools have also found 


educational value in discussing with students AIDS prevention measures 
that include “sexually explicit" materials and "profane, lewd and 


Te Ty ee 


5 


c. Respondents’ focus on "effective" parental 
supervision of children ignores the Court’s teachings in Bolger 
v. Youngs Drug Prods. Corp., 463 U.S. 60, 73 (1983), that the 
relevant constitutional inquiry is whether parents have the 
opportunity to supervise their children’s listening and viewing 
habits. It is telling that respondents cite no case law to support 
their analysis. (See Opp. at 11-13.) 

The real thrust of the government’s argument is apparent 
from its hypothetical involving a toddler at risk of injury from 
common household objects. According to respondents, the only 
way parents can be certain that their children are not exposed to 
"dangerous implements or poisonous substances" only by "child- 
proofing their home." By analogy, respondents argue that 
parents can control their children’s listening and viewing habits 
only by means of a government-imposed broadcast ban 
encompassing the hours when most adults and children are 
awake. (Opp. 12.)* It is remarkable that respondents have 
equated constitutionally protected speech with poison. It is 
equally remarkable that respondents have failed to notice that 
childproofing of homes is a task commonly performed by 
parents, without the compulsory oversight of government 
bureaucrats. But even putting aside that respondents’ 


lascivious language to describe body parts and excretory functions." See, 
e.g., Brown v. Hot, Sexy and Safer Prods., Inc., 68 F.3d 525 (1st Cir. 
1995). 


* The government attempts to justify its ban by complaining that parents 
"have other things to do" than to exercise parental control. (Opp. 12.) 
Determination of the proper degree of parental supervision, of course, is 
a decision for parents to make, not Big Brother. Similarly, whether 
parents choose to permit their children to have radio or television sets in 
their own room is a matter of parental choice, and, in any event, does not 
preclude exercise of parental authority over the use made of the sets. The 
vagaries of parental control do not require permitting the FCC to invade 
every child’s, and by extension, every citizen’s bedroom, living room, and 
den. 


6 


childproofing analogy fails on these grounds, the analogy also 
directly conflicts with the Court’s analysis in Sable 
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115 (1989). 

In Sable, the Court rejected as "quite unpersuasive" the 
government’s assertion that a ban on indecent telephone 
communications was constitutional because it was the most 
effective means of protecting children from exposure to those 
communications. Jd. at 128. Notwithstanding that any other 
means of regulation would not be "foolproof," the Court held 
that the ban violated the First Amendment precisely because its 
denial of adult access to indecent telephone messages "far 
exceeds that which is necessary to limit the access of minors to 
such messages." Jd. at 131, & n.10 (emphasis added). 
Respondents’ arguments based on "effective" parental 
supervision cannot be squared with the Court’s reasoning in 
Sable. 

3. Equally misguided is respondents’ attempt to shield 
the 18-hour broadcast ban from constitutional review by arguing 
that it is merely a legislative judgment to which the Court must 
conclusively defer. (Opp. 16.) The Court’s case law, ignored 
by respondents, undermines this precise assertion. See, e.g., 
TBS, 114 S. Ct. at 2471 (Court has "an obligation to exercise 
independent judgment when First Amendment rights are 
implicated"). Without such independent review, "the scope of 
freedom of speech . . . would be subject to legislative definition 
and the function of the First Amendment as a check on 
legislative power would be © nullified." Landmark 
Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 829, 844 (1978). 

As petitioners have demonstrated, the question of least 
restrictive means is decidedly not "a matter for legislative 
judgment." (Opp. 16.) To the contrary, the broad sweep of the 
FCC’s definition of indecency, together with a channeling rule 
that “stretch[es] to all but the hours most listeners [and viewers] 
are asleep," Action for Children’s Television v. FCC, 852 F.2d 
1332, 1335 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (Ginsburg, J.), makes the 
determination of a reasonable safe harbor "a constitutional 


a 


7 


necessity." (61a) (Wald, J., dissenting.) 

_ Petitioners have conclusively shown that the record does 
not support the government’s presumption of harm from 
indecent speech. (Pet. 22-23, & nn.13, 14.) They have also 
highlighted numerous less restrictive alternatives to a sweeping 
channeling rule, including a narrower regulation specifically 
tailored to the listening habits of the radio audience, channel or 
station-specific restrictions on indecent broadcasts, and use of 
the so-called "V-chip," which permits parents to block programs 
they do not wish their children to view. (Pet. 29-30.) 
Consideration of each of these alternatives, admittedly absent 
here, is required under the "exacting scrutiny" mandated by TBS 
and Sable to ensure that the government does not impose 
unnecessary burdens on protected expression. 

4. Respondents’ treatment of the First Amendment 
rights of adults and maturing minors is nothing short of 
startling. Respondents utterly ignore that Congress’ exclusive 
concern in establishing the broadcast ban was to minimize the 
number of children in the audience; it made no effort to balance 
the First Amendment rights of adult viewers and listeners to 
receive constitutionally protected speech. (Pet. 23-24.) Nor did 
Congress consider the First Amendment interests of older 
minors, other than to lump together all "children" under 18 for 
purposes of the broadcast ban.” The absence of such 
constitutional balancing is inconsistent with a long line of 
precedents supporting the free speech rights of minors. See, 


” Respondents’ contention that adults and minors have non-broadcast 


alternatives to receive indecent expression ignores the Court’s repeated 
admonition that content-based restrictions on speech cannot be justified 
on the ground that “other channels of communication" remain open. 
Bolger, 463 U.S. at 69, n.18. See also, e.g., Shad v. Borough of Mt. 
Ephraim, 452 U.S. 61, 76-77 (1981); Schneider v. State, 308 U.S. 147, 
163 (1939). It also ignores the crucial fact that speech containing 
indecent material, including in particular live news reports and live talk 
shows, loses much of its value if communicated to its audience at a later 
time. 


e.g., Bolger, 463 U.S. at 74, n.30; Carey v. Population Servs. 
Int'l, 431 U.S. 678, 692, n.14 (1977); Erznoznik v. City of 
Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 213-14 (1975). The government’s 
response to this constitutional mandate -- urging "maturing teens 
. . . to stay up late and avail themselves of the statutory safe 
harbor" (Opp. 15, n.6) even when such behavior is contrary to 
their parents’ wishes -- merely highlights the way in which the 
broadcast ban undermines rather than promotes parental 
supervision of children. 

5. Finally, the Court’s recent grant of certiorari in 
Denver Area Educational Tel. Consortium and Alliance for 
Community Media underscores the need for review of the court 
of appeals’ decision upholding the 18-hour broadcast ban. 
Indeed, respondents themselves correctly state that "the interests 
advanced to support the constitutionality of the cable regulations 
in [those cases] are similar to the interests advanced to support 
the constitutionality of the broadcast television regulations in 
this case." (Opp. 19) (emphasis added.) If the Court wishes to 
resolve in an efficient manner the question of Congress’ 
constitutional authority to regulate indecent broadcast and cable 
programming, it should grant certiorari in these cases and hear 
them, or at least decide them, together with the cable indecency 
decisions. 

The cable cases currently before the Court concern 
restrictions on indecent speech enacted by Congress in the same 
statute that is at issue in the instant petitions. Both sets of cases 
were argued before the District of Columbia Circuit on the same 
day and were decided by the same 7-to-4 majority of the en 
banc court of appeals. More significantly, the reasoning 
employed by the court of appeals majority in the cable cases 
draws in part on its analysis of broadcast indecency and, what 
is more, highlights the error of the majority’s decision 
upholding the 18-hour ban. See Alliance for Community Media 
v. FCC, 56 F.3d 105, 125 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (en banc), cert. 
granted, (Nov. 13, 1995) ("segregation and blocking appear to 
accommodate the interests of those viewers who want indecent 


9 


programming better than would a safe harbor system, under 
which cable viewers would be confined to watching such 
programming during designated, often inconvenient time 
periods"). See also (57a) (Edwards, C.J. dissenting) (stressing 
government’s reliance on segregate-and-scramble technology in 
cable media but failure to consider applying such technology to 
broadcast media). 

In reviewing "the application of the First Amendment in 
the context of ‘indecent’ speech in the broadcast media," 
including cable, Chief Judge Edwards recently lamented the 
hopelessly muddled state of the law and urged the Court to 
remedy this confusion: 


1 have come to the conclusion that the law is in 
a state of disarray. Application of the First 
Amendment in this context seems to border on 
the whimsical, for as often as not there is little 
coherence in the case law. For example, I have 
yet to comprehend the distinction that is drawn 
between broadcast and cable television, with 
broadcast stations having reduced First 
Amendment rights even though cable is 
concededly much more responsible for the 
showing of indecent programming. . . . 

I conclude with an innocent hope that the 
Supreme Court will one day soon lend some 
clarity to these areas of First Amendment 
jurisprudence. 


Action for Children’s Television v. FCC, 59 F.3d 1249, 1263, 
1264 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (Edwards, C.J., concurring with 
reservations), petition for cert. filed, Oct. 16, 1995. 

Petitioners respectfully urge the Court to heed Judge 
Edwards’ words and to issue a writ of certiorari in this case to 
resolve Congress’ attempt to regulate indecent expression over 
the nation’s airwaves and cable transmission lines. 


10 


CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the petition for a writ of 
certiorari should be granted. 


Respectfully submitted, 


HARVEY SILVERGLATE ERIC M. LIEBERMAN 
Counsel of Record 
JOHN CRIGLER LAURIE EDELSTEIN 
LAURENCE R. HELFER 


Counsel for Petitioners 

(On Behalf of the National 
Emergency Civil Liberties 
Committee) 


