         SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                     115

                                 Syllabus


SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CALIFORNIA, INC. v.
 FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION ET AL.
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED ST ATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
          CENTRAL DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
     No. 88-515.    Argued April 19, 1989-Decided June 23, 1989*
Section 223(b) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, bans inde-
  cent as well as obscene interstate commercial telephone messages, com-
  monly known as "dial-a-porn." Under its predecessor provision-which
  sought to restrict minors' access to dial-a-porn-the Federal Communi-
  cations Commission (FCC), after lengthy court proceedings, had promul-
  gated regulations laying out means by which dial-a-porn sponsors could
  screen out underaged callers. Sable Communications of California,
  which offers sexually oriented prerecorded telephone messages to callers
  both in and outside the Los Angeles metropolitan area, brought suit in
  the District Court, claiming that § 223(b)'s obscenity and indecency pro-
  visions were unconstitutional, chiefly under the First and Fourteenth
  Amendments, and seeking an injunction enjoining the FCC and the J us-
  tice Department from initiating any criminal investigation or prosecu-
  tion, civil action, or administrative proceeding under the statute and a
  declaratory judgment. The court denied Sable's request for a prelimi-
  nary injunction against enforcement of the ban on obscene telephone
  messages, rejecting the argument that the statute was unconstitutional
  because it created a national standard of obscenity. However, it issued
  the injunction with regard to the indecent speech provision, holding that
  the provision was overbroad and unconstitutional because it was not nar-
  rowly drawn to achieve the legitimate state interest of protecting chil-
  dren from exposure to indecent dial-a-porn messages.
Held:
     1. Section 223(b) does not unconstitutionally prohibit the interstate
  transmission of obscene commercial telephone messages. The protec-
  tion of the First Amendment does not extend to obscene speech. In
  addition, § 223(b) does not contravene the "contemporary community
  standards" requirement of Miller v. California, 413 U. S. 15, since it no
  more establishes a "national standard" of obscenity than do federal stat-
  utes prohibiting the mailing of obscene materials or the broadcasting of

   *Together with No. 88-525, Federal Communications Commission et
al. v. Sable Communications of California, Inc., also on appeal from the
same court.
116                      OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                                  Syllabus                          492 u. s.

  obscene messages. There is no constitutional barrier under Miller to
  prohibiting communications that are obscene in some communities under
  local standards even though they are not obscene in others. Sable,
  which has the burden of complying with the prohibition, is free to tailor
  its messages, on a selective basis, to the communities it chooses to serve.
  Pp. 124-126.
     2. Section 223(b)'s ban on indecent telephone messages violates the
  First Amendment since the statute's denial of adult access to such mes-
  sages far exceeds that which is necessary to serve the compelling inter-
  est of preventing minors from being exposed to the messages. FCC v.
  Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, an emphatically narrow ruling giv-
  ing the FCC power to regulate an indecent radio broadcast, is readily
  distinguishable from these cases. Pacifica, which did not involve a total
  ban on broadcasting indecent material, relied on the "unique" attributes
  of broadcasting, which can intrude on the privacy of the home without
  prior warning of content and which is uniquely accessible to children.
  In contrast, the dial-it medium requires the listener to take affirmative
  steps to receive the communications. The Government's argument that
  nothing less than a total ban could prevent children from gaining access
  to the messages and that this Court should defer to Congress' conclu-
  sions and factual findings to that effect is unpersuasive. There is no evi-
  dence to show that children would have evaded the rules that the FCC,
  after prolonged proceedings, had determined would keep the messages
  out of their reach. Moreover, deference to Congress' legislative find-
  ings cannot limit judicial inquiry where First Amendment rights are at
  stake. Here, the congressional record contains no legislative findings
  that would justify a conclusion that there are no constitutionally accept-
  able less restrictive means to achieve the Government's interest in pro-
  tecting minors. Pp. 126-131.
692 F. Supp. 1208, affirmed.
  WHITE, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court with respect to
Parts I, II, and IV, and the opinion of the Court with respect to Part III, in
which REHNQUIST, C. J., and BLACKMUN, O'CONNOR, SCALIA, and KEN-
NEDY, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring opinion, post, p. 131.
BRENNAN, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in
which MARSHALL and STEVENS, JJ., joined, post, p. 133.

  Richard G. Taranto argued the cause for appellees in
No. 88-515 and for appellants in No. 88-525. With him on
the briefs were Acting Solicitor General Bryson, Assistant
Attorney General Bolton, Deputy Solicitor. General Wallace,
Barbara L. Herwig, Jacob M. Lewis, and Diane S. Killary.
         SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                     117

115                        Opinion of the Court

  Laurence H. Tribe argued the cause for appellant in
No. 88-515 and for appellee in No. 88-525. With him on
the brief were Brian Stuart Koukoutchos, Lawrence E.
Abelman, Norman S. Beier, Richard K. Simon, and Lee L.
Blackman.t

  JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
   The issue before us is the constitutionality of§ 223(b) of the
Communications Act of 1934. 47 U. S. C. §223(b) (1982 ed.,
Supp. V). The statute, as amended in 1988, imposes an out-
right ban on indecent as well as obscene interstate commercial
telephone messages. The District Court upheld the prohi-
bition against obscene interstate telephone communications
for commercial purposes, but enjoined the enforcement of the
statute insofar as it applied to indecent messages. We affirm
the District Court in both respects.

                                     I
   In 1983, Sable Communications, Inc., a Los Angeles-based
affiliate of Carlin Communications, Inc., began offering sexu-

   tBriefs of amici curiae were filed for Minority Members of the Com-
mittee on Energy and Commerce of the United States House of Represent-
atives by John J. Adams; for Action for Children's Television et al. by
Timothy B. Dyk, Henry Geller, John A. Powell, C. Edwin Baker, Susan
M. Liss, Jan G. Levine, Howard Monderer, Lois J. Schiffer, Karen
Christensen, Andrew Jay Schwartzman, Paula A. Jameson, Nancy H.
Hendry, J. Laurent Scharff, Jane E. Kirtley, Bruce W. Sanford, and Rob-
ert A. Beizer; for the American Family Association, Inc., by Peggy M.
Coleman; for the Association of Interactive Information Providers by Earl
Nicholas Selby and William Bennett Turner; for Citizens for Decency
through Law, Inc., by Benjamin W. Bull; for Home Box Office, Inc., by
Daniel M. Waggoner, Stuart R. Dunwoody, and Harold E. Akselrad; for
the Pacifica Foundation by William J. Byrnes; for Morality in Media, Inc.,
by Paul J. McGeady; for the San Francisco AIDS Foundation by Leonard
Graff; for the United States Catholic Conference by Mark E. Chapko; for
John W. Olivo, Jr., by Robert T. Perry; and for Jane Roe et al. by Bruce J.
Ennis.
118                    OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                         Opinion of the Court               492   u. s.
ally oriented prerecorded telephone messages 1 (popularly
known as "dial-a-porn") through the Pacific Bell telephone
network. In order to provide the messages, Sable arranged
with Pacific Bell to use special telephone lines, designed to
handle large volumes of calls simultaneously. Those who
called the adult message number were charged a special fee.
The fee was collected by Pacific Bell and divided between the
phone company and the message provider. Callers outside
the Los Angeles metropolitan area could reach the number by
means of a long-distance toll call to the Los Angeles area code.
   In 1988, Sable brought suit in District Court seeking de-
claratory and injunctive relief against enforcement of the
recently amended § 223(b). The 1988 amendments to the
statute imposed a blanket prohibition on indecent as well as
obscene interstate commercial telephone messages. Sable
brought this action to enjoin the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and the Justice Department from initiat-
ing any criminal investigation or prosecution, civil action
or administrative proceeding under the statute. Sable also
sought a declaratory judgment, challenging the indecency and
the obscenity provisions of the amended § 223(b) as uncon-
stitutional, chiefly under the First and Fourteenth Amend-
ments to the Constitution.
   The District Court found that a concrete controversy
existed and that Sable met the irreparable injury require-
ment for issuance of a preliminary injunction under Elrod v.
Burns, 427 U. S. 347, 373 (1976). 692 F. Supp. 1208, 1209
(CD Cal. 1988). The District Court denied Sable's request
for a preliminary injunction against enforcement of the stat-
ute's ban on obscene telephone messages, rejecting the argu-
ment that the statute was unconstitutional because it created
a national standard of obscenity. The District Court, how-
  1
   A typical prerecorded message lasts anywhere from 30 seconds to
two minutes and may be called by up to 50,000 people hourly through a
single telephone number. Comment, Telephones, Sex, and the First
Amendment, 33 UCLA L. Rev. 1221, 1223 (1986).




                                                                          I
         SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                        119

115                         Opinion of the Court

ever, struck down the "indecent speech" provision of§ 223(b),
holding that in this respect the statute was overbroad and un-
constitutional and that this result was consistent with FCC v.
Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978). "While the gov-
ernment unquestionably has a legitimate interest in, e. g.,
protecting children from exposure to indecent dial-a-porn
messages, § 223(b) is not narrowly drawn to achieve any such
purpose. Its flat-out ban of indecent speech is contrary to
the First Amendment." 692 F. Supp., at 1209. Therefore,
the court issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting enforce-
ment of§ 223(b) with respect to any communication alleged to
be "indecent."
   We noted probable jurisdiction on Sable's appeal of the ob-
scenity ruling (No. 88-515); we also noted probable juriedic-
tion on the federal parties' cross-appeal of the preliminary
injunction holding the statute unconstitutional with respect
to its ban on indecent speech (No. 88-525). 488 U. S. 1003
(1989). 2
                                II
   While dial-a-porn services are a creature of this decade,
the medium, in its brief history, has been the subject of much
litigation and the object of a series of attempts at regula-

  2
    Sable appealed the District Court ruling to the Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit, concurrently filing an emergency motion for an injunc-
tion pending appeal. The District Court entered an order temporarily en-
joining the FCC from enforcing the statute during the pendency of the ap-
peal. After the federal parties filed their notice of appeal to this Court
from the District Court's grant of the preliminary injunction as to "inde-
cent" communication, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit entered
an order directing Sable either to file a motion for voluntary dismissal or to
show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
Sable filed an ex parie application to this Court for an injunction pending
appeal, as well as a return on the Court of Appeals' order to show cause.
The Court of Appeals entered an order dismissing the appeal since the fil-
ing of a direct appeal by the FCC had the effect of transferring Sable's ap-
peal to this Court.
120                    OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                         Opinion of the Court                 492 u. s.

tion. 3 The first litigation involving dial-a-porn was brought
under 82 Stat. 112, 47 U. S. C. § 223, which proscribed know-
ingly "permitting a telephone under [one's] control" to be
used to make "any comment, request, suggestion or proposal
which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent."
However, the FCC concluded in an administrative action that
the existing law did not cover dial-a-porn. In re Application
for Review of Complaint Filed by Peter F. Cahalan, FCC
File No. E-83-14 (memorandum opinions and orders adopted
May 13, 1983).
   In reaction to that FCC determination, Congress made its
first effort explicitly to address "dial-a-porn" when it added a
subsection 223(b) to the 1934 Communications Act. The pro-
vision, which was the predecessor to the amendment at issue
in this case, pertained directly to sexually oriented commer-
cial telephone messages and sought to restrict the access of
minors to dial-a-porn. The relevant provision of the Act,
Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of
 1983, Pub. L. 98-214, § 8(b), 97 Stat. 1470, made it a crime to
use telephone facilities to make "obscene or indecent" inter-
state telephone communications "for commercial purposes to
any person under eighteen years of age or to any other per-
son without that person's consent." 47 U. S. C. § 223(b)(l)
(A) (1982 ed., Supp. V). The statute criminalized commer-
cial transmission of sexually oriented communications to mi-
nors and required the FCC to promulgate regulations laying
out the means by which dial-a-porn sponsors could screen out
underaged callers. § 223(b)(2). The enactment provided
that it would be a defense to prosecution that the defendant
restricted access to adults only, in accordance with proce-
 dures established by the FCC. The statute did not criminal-

  3
   Dial-a-porn is big business. The dial-a-porn service in New York City
alone received six to seven million calls a month for the 6-month period
ending in April 1985. Carlin Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 787 F. 2d
846, 848 (CA2 1986).
       SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC            121

115                   Opinion of the Court

ize sexually oriented messages to adults, whether the mes-
sages were obscene or indecent.
   The FCC initially promulgated regulations that would have
established a defense to message providers operating only
between the hours of 9 p.m. and 8 a.m. eastern time (time
channeling) and to providers requiring payment by credit
card (screening) before transmission of the dial-a-porn mes-
sage. Restrictions on Obscene or Indecent Telephone Mes-
sage Services, 47 CFR § 64.201 (1988). In Carlin Commu-
nications, Inc. v. FCC, 749 F. 2d 113 (1984) (Carlin I),
the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit set aside the time
channeling regulations and remanded to the FCC to examine
other alternatives, concluding that the operating hours re-
quirement was "both overinclusive and underinclusive" be-
cause it denied "access to adults between certain hours, but
not to youths who can easily pick up a private or public tele-
phone and call dial-a-porn during the remaining hours." Id.,
at 121. The Court of Appeals did not reach the constitution-
ality of the underlying legislation.
   In 1985, the FCC promulgated new regulations which con-
tinued to permit credit card payment as a defense to prosecu-
tion. Instead of time restrictions, however, the Commission
added a defense based on use of access codes (user identifi-
cation codes). Thus, it would be a defense to prosecution
under § 223(b) if the defendant, before transmission of the
message, restricted customer access by requiring either pay-
ment by credit card or authorization by access or identi-
fication code. 50 Fed. Reg. 42699, 42705 (1985). The regu-
lations required each dial-a-porn vendor to develop an
identification code data base and implementation scheme.
Callers would be required to provide an access number for
identification (or a credit card) before receiving the message.
The access code would be received through the mail after the
message provider reviewed the application and concluded
through a written age ascertainment procedure that the ap-
122                 OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                      Opinion of the Court            492 U.S.

plicant was at least 18 years of age. The FCC rejected a
proposal for "exchange blocking" which would block or screen
telephone numbers at the customer's premises or at the tele-
phone company offices. In Carlin Comnnmications, Inc. v.
FCC, 787 F. 2d 846 (CA2 1986) (Carlin II), the Court of Ap-
peals set aside the new regulations because of the FCC's fail-
ure adequately to consider customer premises blocking.
Again, the constitutionality of the underlying legislation was
not addressed.
   The FCC then promulgated a third set of regulations,
which again rejected customer premises blocking but added
to the prior defenses of credit card payment and access code
use a third defense: message scrambling. 52 Fed. Reg.
17760 (1987). Under this system, providers would scramble
the message, which would then be unintelligible without the
use of a descrambler, the sale of which would be limited to
adults. On January 15, 1988, in Carlin Cornmunications,
Inc. v. FCC, 837 F. 2d 546 (Carlin Ill), cert. denied,
488 U. S. 924 (1988), the Court of Appeals for the Second Cir-
cuit held that the new regulations, which made access codes,
along with credit card payments and scrambled messages,
defenses to prosecution under § 223(b) for dial-a-porn provid-
ers, were supported by the evidence, had been properly ar-
rived at, and were a "feasible and effective way to serve" the
"compelling state interest" in protecting minors, 837 F. 2d, at
555; but the Court directed the FCC to reopen proceedings if
a less restrictive technology became available. The Court of
Appeals, however, this time reaching the constitutionality of
the statute, invalidated § 223(b) insofar as it sought to apply
to nonobscene speech. Id., at 560, 561.
   Thereafter, in April 1988, Congress amended § 223(b) of
the Communications Act to prohibit indecent as well as
obscene interstate commercial telephone communications di-
rected to any person regardless of age. The amended stat-
ute, which took effect on July 1, 1988, also eliminated the
requirement that the FCC promulgate regulations for re-
         SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                         123

115                         Opinion of the Court

stricting access to minors since a total ban was imposed on
dial-a-porn, making it illegal for adults, as well as children, to
have access to the sexually explicit messages, Pub. L. 100-
297, 102 Stat. 424. -1 It was this version of the statute that
was in effect when Sable commenced this action. 5

  -1  "(b)(l) Whoever knowingly-
   "(A) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communica-
tion, by means of telephone, makes (directly or by recording device) any
obscene or indecent communication for commercial purposes to any person,
regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call; or
   "(B) permits any telephone facility under such person's control to be
used for an activity prohibited by subparagraph (A),
"shall be fined not more than $50,000 or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both."
   .; After Sable and the federal parties filed their jurisdictional statements
with this Court, but before we noted probable jurisdiction, § 223(b) was
again revised by Congress in § 7524 of the Child Protection and Obscenity
Enforcement Act of 1988, § 7524, 102 Stat. 4502, which was enacted as
Title VII, Subtitle N, of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, Pub. L. 100-
690 (codified at 47 U. S. C. § 223(b) (1988 ed.)). This most recent legisla-
tion, signed into law on November 18, 1988, places the prohibition against
obscene commercial telephone messages in a subsection separate from that
containing the prohibition against indecent messages. In addition, under
the new law, the prohibition against obscene or indecent telephone mes-
sages is enforceable only through criminal penalties and no longer through
administrative proceedings by the FCC.
    Section 223(b) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by§ 7524
of the Child Protection and Obscenity Enforcement Act of 1988, states in
pertinent part:
   "(b)(l) Whoever knowingly-
   "(A) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communica-
tion, by means of telephone, makes (directly or by recording device) any
obscene communication for commercial purposes to any person, regardless
of whether the maker of such communication placed the call; or
    "(B) permits any telephone facility under such person's control to be
used for an activity prohibited by clause (i),
"shall be fined in accordance with title 18 of the United States Code, or
imprisoned not more than two years, or both.
    "(2) Whoever knowingly-
    "(A) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communica-
tion, by means of telephone, makes (directly or by recording device) any
    124                      OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                               Opinion of the Court                   492 U.S.

                                        III
       In the ruling at issue in No. 88-515, the District Court up-
    held § 223(b)'s prohibition of obscene telephone messages as
    constitutional. We agree with that judgment. In contrast
    to the prohibition on indecent communications, there is no
    constitutional barrier to the ban on obscene dial-a-porn re-
    cordings. We have repeatedly held that the protection of
    the First Amendment does not extend to obscene speech.
    See, e. g., Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton, 413 U. S. 49,
    69 (1973). The cases before us today do not require us to de-
    cide what is obscene or what is indecent but rather to deter-
    mine whether Congress is empowered to prohibit transmis-
    sion of obscene telephonic communications.
       In its facial challenge to the statute, Sable argues that the
    legislation creates an impermissible national standard of ob-
    scenity, and that it places message senders in a "double bind"
    by compelling them to tailor all their messages to the least
    tolerant community. 6
       We do not read§ 223(b) as contravening the "contemporary
    community standards" requirement of Miller v. California,
    413 U. S. 15 (1973). Section 223(b) no more establishes a
    "national standard" of obscenity than do federal statutes
I
l   indecent communication for commercial purposes to any person, regardless
    of whether the maker of such communication placed the call; or
       "(B) permits any telephone facility under such person's control to be
    used for an activity prohibited by clause (i),
    "shall be fined not more than $50,000 or imprisoned not more than six
    months, or both." 102 Stat. 4502.
       Since the substantive prohibitions under this amendment remain the
    same, this case is not moot.
       6
         In its jurisdictional statement, Sable also argued that the prohibition
    on obscene calls is not severable from the ban on indecent messages. This
    last claim was not renewed in Sable's brief on the merits, presumably as a
    result of the subsequent modification of the statute in which Congress spe-
    cifically placed the ban on obscene commercial telephone messages in a sub-
    section separate from the prohibition against indecent messages. Thus,
    the severability question is no longer before us.
       SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC            125

115                   Opinion of the Court

prohibiting the mailing of obscene materials, 18 U. S. C.
§ 1461, see Hamling v. United States, 418 U. S. 87 (1974), or
the broadcasting of obscene messages, 18 U. S. C. § 1464.
In United States v. Reidel, 402 U. S. 351 (1971), we said that
Congress could prohibit the use of the mails for commercial
distribution of materials properly classifiable as obscene,
even though those materials were being distributed to willing
adults who stated that they were adults. Similarly, we hold
today that there is no constitutional stricture against Con-
gress' prohibiting the interstate transmission of obscene com-
mercial telephone recordings.
   We stated in United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film,
413 U. S. 123 (1973), that the Miller standards, including the
"contemporary community standards" formulation, apply to
federal legislation. As we have said before, the fact that
"distributors of allegedly obscene materials may be subjected
to varying community standards in the various federal judi-
cial districts into which they transmit the materials does not
render a federal statute unconstitutional because of the fail-
ure of application of uniform national standards of obscenity."
Hamling v. United States, supra, at 106.
   Furthermore, Sable is free to tailor its messages, on a se-
lective basis, if it so chooses, to the communities it chooses
to serve. While Sable may be forced to incur some costs
in developing and implementing a system for screening the
locale of incoming calls, there is no constitutional impedi-
ment to enacting a law which may impose such costs on a me-
dium electing to provide these messages. Whether Sable
chooses to hire operators to determine the source of the calls
or engages with the telephone company to arrange for the
screening and blocking of out-of-area calls or finds another
means for providing messages compatible with community
standards is a decision for the message provider to make.
There is no constitutional barrier under Miller to prohibit-
ing communications that are obscene in some communities
under local standards even though they are not obscene in
126                  OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                       Opinion of the Court            492   u. s.
others. If Sable's audience is comprised of different com-
munities with different local standards, Sable ultimately
bears the burden of complying with the prohibition on ob-
scene messages.
                           IV
   In No. 88-525, the District Court concluded that while the
Government has a legitimate interest in protecting children
from exposure to indecent dial-a-porn messages, § 223(b) was
not sufficiently narrowly drawn to serve that purpose and
thus violated the First Amendment. We agree.
   Sexual expression which is indecent but not obscene is pro-
tected by the First Amendment; and the federal parties do
not submit that the sale of such materials to adults could be
criminalized solely because they are indecent. The Govern-
ment may, however, regulate the content of constitutionally
protected speech in order to promote a compelling interest if
it chooses the least restrictive means to further the articu-
lated interest. We have recognized that there is a compel-
ling interest in protecting the physical and psychological well-
being of minors. This interest extends to shielding minors
from the influence of literature that is not obscene by adult
standards. Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629, 639-640
(1968); New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S. 747, 756-757 (1982).
The Government may serve this legitimate interest, but to
withstand constitutional scrutiny, "it must do so by narrowly
drawn regulations designed to serve those interests without
unnecessarily interfering with First Amendment freedoms.
Hynes v. Mayor of Oradell, 425 U. S., at 620; First National
Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 786 (1978)."
Schaumburg v. Citizens for a Better Environment, 444 U. S.
620, 637 (1980). It is not enough to show that the Govern-
ment's ends are compelling; the means must be carefully tai-
lored to achieve those ends.
   In Butler v. Michigan, 352 U. S. 380 (1957), a unanimous
Court reversed a conviction under a statute which made it an
offense to make available to the general public materials
       SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC            127

115                   Opinion of the Court

found to have a potentially harmful influence on minors.
The Court found the law to be insufficiently tailored since
it denied adults their free speech rights by allowing them
to read only what was acceptable for children. As Justice
Frankfurter said in that case, "[s]urely this is to burn the
house to roast the pig." Id., at 383. In our judgment, this
case, like Butler, presents us with "legislation not reasonably
restricted to the evil with which it is said to deal." Ibid.
   In attempting to justify the complete ban and criminaliza-
tion of the indecent commercial telephone communications
with adults as well as minors, the federal parties rely on FCC
v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978), a case in which
the Court considered whether the FCC has the power to reg-
ulate a radio broadcast that is indecent but not obscene. In
an emphatically narrow holding, the Pacifica Court con-
cluded that special treatment of indecent broadcasting was
justified. .
   Pacifica is readily distinguishable from these cases, most
obviously because it did not involve a total ban on broadcast-
ing indecent material. The FCC rule was not "'intended to
place an absolute prohibition on the broadcast of this type
of language, but rather sought to channel it to times of
day when children most likely would not be exposed to it.'"
Pacifica, supra, at 733, quoting Pacifica Foundation, 59
F. C. C. 2d 892 (1976). The issue of a total ban was not be-
fore the Court. 438 U. S., at 750, n. 28.
   The Pacifica opinion also relied on the "unique" attributes
of broadcasting, noting that broadcasting is "uniquely perva-
sive," can intrude on the privacy of the home without prior
warning as to program content, and is "uniquely accessible
to children, even those too young to read." Id., at 748-749.
The private commercial telephone communications at issue
here are substantially different from the public radio broad-
cast at issue in Pacifica. In contrast to public displays, un-
solicited mailings and other means of expression which the
recipient has no meaningful opportunity to avoid, the dial-it
128                  OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                       Opinion of the Court            492 u. s.

medium requires the listener to take affirmative steps to re-
ceive the communication. There is no "captive audience"
problem here; callers will generally not be unwilling listen-
ers. The context of dial-in services, where a caller seeks and
is willing to pay for the communication, is manifestly differ-
ent from a situation in which a listener does not want the re-
ceived message. Placing a telephone call is not the same as
turning on a radio and being taken by surprise by an indecent
message. Unlike an unexpected outburst on a radio broad-
cast, the message received by one who places a call to a dial-
a-porn service is not so invasive or surprising that it prevents
an unwilling listener from avoiding exposure to it.
   The Court in Pacifica was careful "to emphasize the nar-
rowness of [its] holding." Id., at 750. As we did in Bolger
v. Youngs Drug Products Corp., 463 U. S. 60 (1983), we dis-
tinguish Pacifica from the cases before us and reiterate that
"the government may not 'reduce the adult population . . . to
... only what is fit for children.'" 463 U. S., at 73, quoting
Butler v. Michigan, supra, at 383.
   The federal parties nevertheless argue that the total ban
on indecent commercial telephone communications is justified
because nothing less could prevent children from gaining ac-
cess to such messages. We find the argument quite unper-
suasive. The FCC, after lengthy proceedings, determined
that its credit card, access code, and scrambling rules were a
satisfactory solution to the problem of keeping indecent dial-
a-porn messages out of the reach of minors. The Court of
Appeals, after careful consideration, agreed that these rules
represented a "feasible and effective" way to serve the Gov-
ernment's compelling interest in protecting children. 837 F.
2d, at 555.
   The federal parties now insist that the rules would not be
effective enough-that enterprising youngsters could and
would evade the rules and gain access to communications
from which they should be shielded. There is no evidence in
the record before us to that effect, nor could there be since
         SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                       129

115                        Opinion of the Court

the FCC's implementation of§ 223(b) prior to its 1988 amend-
ment has never been tested over time. In this respect, the
federal parties assert that in amending § 223(b) in 1988, Con-
gress expressed its view that there was not a sufficiently
effective way to protect minors short of the total ban that
it enacted. The federal parties claim that we must give def-
erence to that judgment.
   To the extent that the federal parties suggest that we
should defer to Congress' conclusion about an issue of con-
stitutional law, our answer is that while we do not ignore it,
it is our task in the end to decide whether Congress has vio-
lated the Constitution. This is particularly true where the
Legislature has concluded that its product does not violate
the First Amendment. "Deference to a legislative finding
cannot limit judicial inquiry when First Amendment rights
are at stake." Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Vir-
ginia, 435 U. S. 829, 843 (1978). The federal parties, how-
ever, also urge us to defer to the factual findings by Congress
relevant to resolving the constitutional issue; they rely on
Walters v. National Association of Radiation Survivors, 473
U. S. 305, 331, n. 12 (1985), and Rostker v. Goldberg, 453
U. S. 57, 72-73 (1981). Beyond the fact that whatever def-
erence is due legislative findings would not foreclose our
independent judgment of the facts bearing on an issue of
constitutional law, our answer is that the congressional
record contains no legislative findings that would justify us
in concluding that there is no constitutionally acceptable less
restrictive means, short of a total ban, to achieve the Govern-
ment's interest in protecting minors.
   There is no doubt Congress enacted a total ban on both
obscene and indecent telephone communications. But aside
from conclusory statements during the debates by propo-
nents of the bill, 7 as well as similar assertions in hearings on
  7
    See e. g., 134 Cong. Rec. 7331 (1988) (statement of Rep. Bliley); id., at
7336 (statement of Rep. Coats); id., at 7330 (statement of Rep. Hall; id., at
7599 (statement of Sen. Hatch).
130                      OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                           Opinion of the Court                  492 u. s.

a substantially identical bill the year before, H. R. 1786, 8
that under the FCC regulations minors could still have access
to dial-a-porn messages, the congressional record presented
to us contains no evidence as to how effective or ineffective
the FCC's most recent regulations were or might prove to
be. It may well be that there is no fail-safe method of guar-
anteeing that never will a minor be able to access the dial-a-
porn system. The bill that was enacted, however, was intro-
duced on the floor; nor was there a committee report on the
bill from which the language of the enacted bill was taken.
No Congressman or Senator purported to present a consid-
ered judgment with respect to how often or to what extent
minors could or would circumvent the rules and have access
to dial-a-porn messages. On the other hand, in the hearings
on H. R. 1786, the Committee heard testimony from the
FCC and other witnesses that the FCC rules would be effec-
tive and should be tried out in practice. 9 Furthermore, at
the conclusion of the hearing, the Chairman of the Sub-
committee suggested consultation looking toward "drafting a
piece of legislation that will pass constitutional muster, while
at the same time providing for the practical relief which fam-
ilies and groups are looking for." Hearings, at 235. The bill
never emerged from Committee.
   For all we know from this record, the FCC's technological
approach to restricting dial-a-porn messages to adults who
seek them would be extremely effective, and only a few of the
most enterprising and disobedient young people would man-
age to secure access to such messages. 10 If this is the case,
  8
    Telephone Decency Act of 1987: Hearing on H. R. 1786 before the
Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance of the House Commit-
tee on Energy and Commerce, 100th Cong., 1st Sess., 2, 15 (1987) (Rep.
Bliley) (Hearings); id., at 18 (Rep. Coats); id., at 20 (Rep. Tauke).
  These hearings were held while Carlin III was pending before the Court
of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
  9
    See, e. g., Hearings, at 129, 130, 132-133, 195-196, 198-200, 230-231.
  10
     In the Hearings on H. R. 1786, id., at 231-232, the following colloquy
occurred between Congressman Nielson and Mr. Ward, a United States
Attorney interested in § 223(b) prosecutions:
        SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC                    131

115                     SCALIA, J., concurring

it seems to us that § 223(b) is not a narrowly tailored effort
to serve the compelling interest of preventing minors from
being exposed to indecent telephone messages. Under our
precedents, § 223(b), in its present form, has the invalid ef-
fect of limiting the content of adult telephone conversations
to that which is suitable for children to hear. It is another
case of "burn[ing] the house to roast the pig." Butler v.
Michigan, 352 U. S., at 383.
   Because the statute's denial of adult access to telephone
messages which are indecent but not obscene far exceeds
that which is necessary to limit the access of minors to such
messages, we hold that the ban does not survive constitu-
tional scrutiny.
   Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the District Court
in Nos. 88-515 and 88-525.
                                              It is so ordered.
  JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring.
   I join the opinion of the Court, but add a few words. It
should not be missed that we are making a value judgment
with respect to the indecency portion of the statute. The
conclusion of the reasoning in Part IV of our opinion is as
follows:
        "For all we know from this record, the FCC's techno-
      logical approach to restricting dial-a-porn messages to
      adults who seek them would be extremely effective, and
      only a few of the most enterprising and disobedient

  "Mr. NIELSON. Let me ask the question I asked the previous panel.
Do any of the current alternatives by the FCC-that is the access codes,
the credit cards, or the scrambling-do any of those provide a foolproof
way of limiting dial-a-porn access to adults only? Either of you.
  "Mr. WARD. I think that-it's not foolproof, but I think the access
code requirement and the screening option, both provide the means of dra-
matically reducing the number of calls from minors in the United States,
almost eliminating them. So I think that it would be a very effective way
to do it.
  "Mr. NIELSON. But not foolproof?
  "Mr. WARD. Not absolutely foolproof."
132                   OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                       SCALIA, J., concurring           492   u. s.
      young people would manage to secure access to such
      messages. If this is the case, it seems to us that § 223(b)
      is not a narrowly tailored effort to serve the compelling
      interest of preventing minors from being exposed to in-
      decent telephone messages." Ante, at 130-131.
We could as well have said:
      "We know from this record that the FCC's technologi-
   cal approach to restricting dial-a-porn messages to adults
   who seek them would be inadequate, since some enter-
   prising and disobedient young people would manage to
   secure access to such messages. Since this is the case,
   it seems to us that§ 223(b) is a narrowly tailored effort to
   serve the compelling interest of preventing minors from
   being exposed to indecent telephone messages."
I join the Court's opinion because I think it correct that a
wholesale prohibition upon adult access to indecent speech
cannot be adopted merely because the FCC's alternate pro-
posal could be circumvented by as few children as the evi-
dence suggests. But where a reasonable person draws the
line in this balancing process - that is, how few children ren-
der the risk unacceptable-depends in part upon what mere
"indecency" (as opposed to "obscenity") includes. The more
narrow the understanding of what is "obscene," and hence
the more pornographic what is embraced within the residual
category of "indecency," the more reasonable it becomes to
insist upon greater assurance of insulation from minors. So
while the Court is unanimous on the reasoning of Part IV, I
am not sure it is unanimous on the assumptions underlying
that reasoning. I do not believe, for example, that any sort
of sexual activity portrayed or enacted over the phone lines
would fall outside of the obscenity portion of the statute that
we uphold, and within the indecency portion that we strike
down, so long as it appeals only to "normal, healthy sexual
desires" as opposed to "shameful or morbid" ones. Brockett
v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 498 (1985).
       SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC              133

115                  Opinion of BRENNAN, J.

   In joining Part IV, I do so with the understanding that its
examination of the legislative history (ante, at 129-130) is
merely meant to establish that no more there than anywhere
else can data be found demonstrating the infeasibility of al-
ternative means to provide (given the nature of this material)
adequate protection of minors. I do not understand the
Court to suggest that such data must have been before Con-
gress in order for the law to be valid. Even though "[n]o
Congressman or Senator purported to present a considered
judgment" on infeasibility, ante, at 130, the law would be
valid if infeasibility was true. Neither due process nor the
First Amendment requires legislation to be supported by
committee reports, floor debates, or even consideration, but
only by a vote.
   Finally, I note that while we hold the Constitution pre-
vents Congress from banning indecent speech in this fashion,
we do not hold that the Constitution requires public utilities
to carry it.
  JUSTICE BRENNAN' with whom JUSTICE MARSHALL and
JUSTICE STEVENS join, concurring in part and dissenting
in part.
   I agree that a statute imposing criminal penalties for mak-
ing, or for allowing others to use a telephone under one's con-
trol to make, any indecent telephonic communication for a
commercial purpose is patently unconstitutional. I there-
fore join Parts I, II, and IV of the Court's opinion.
   In my view, however, 47 U. S. C. § 223(b)(l)(A)'s parallel
criminal prohibition with regard to obscene commercial com-
munications likewise violates the First Amendment. I have
long been convinced that the exaction of criminal penalties
for the distribution of obscene materials to consenting adults
is constitutionally intolerable. In my judgment, "the con-
cept of 'obscenity' cannot be defined with sufficient specificity
and clarity to provide fair notice to persons who create and
distribute sexually oriented materials, to prevent substantial
erosion of protected speech as a byproduct of the attempt
134                 OCTOBER TERM, 1988

                     Opinion of BRENNAN, J.           492   u. s.
to suppress unprotected speech, and to avoid very costly in-
stitutional harms." Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton, 413
U. S. 49, 103 (1973) (BRENNAN, J., dissenting). To be sure,
the Government has a strong interest in protecting children
against exposure to pornographic material that might be
harmful to them. New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S. 747, 775-
777 (1982) (BRENNAN, J., concurring in judgment); Ginsberg
v. New York, 390 U. S. 629 (1968). But a complete criminal
ban on obscene telephonic messages for profit is "unconstitu-
tionally overbroad, and therefore invalid on its face," as
a means for achieving this end. Miller v. California, 413
u. s. 15, 47 (1973) (BRENNAN, J., dissenting).
   The very evidence the Court adduces to show that denying
adults access to all indecent commercial messages "far ex-
ceeds that which is necessary to limit the access of minors
to such messages," ante, at 131, also demonstrates that for-
bidding the transmission of all obscene messages is unduly
heavyhanded. After painstaking scrutiny, both the FCC
and the Second Circuit found that "a scheme involving access
codes, scrambling, and credit card payment is a feasible and
effective way to serve this compelling state interest" in safe-
guarding children. Carlin Communications, Inc. v. FCC,
837 F. 2d 546, 555, cert. denied, 488 U. S. 924 (1988). And
during the 1987 hearings on H. R. 1786, a United States
attorney speaking on behalf of the Justice Department de-
scribed the FCC's proposed regulations as "very effective,"
because they would "dramatically reduc[e] the number of
calls from minors in the United States, almost eliminating
them." Telephone Decency Act of 1987: Hearings on H. R.
1786 before the Subcommittee on Telecommunications and
Finance of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce,
100th Cong., 1st Sess., 231 (1987). In addition, as the Court
notes, ante, at 129-130, no contrary evidence was before
Congress when it voted to impose a total prohibition on ob-
scene telephonic messages for profit. Hence, the federal
parties cannot plausibly claim that their legitimate interest
       SABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF CAL., INC. v. FCC           135

115                 Opinion of BRENNAN, J.

in protecting children warrants this Draconian restriction on
the First Amendment rights of adults who seek to hear the
messages that Sable and others provide.
   Section 223(b)(l)(A) unambiguously proscribes all obscene
commercial messages, and thus admits of no construction
that would render it constitutionally permissible. Because
this criminal statute curtails freedom of speech far more rad-
ically than the Government's interest in preventing harm to
minors could possibly license on the record before us, I would
reverse the District Court's decision in No. 88-515 and strike
down the statute on its face. Accordingly, I dissent from
Part III of the Court's opinion.
