204                       OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                                   Syllabus                          460 U. S.


WHITE, MAYOR OF BOSTON, ET AL. v. MASSACHU-
SETTS COUNCIL OF CONSTRUCTION EMPLOYERS,
                INC., ET AL.
        CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT
                    OF MASSACHUSETTS
 No. 81-1003.    Argued November 1, 1982—Decided February 28, 1983
Petitioner Mayor of Boston, Mass., issued an executive order requiring all
  construction projects funded in whole or in part by city funds or funds
  that the city had authority to administer to be performed by a work force
  at least half of which are bona fide residents of the city. The Massachu-
  setts Supreme Judicial Court held the order unconstitutional under the
  Commerce Clause.
Held: The Commerce Clause does not prevent the city from giving effect
  to the Mayor’s executive order. Pp. 206-215.
     (a) When a state or local government enters the market as a par-
  ticipant, it is not subject to the restraints of the Commerce Clause.
  Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp., 426 U. S. 794; Reeves, Inc. v. Stake,
  447 U. S. 429. In a case like the instant one, the only inquiry is whether
  the challenged program constituted direct state or local participation in
  the market. Pp. 206-208.
     (b) Insofar as the city expended only its own funds in entering into
  construction contracts for public projects, it was a market participant
  and entitled to be treated as such under the rule of Alexandria Scrap
  Corp. Even if implementation of the Mayor’s order might have a sig-
  nificant impact on specialized construction firms employing out-of-state
  residents, this is not relevant to the inquiry of whether the city is partici-
  pating in the marketplace when it provides funds for construction. Im-
  pact on out-of-state residents figures in the equation only after it is de-
  cided that the city is regulating the market rather than participating in
  it, for only in the former case need it be determined whether any burden
  on interstate commerce is permitted by the Commerce Clause. And,
  even if the Mayor’s order is characterized as sweeping too broadly, such
  characterization is relevant only if the Commerce Clause imposes re-
  straints on the city’s activity and is no help in deciding whether those
  restraints apply. Pp. 209-211.
     (c) Insofar as the Mayor’s order was applied to projects funded in
  part with funds obtained from certain federal programs, the order was
   affirmatively sanctioned by the pertinent regulations of those programs.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                         205

204                         Opinion of the Court

  Where the restrictions imposed by the city on construction projects
  financed in part by federal funds are directed by Congress, then no
  dormant Commerce Clause issue is presented. Pp. 212-213.
384 Mass. 466, 425 N. E. 2d 346, reversed and remanded.

   Rehn quis t , J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Burge r ,
C. J., and Bren nan , Marsh al l , Powe ll , Ste ve ns , and O’Con no r , JJ.,
joined. Bla ckmu n , J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting
in part, in which Whit e , J., joined, post, p. 215.

  Laurence H. Tribe argued the cause for petitioners. With
him on the briefs were Kurt M. Pressman, Mark D. Stem,
and Harold J. Carroll.
  Paul J. Kingston argued the cause and filed a brief for
*
respondents.

  Justi ce Rehnq uist delivered the opinion of the Court.
  In 1979 the Mayor of Boston, Mass., issued an executive
order*1 which required that all construction projects funded

   *Arthur Kinoy filed a brief for the Affirmative Action Coordinating Cen-
ter et al. as amici curiae urging reversal.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed by J. Albert Woll,
Laurence J. Cohen, Laurence Gold, and George Kaufmann for the Ameri-
can Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations et al.;
and by Stephen A. Bokat for the Chamber of Commerce of the United
States.
   Wayne S. Henderson and Robert E. Dickinson filed a brief for the New
England Legal Foundation et al. as amici curiae.
   1 The executive order provides:
   “On any construction project funded in whole or in part by City funds, or
funds which, in accordance with a federal grant or otherwise, the City ex-
pends or administers, and to which the City is a signatory to the construc-
tion contract, the worker hours on a craft-by-craft basis shall be per-
formed, in accordance with the contract documents established herewith,
as follows:
   “a. at least 50% by bona fide Boston residents;
   “b. at least 25% by minorities;
   “c. at least 10% by women.”
Only the residency requirement is being challenged.
206                      OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                           Opinion of the Court                  460 U. S.

in whole or in part by city funds, or funds which the city had
the authority to administer, should be performed by a work
force consisting of at least half bona fide residents of Boston.2
The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts decided that
the order was unconstitutional, observing that the Commerce
Clause “presents a clear obstacle to the city’s order.” 384
Mass. 466, 479, 425 N. E. 2d 346, 354 (1981). We granted
certiorari to decide whether the Commerce Clause of the
United States Constitution, Art. I, §8, cl. 3, prevents the
city from giving effect to the Mayor’s order. 455 U. S. 919
(1982). We now conclude that it does not and reverse.
                                 I
   We were first asked in Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp.,
426 U. S. 794 (1976), to decide whether state and local gov-
ernments are restrained by the Commerce Clause when they
seek to effect commercial transactions not as “regulators” but
as “market participants.” In that case, the Maryland Legis-
lature, in an attempt to encourage the recycling of aban-
doned automobiles, offered a bounty for every Maryland-
titled automobile converted into scrap if the scrap processor
supplied documentation of ownership. An amendment to
the Maryland statute imposed more exacting documentation
requirements on out-of-state than in-state processors, and
out-of-state processors in turn demanded more exacting doc-
umentation from those who sold the junked automobiles for
scrap. As a result, it became easier for those in possession
of the automobiles to sell to in-state processors. “The prac-
tical effect was substantially the same as if Maryland had
withdrawn altogether the availability of bounties on hulks
delivered by unlicensed suppliers to licensed non-Maryland
processors.” Id., at 803, n. 13. In upholding the Maryland
   2 In 1980, of approximately $483 million expended on construction in the
city of Boston, some $54 million, or 11%, was spent on projects to which the
executive order applied. Of this latter amount, approximately $34 million
represented projects being funded in part through federal Urban Develop-
ment Action Grants (UDAG’s).
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                         207

204                        Opinion of the Court

statute in the face of a Commerce Clause challenge, we said
that “[n]othing in the purposes animating the Commerce
Clause prohibits a State, in the absence of congressional ac-
tion, from participating in the market and exercising the
right to favor its own citizens over others.” Id., at 810 (foot-
notes omitted). Because Maryland was participating in the
market, rather than acting as a market regulator, we con-
cluded that the Commerce Clause was not “intended to re-
quire independent justification,” id., at 809, for the statutory
bounty.
   We faced the question again in Reeves, Inc. n . Stake, 447
U. S. 429 (1980), when confronted with a South Dakota policy
to confine the sale of cement by a state-operated cement
plant to residents of South Dakota. We underscored the
holding of Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp., saying:
         “The basic distinction drawn in Alexandria Scrap be-
      tween States as market participants and States as mar-
      ket regulators makes good sense and sound law. As
      that case explains, the Commerce Clause responds prin-
      cipally to state taxes and regulatory measures impeding
      free private trade in the national marketplace. [Cita-
      tion omitted.] There is no indication of a constitutional
      plan to limit the ability of the States themselves to oper-
      ate freely in the free market.” 447 U. S., at 436-437.3

   3 We also noted the policy in support of this limitation on the Commerce
Clause:
   “Restraint in this area is also counseled by considerations of state sover-
eignty, the role of each State ‘“as guardian and trustee for its people,’”
Heim v. McCall, 239 U. S. 175, 191 (1915), quoting Atkin n . Kansas, 191
U. S. 207,222-223 (1903), and ‘the long recognized right of trader or manu-
facturer, engaged in an entirely private business, freely to exercise his own
independent discretion as to parties with whom he will deal.’ United
States v. Colgate & Co., 250 U. S. 300, 307 (1919). Moreover, state pro-
prietary activities may be, and often are, burdened with the same restric-
tions imposed on private market participants. Evenhandedness suggests
that, when acting as proprietors, States should similarly share existing
208                     OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                          Opinion of the Court                 460 U. S.

We concluded that South Dakota, “as a seller of cement, un-
questionably fits the ‘market participant’ label” and applied
the “general rule of Alexandria Scrap.” Id., at 440.
  Alexandria Scrap and Reeves, therefore, stand for the
proposition that when a state or local government enters the
market as a participant it is not subject to the restraints of
the Commerce Clause. As we said in Reeves, in this kind of
case there is “a single inquiry: whether the challenged ‘pro-
gram constituted direct state participation in the market.’”
447 U. S., at 436, n. 7. We reaffirm that principle now.
   The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts concluded
that the city of Boston is not participating in the market in
the sense described in Alexandria Scrap Corp, and Reeves
because the order applies where the city is acting in a nonpro-
prietary capacity, has a significant impact on interstate com-
merce, is more sweeping than necessary to achieve its objec-
tives, and applies to funds the city receives from federal
grants. 384 Mass., at 479-480, 425 N. E. 2d, at 354-355.
For the same reasons the court found that the city is not a
market participant, it concluded that the executive order vio-
lated the substantive restraints of the Commerce Clause.4
Ibid.
                               II
   Petitioners and respondents both, to a greater or lesser ex-
tent, seek to have us decide questions not presented by the
record in this case. In support of the Massachusetts court’s
finding that the city is acting in a nonproprietary capacity,
respondents urge that much of the construction subject to the
Mayor’s order involved nonpublic projects that were financed
largely through private funds. While the Mayor’s order by

freedoms from federal constraints, including the inherent limits of the
Commerce Clause.” 447 U. S., at 438-439 (footnotes omitted).
   4 Respondents made several other challenges to the order, none of which
are before us. Respondents also directed challenges to resident prefer-
ences contained in other state and local laws. None of these provisions is
before us.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                        209

204                        Opinion of the Court

its terms would appear to apply to such construction, there is
simply nothing in the record before us to support the conclu-
sion that city funds were used for these types of construction
projects. Respondents, had they wished to raise this ques-
tion, were obligated to offer some evidence that city funds
and private funds were used jointly to finance construction of
some of the projects which were in fact subjected to the pro-
visions of the Mayor’s order; nothing in the record supports
such a conclusion.5 The only issues before us, then, are the
propriety of applying the Mayor’s executive order to projects
funded wholly with city funds and projects funded in part
with federal funds. We address first the application of the
order to city-funded projects.
   The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts expressed
reservations as to the application of the “market participa-
tion” principle to the city here, reasoning that “the imple-
mentation of the mayor’s order will have a significant impact
on those firms which engage in specialized areas of construc-
tion and employ permanent works crews composed of out-of-
State residents.” 384 Mass., at 479, 425 N. E. 2d, at 354.
Even if this conclusion is factually correct,6 it is not relevant
   6 The case was submitted below on an agreed statement of facts. The
only reference in that statement to the funds affected by the order
provides:
“The approximate dollar value of construction, both private and public,
within the City of Boston in 1980 was $482,886,000; of that amount approxi-
mately [$]54,421,040 represented construction projects ‘funded in whole or
in part by City funds, or funds which, in accordance with a federal grant or
otherwise, the City expends or administers, and to which the City is a sig-
natory to the construction contract’ to which the Executive Order, by
its terms, was applicable. Of that $54,421,040 approximately $34,000,-
000 represented projects involving Urban Development Action Grants.”
Agreed Statement of Facts, at A42.
   6 The record does not readily support a finding of “significant impact” on
firms employing out-of-state residents. The parties stipulated that a
“small number of plaintiff contractors are out-of-state contractors who
have regular and permanent work crews comprised entirely of out-of-state
residents. These contractors for the most part are those who perform
210                      OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                           Opinion of the Court                  460 U. S.

to the inquiry of whether the city is participating in the mar-
ketplace when it provides city funds for building construc-
tion. If the city is a market participant, then the Commerce
Clause establishes no barrier to conditions such as these
which the city demands for its participation. Impact on out-
of-state residents figures in the equation only after it is
decided that the city is regulating the market rather than
participating in it, for only in the former case need it be de-
termined whether any burden on interstate commerce is per-
mitted by the Commerce Clause.
   The same may be said of the Massachusetts court’s finding
that the executive order sweeps too broadly, creating more
burden than is necessary to accomplish its stated objectives.
Id., at 480, 425 N. E. 2d, at 355. While relevant if the Com-
merce Clause imposes restraints on the city’s activity, this
characterization is of no help in deciding whether those re-
straints apply. The Massachusetts court relied in part on
our decision in Hicklin n . Orbeck, 437 U. S. 518 (1978), say-
ing that “as in Hicklin, supra, there is a broadly drawn stat-
ute which sweeps far wider than merely favoring unemployed
or underemployed local residents.” 384 Mass., at 480, 425
N. E. 2d, at 355.
   In Hicklin we considered an Alaska statute which required
employment in all work connected with oil and gas leases to
which the State was a party to be offered first to “qualified”
Alaska residents in preference to nonresidents. The State
sought to justify the “Alaska Hire” law on the ground that

specialty work. .. .” Id., at A41 (emphasis added). Although the parties
also stipulated that some out-of-state workers who would otherwise have
been employed on the projects would be unemployed and that some out-of-
state contractors would be discouraged from bidding on public construction
work, id., at A37, the record does not reveal that any significant number of
out-of-state workers or contractors has withdrawn from the construction
market because of the order. Furthermore, the record does not show that
the increased employment of city residents in publicly funded construction
projects has been accompanied by a decline in the percentage of out-of-
state residents. See id., at A48.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                         211

204                         Opinion of the Court

the underlying oil and gas were owned by the State itself.
Analyzing the case under the Privileges and Immunities
Clause of Art. IV, § 2, we held that mere ownership of a natu-
ral resource did not in all circumstances render a state regu-
lation such as the “Alaska Hire” law immune from attack
under that Clause. We summarized our view of the Alaska
statute in these words:
      “In sum, the Act is an attempt to force virtually all busi-
      nesses that benefit in some way from the economic ripple
      effect of Alaska’s decision to develop its oil and gas re-
      sources to bias their employment practices in favor of
      the State’s residents.” 437 U. S., at 531.
   Even though respondents no longer press the Privileges
and Immunities Clause holding of Hicklin in support of their
Commerce Clause argument, we note that on the record be-
fore us the application of the Mayor’s executive order to con-
tracts involving only city funds does not represent the sort of
“attempt to force virtually all businesses that benefit in some
way from the economic ripple effect” of the city’s decision to
enter into contracts for construction projects “to bias their
employment practices in favor of the [city’s] residents.”7

   7Just ice Bla ckmun ’s opinion dissenting in part, post, p. 215, argues
that the Mayor’s order goes beyond market participation because it regu-
lates employment contracts between public contractors and their em-
ployees. We agree with Just ice Black mun that there are some limits
on a state or local government’s ability to impose restrictions that reach be-
yond the immediate parties with which the government transacts business.
Cf. Hicklin v. Orbeck, 437 U. S. 518, 529-531 (1978). We find it unneces-
sary in this case to define those limits with precision, except to say that we
think the Commerce Clause does not require the city to stop at the bound-
ary of formal privity of contract. In this case, the Mayor’s executive order
covers a discrete, identifiable class of economic activity in which the city is
a major participant. Everyone affected by the order is, in a substantial if
informal sense, “working for the city.” Wherever the limits of the market
participation exception may lie, we conclude that the executive order in
this case falls well within the scope of Alexandria Scrap and Reeves.
212                      OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                            Opinion of the Court                  460 U. S.

  The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts also ob-
served that “a significant percentage of the funds affected by
the order are received from Federal sources.” 384 Mass., at
479, 425 N. E. 2d, at 354. The record does indicate that of
approximately $54 million expended on projects affected by
the Mayor’s executive order, some $34 million represented
projects being funded in part through UDAG’s.8 While the
record assigns specific dollar amounts only for UDAG’s, the
parties also have stipulated that the executive order applies
to Community Development Block Grants (CDBG’s) and Eco-
nomic Development Administration Grants (EDAG’s).9

   8 Not all UDAG projects in Boston have been subjected to the executive
order. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) publica-
tions indicate that in 1980 Boston received $28,600,000 through UDAG’s
and that this money was to be spent on projects costing a total of $397 mil-
lion. U. S. Dept, of HUD, UDAG Project Approval List, Region I, p. 1
(Boston, Mass., Feb. 9, 1982). While we do not know what percentage of
the $34 million spent on projects affected by the executive order was in fact
UDAG money, we do know that overall UDAG funds constituted 7% of the
total costs of projects they were expended on.
   9 UDAG’s are administered by HUD pursuant to the Housing and Com-
munity Development Act of 1977, 42 U. S. C. §5318 (1976 ed., Supp. V).
The HUD regulations governing the program are found at 24 CFR pt. 570,
subpart G (1982). CDBG’s are administered by HUD pursuant to the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U. S. C. § 5301 et
seq. (1976 ed. and Supp. V), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR
pt. 570 (1982). EDAG’s are administered by the Department of Com-
merce in accordance with the Public Works and Economic Development
Act of 1965, 42 U. S. C. § 3131 et seq. (1976 ed. and Supp. V), and the im-
plementing regulations at 13 CFR pt. 305 (1982).
   Respondents have asserted in this Court that the executive order also
applies to funds the city receives from the Department of Transportation.
In the agreed statement of facts the parties stipulated that a resident pref-
erence in a state statute challenged below applied to DOT funds. Agreed
Statement of Facts, at A45. There is, however, nothing in the record
to indicate that DOT funds are affected by the order. In fact, the parties
stipulate that the affected federal funds come from UDAG’s, CDBG’s, and
EDAG’s. Id., at A43-A44. Without support in the record for a con-
trary conclusion, we decide this case as though DOT funds are not in-
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                        213

204                        Opinion of the Court

   But all of this proves too much. The Commerce Clause
is a grant of authority to Congress, and not a restriction
on the authority of that body. See American Power &
Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U. S. 90 (1946); Gibbons v. Ogden, 9
Wheat. 1 (1824). Congress, unlike a state legislature au-
thorizing similar expenditures, is not limited by any negative
implications of the Commerce Clause in the exercise of its
spending power. Where state or local government action is
specifically authorized by Congress, it is not subject to the
Commerce Clause even if it interferes with interstate com-
merce. Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona, 325 U. S. 761, 769
(1945). Thus, if the restrictions imposed by the city on con-
struction projects financed in part by federal funds are di-
rected by Congress then no dormant Commerce Clause issue
is presented.
   An examination of the applicable statutes reveals that
these federal programs were intended to encourage economic
revitalization, including improved opportunities for the poor,
minorities, and unemployed.*1011 Examination of the regula-
tions set forth in the margin indicates that the Mayor’s execu-
tive order sounds a harmonious note; the federal regulations
for each program affirmatively permit the type of parochial
favoritism expressed in the order.11
volved. See Ramsey v. Mine Workers, 401 U. S. 302, 312 (1971); Tyrrell
v. District of Columbia, 243 U. S. 1, 4-6 (1917).
   10 See 42 U. S. C. §5318 (1976 ed., Supp. V) (UDAG’s); §5301 (1976 ed.
and Supp. V) (CDBG’s); §3131 (EDAG’s).
   11 In issuing implementing regulations to carry out its authority under
the UDAG program, HUD requires that a city certify that its project
would not be undertaken by the private sector without public funds and
that the project will alleviate economic distress by helping the poor, minor-
ities, and unemployed. 24 CFR § 570.458(c) (1982). The regulations fur-
ther provide that the city must “comply with . . . Section 3 of the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, and implementing regu-
lations at 24 CFR Part 135.” 24 CFR § 570.458(c)(14)(ix)(D) (1982). The
regulations implementing that Act provide that “to the greatest extent fea-
sible opportunities for training and employment arising in connection with
the planning and carrying out of any project assisted under any such pro-
214                       OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                            Opinion of the Court                      460 U. S.

                                      Ill
   We hold that on the record before us the application of the
Mayor’s executive order to the contracts in question did not
violate the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitu-
tion.12 Insofar as the city expended only its own funds in en-

gram be given to lower income persons residing in the area of such project.
. . .” 24 CFR § 135.1(a)(2)(i) (1982) (emphasis added).
   Similarly, CDBG regulations provide that a recipient of funds must
“comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968,
as amended, requiring that to the greatest extent feasible opportunities for
training and employment be given to lower-income residents of the project
area and contracts for work in connection with the project be awarded to
eligible business concerns which are located in, or owned in substantial
part by, persons residing in the area of the project.” 24 CFR § 570.307(m)
(1982) (emphasis added).
EDAG regulations provide:
“The maximum feasible employment of local labor shall be made in the con-
struction of public works and development facility projects receiving direct
grants and loans. Accordingly, every contractor and subcontractor under-
taking to do work on any such project which is or reasonably may be done
as on-site work, shall be required to employ in carrying out such contract
work, qualified persons who regularly reside in the designated area where
such project is to be located, or in the case of economic development cen-
ters, qualified persons who regularly reside in the center or in the adjacent
or nearby redevelopment areas within the economic development district.
. . .” 13 CFR § 305.54(a) (1982) (emphasis added).
   12 Respondents ask us to decide whether the executive order offends the
Privileges and Immunities Clause of Art. IV, § 2, which provides: “The Cit-
izens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citi-
zens in the several States.” In addressing this issue, the Massachusetts
court said:
“The preference is for inhabitants of the city, and its ‘negative’ effect is felt
in significant part by other citizens of the Commonwealth, as well as by
residents of other States. In such circumstances it may be more difficult
to find a violation of the privileges and immunités clause because the dis-
crimination adversely affects citizens of the Commonwealth as well.” 384
Mass. 466, 478, 425 N. E. 2d 346, 354 (1981).
 Because of its disposition under the Commerce Clause, however, the court
did not resolve this issue.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                       215

204                     Opinion of Bla ckm un , J.

tering into construction contracts for public projects, it was a
market participant and entitled to be treated as such under
the rule of Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp., 426 U. S. 794
(1976). Insofar as the Mayor’s executive order was applied
to projects funded in part with funds obtained from the fed-
eral programs described above, the order was affirmatively
sanctioned by the pertinent regulations of those programs.
The judgment of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachu-
setts is therefore reversed, and the case is remanded to that
court for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
                                                       It is so ordered.
  Justi ce Blac kmu n , with whom Justi ce White joins,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
   I agree with the Court that this case presents two issues:
(1) the validity of the Mayor’s executive order as applied to
projects funded entirely by the city of Boston with its own
revenues, and (2) the validity of the order as applied to
projects funded in part with federal revenues pursuant to
certain congressionally created grant programs.
                                I
  Respecting the second issue, I am in agreement with the
Court’s conclusion that Congress, in creating the grant pro-
grams in question, specifically authorized “the type of paro-
chial favoritism expressed in the order.” Ante, at 213. As
the Court holds, Congress unquestionably has the power to
authorize state or local discrimination against interstate com-
merce that otherwise would violate the dormant aspect of the
Commerce Clause. Prudential Ins. Co. v. Benjamin, 328
U. S. 408, 418-427 (1946).*  1
  This question has not been, to any great extent, briefed or argued in this
Court. We did not grant certiorari on the issue and remand without pass-
ing on its merits. See General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric
Co., 304 U. S. 175, 177-178 (1938).
  1 Because the Court does not pass on the possible invalidity of the ex-
ecutive order under the Privileges and Immunities Clause, U. S. Const.,
216                     OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                         Opinion of Black mun , J.               460 U. S.

                                    II
   I do not agree, however, with the Court’s holding that the
executive order is immune from Commerce Clause scrutiny
insofar as it applies to city activities undertaken without spe-
cific congressional authorization.
   The Court rejects certain arguments advanced by the Su-
preme Judicial Court of Massachusetts as relevant only if the
order were “regulation of,” rather than “participation in,” the
market. Ante, at 210-211. The Court holds that the order
is the latter rather than the former because, in the Court’s
view, it “falls well within the scope,” ante, at 211, n. 7, of the
Court’s decisions in Hughes n . Alexandria Scrap Corp., 426
U. S. 794 (1976), and Reeves, Inc. v. Stake, 447 U. S. 429
(1980). With due respect, this plainly is not so.
   In Alexandria Scrap, the effect of the Maryland statute
was to offer a subsidy only to scrap processors located within
the State. See 426 U. S., at 803, n. 13. The Court held that,
a State, free from Commerce Clause scrutiny, may enter “the
market as a purchaser, in effect, of a potential article of inter-
state commerce” and “restric[t] its trade to its own citizens or
businesses within the State.” Id., at 808. Alexandria
Scrap thus permits a State to prefer its residents as direct
recipients of certain subsidies. See Reeves, 447 U. S., at
440, n. 14 (discussing Alexandria Scrap).
   In Reeves, South Dakota refused to sell cement to out-of-
state consumers until the orders of all in-state customers
were filled. The Court held that the Commerce Clause is
not implicated when a State prefers its own residents as di-
rect purchasers of state-produced goods. Neither Reeves

Art. IV, § 2, cl. 1, it has no occasion to determine whether Congress may
authorize, through affirmative legislation, what otherwise would be a viola-
tion of that Clause. This question may present considerations different
from those presented by the dormant Commerce Clause. See L. Tribe,
American Constitutional Law § 6-31, p. 403, n. 18 (1978). For the reasons
given by the Court, ante, at 214-215, n. 12, I also decline to reach this
issue.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                          217

204                      Opinion of Bla ckmun , J.

nor Alexandria Scrap, however, went beyond ensuring that
the States enjoy “ ‘the long recognized right of trader or man-
ufacturer, engaged in an entirely private business, freely to
exercise his own independent discretion as to parties with
whom he will deal.’” Reeves, 447 U. S., at 438-439, quoting
United States v. Colgate & Co., 250 U. S. 300, 307 (1919).
   Boston’s executive order goes much further. The city has
not attempted merely to choose the “parties with whom [it]
will deal.”2 Instead, it has imposed as a condition of obtain-
ing a public construction contract the requirement that pri-
vate firms hire only Boston residents for 50% of specified
jobs.3 Thus, the order directly restricts the ability of private
employers to hire nonresidents, and thereby curtails nonres-
idents’ access to jobs with private employers. I had thought
it well established that, under the Commerce Clause, States
and localities cannot impose restrictions granting their own
residents either the exclusive right, or a priority, to private
sector economic opportunities. See H. P. Hood & Sons v.
Du Mond, 336 U. S. 525 (1949); Pennsylvania v. West Vir-
ginia, 262 U. S. 553 (1923); cf. Hicklin v. Orbeck, 437 U. S.
518 (1978) (decided under the Privileges and Immunities
Clause).
   Such restrictions are not immune from attack under the
 Commerce Clause solely because the city has imposed them
as conditions to its contracts with private employers. In
Reeves, the Court, I thought, carefully explored reasons the
policy there at issue might not have been entitled to the mar-
ket participant exemption, notwithstanding the policy’s es-
 sentially proprietary nature. 447 U. S., at 440-447. The
   2 Had the city decided to limit its own hiring to Boston residents, its deci-
sion would almost certainly have been permissible under McCarthy v.
Philadelphia Civil Service Comm’n, 424 U. S. 645 (1976), as well as Reeves
and Alexandria Scrap.
   8 That the order limits the preference to 50% of the covered jobs is, of
course, not relevant to the applicability of the market participant exemp-
tion. If such preferences do not implicate the dormant Commerce Clause,
they are immune even if they apply to 100% of a contractor’s jobs.
218                  OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                    Opinion of Bla ckmu n , J.         460 U. S.

Court also observed that the line between “market partici-
pant” and “market regulator” is not always bright: “South
Dakota, as a seller of cement, unquestionably fits the ‘market
participant’ label more comfortably than a State acting to
subsidize local scrap processors.” Id., at 440. See id., at
440, n. 14 (“We have no occasion here to inquire whether sub-
sidy programs unlike that involved in Alexandria Scrap war-
rant characterization as proprietary, rather than regulatory,
activity”).
   The line between regulation and market participation, for
purposes of the Commerce Clause, should be drawn with ref-
erence to the constitutional values giving rise to the market
participant exemption itself. As the Court recognized in
Reeves, the most important of these is that historically the
“Commerce Clause responds principally to state taxes and
regulatory measures impeding free private trade in the na-
tional marketplace”; it was not designed “to limit the ability
of the States themselves to operate freely in the free mar-
ket.” Reeves, 447 U. S., at 437. The Court also observed
that the distinction between participation and regulation
rests on core notions of state sovereignty, coupled with the
traditional right of private traders to determine the identities
of their bargaining partners free from governmental interfer-
ence. Id., at 438-439. The legitimacy of a claim to the mar-
ket participant exemption thus should turn primarily on
whether a particular state action more closely resembles an
attempt to impede trade among private parties, or an at-
tempt, analogous to the accustomed right of merchants in the
private sector, to govern the State’s own economic conduct
and to determine the parties with whom it will deal.
   The simple unilateral refusals to deal that the Court en-
countered in Reeves and Alexandria Scrap were relatively
pure examples of a seller’s or purchaser’s simply choosing its
bargaining partners, “long recognized” as the right of traders
in our free enterprise system. The executive order in this
case, in notable contrast, by its terms is a direct attempt to
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                         219

204                      Opinion of Bla ckmu n , J.

govern private economic relationships. The power to dictate
to another those with whom he may deal is viewed with suspi-
cion and closely limited in the context of purely private eco-
nomic relations.4 When exercised by government, such a
power is the essence of regulation.

   4 Compare United States v. Colgate & Co., 250 U. S. 300, 307 (1919) (un-
questioned right of trader unilaterally to refuse to deal with those retailers
who do not adhere to retail price schedule), relied upon in Reeves, 447
U. S., at 439, with United States v. Parke, Davis & Co., 362 U. S. 29,
45-46 (1960) (trader violates Sherman Act by inducing wholesalers to
refuse to deal with retailers who will not adhere to price schedule), United
States v. Arnold, Schwinn & Co., 388 U. S. 365, 382 (1967) (“Once the
manufacturer has parted with title and risk, he has parted with dominion
over the product, and his effort thereafter to restrict territory or persons
to whom the product may be transferred” violates the Sherman Act), and
Continental T. V., Inc. v. GTE Sylvania Inc., 433 U. S. 36, 49 (1977)
(overruling Schwinn in part; nonprice vertical market restrictions are not
per se unlawful, but should be judged individually under the “rule of rea-
son” to determine whether they “should be prohibited as imposing an un-
reasonable restraint on competition”).
   Conditioning a willingness to deal with potential bargaining partners on
their derivative refusals to deal with others is particularly suspect where
those whom the trader attempts to isolate are its competitors. See Lorain
Journal Co. v. United States, 342 U. S. 143, 154-155 (1951). Here, the
citizens of Boston, through their Mayor, have sought to do just this by re-
quiring those wishing to deal with their city government to refuse to hire
nonresidents competing with citizens for jobs. This anticompetitive and
suspect goal will be present whenever a unit of state or local government
requires recipients of public contracts or government subsidies to deal only
with that government’s constituents.
   Congress, in § 8(e) of the National Labor Relations Act, has expressly
prohibited labor organizations from requiring employers to agree “to cease
or refrain from handling, using, selling, transporting or otherwise dealing
in any of the products of any other employer, or to cease doing business
with any other person,” and has declared any such agreement to be void.
29 U. S. C. § 158(e). On the other hand, permitting labor unions to refuse
to deal with the primary employer is the staple of federal labor policy, and
nothing prevents an employer from refusing unilaterally to deal with oth-
ers for any lawful reason. To be sure, in the construction industry, at
issue in the executive order, collective-bargaining agreements are ex-
pressly exempted from this proscription of “hot cargo” clauses. Ibid.; see
220                      OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                        Opinion of Bla ckm un , J.                460 U. S.

   Attempts directly to constrict private economic choices
through contractual conditions are particularly akin to regu-
lation because, unlike simple refusals to deal but like conven-
tional market regulation, they threaten to extend their regu-
latory impact well beyond the transaction in which the State
has an interest. A requirement that firms wishing to deal
with the State hire a certain percentage of their work force
from among state residents in practice may constrict the
opportunities of nonresidents to work on projects with no
connection whatever with the governmental entity imposing
the condition. A firm that relies to any significant degree on
a permanent work force will be compelled to favor local resi-
dents for these positions. An analogous requirement that
such firms purchase only from in-state suppliers the goods
used in state projects also might constrict interstate trade
wholly unrelated to government business. If economic con-
siderations counsel in favor of stable relationships with sup-
pliers, a firm wishing to deal with the State will be compelled
to favor local firms across the board. The effect of such
“conditions” on the ability of nonresidents to deal with af-
fected firms would be virtually identical to the effect of a con-
ventional market regulation requiring such practices.
   In Reeves, the Court cited “considerations of state sov-
ereignty” as another factor counseling restraint in applying
the Commerce Clause to “proprietary” activity. The States
have a sovereign interest in some freedom from federal inter-
ference when hiring state employees. It might be argued
that because the city could have chosen to build the projects
covered by the order itself and, free from dormant Com-

Woelke & Romero Framing, Inc. v. NLRB, 456 U. S. 645 (1982). That
Congress has chosen, however, for reasons peculiar to labor policy and the
history and nature of collective bargaining in the construction industry, to
exclude collective agreements in that industry from this restriction does
not detract from my basic point: there is a world of difference between the
kind of “proprietary” activity at issue here and the kind exempted from
dormant Commerce Clause scrutiny in Reeves and Alexandria Scrap.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                      221

204                     Opinion of Bla ckmun , J.

merce Clause restraint, could have hired local residents, the
city may contract to have the work done by private firms on
the condition that the firms hire local residents.5 But the
Court never has suggested that the State’s special sovereign
interest in determining whom it will hire, and in setting the
terms and conditions of public employment, extends to dictat-
ing whom private parties with which it contracts will hire, or
the terms and conditions of private employment. In my
view, the State’s interest in managing its relations with its
employees is fully safeguarded by its power to do the work
itself if it so chooses, with such immunity from the Commerce
Clause as attaches in that situation. The Court’s observa-
tion in Reeves, 447 U. S., at 438-439, tying concerns for state
sovereignty to a merchant’s customary power to exercise his
independent discretion as to the parties with whom he will
deal, is fully consistent with this view. But when a State at-
tempts to arrogate unto itself the “independent discretion” of
others to deal with whom they please, it exercises regulatory
power that must be consistent with the requirements of the
Commerce Clause. See generally Varat, State “Citizenship”
and Interstate Equality, 48 U. Chi. L. Rev. 487, 560-564
(1981).
   This approach fully safeguards the power of the State to
limit to state residents the direct benefits of subsidy pro-
grams supported with state funds. It permits a State to pre-
fer local businesses as providers of the goods it purchases in
the marketplace, and to prefer local residents as direct pur-
chasers or recipients of state-created bounty. But it does
not permit a State to impose clear market regulations as a
condition of a contract or of a subsidy, using the tremendous
power of the state treasury directly to impede the free flow
of private trade in interstate commerce, or, what may be
worse, to discriminate against such commerce. South Da-
kota should not be immune from the Commerce Clause if, for
  6 Indeed, the Court appears to rely on this argument.   See ante, at 211,
n. 7.
222                    OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                       Opinion of Bla ckmu n , J.             460 U. S.

example, it imposes as a condition on the sale of state-
owned cement that purchasers employ only South Dakota resi-
dents, or resell the cement only to South Dakota customers.
Cf. Reeves, 447 U. S., at 444, n. 17 (“Nor has South Dakota cut
off access to its own cement altogether, for the policy does
not bar resale of South Dakota cement to out-of-state pur-
chasers”). Similarly, Maryland should not be free of Com-
merce Clause scrutiny if it imposes as a condition of receiving
a bounty, like that at issue in Alexandria Scrap, that scrap
processors employ only Maryland residents, or resell the proc-
essed scrap only in-state. In my view such conditions, like
the condition at issue here, directly intrude upon the historic
Commerce Clause concern with “measures impeding free pri-
vate trade in the national marketplace.” Reeves, 447 U. S.,
at 437.
   I do not intend to suggest that the Court necessarily would
decide these variations of Alexandria Scrap and Reeves as it
has decided this case; evidently, the Court acknowledges that
“restrictions that reach beyond the immediate parties with
which the government transacts business” pose Commerce
Clause questions more profound than did the restrictions at
issue in Alexandria Scrap and Reeves. Ante, at 211, n. 7.
The Court indicates that it upholds the executive order on
the understanding that, with the exception of the federal
grant programs, it is applied solely to construction projects
funded entirely by the city. Ante, at 208-209. Because
many construction contractors hire a substantially different
work crew for each project they undertake, applied to such
projects the Mayor’s order is arguably limited, as the Court
says, to a “discrete, identifiable class of economic activity in
which the city is a major participant.” Ante, at 211, n. 7.6

  6See S. Rep. No. 187, 86th Cong., 1st Sess., 27 (1959) (“The occasional
nature of the employment relationship makes [the construction] industry
markedly different from manufacturing and other types of enterprise. An
individual employee typically works for many employers and for none of
them continuously. Jobs are frequently of short duration, depending upon
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS                     223

204                     Opinion of Bla ckm un , J.

This unique aspect of employment in the construction indus-
try—and of public works construction projects—must also
underlie the Court’s related justification that “[e]veryone af-
fected by the order is, in a substantial if informal sense,
‘working for the city.’” Ibid.
   I am not persuaded, however, that even the comparatively
limited terms of the executive order constitute “market par-
ticipation” rather than “market regulation.” The “sense” in
which those affected by the Mayor’s order “work for the city”
is so “informal,” in my view, as to lack substance altogether.
The city does not hire them, fire them, negotiate with them
or their representative about the terms of their employment,
or pay their wages. In the case of the employees of subcon-
tractors regulated by the order, the city does not even pay,
or contract directly with, their employers. In short, the eco-
nomic choices the city restricts in favor of its residents are
the choices of private entities engaged in interstate com-
merce. Thus, the executive order directly impedes “free
private trade in the national marketplace,” and for that rea-
son I would not hold it immune from Commerce Clause scru-
tiny. I therefore reach the question whether the order im-
poses an impermissible burden on interstate commerce.
                               Ill
  As the Court recognizes, the order constitutes “parochial
favoritism” of Boston residents over nonresidents of Boston
and Massachusetts for access to private sector jobs. Ante,
at 213. Thus, the order is a “protectionist measure” subject
to the rule of virtually per se invalidity established by many
of this Court’s cases. See, e. g., Philadelphia v. New Jer-
sey, 437 U. S. 617, 624 (1978).7
various stages of construction”). It is noteworthy, however, that in this
case the parties have stipulated that the order affects some “contractors
who have regular and permanent work crews.” Agreed Statement of
Facts, App. to Pet. for Cert. A41.
  71 reject the suggestion that the record does not establish a cognizable
burden on interstate commerce. See ante, at 209-210, and n. 6. The city
224                       OCTOBER TERM, 1982

                         Opinion of Black mun , J.                  460 U. S.

  That the order burdens Massachusetts residents living out-
side Boston to the same extent as residents of other States
does not save the order from this rule. First, the order
derives in part from a state statute encouraging all Massa-
chusetts communities to institute similar measures. Mass.
Gen. Laws Ann., ch. 149, §26 (West 1982).8 That statute is
clearly designed to benefit all Massachusetts residents at the
expense of all residents of other States. In carrying out this
statutory mandate, Boston, a creature of the Common-
wealth, is tainted by participation in the Commonwealth’s
larger and clearly discriminatory scheme.
   Second, and more significant, the order would be improper
under Dean Milk Co. v. Madison, 340 U. S. 349 (1951), even
absent the state statute. In Dean Milk, this Court held
that a Madison, Wis., city ordinance “plainly discriminate[d]
against interstate commerce,” even though “Wisconsin milk
from outside the Madison area [was] subjected to the same
proscription as that moving in interstate commerce.” Id., at
354, and n. 4. This was so because the ordinance “erect[ed]
an economic barrier protecting a major local industry against
competition from without the State.” Id., at 354. The

has stipulated that, as a result of this order, some construction workers
who are nonresidents of Massachusetts will be unemployed; contractors
from outside Massachusetts will be discouraged from bidding on affected
projects; and the costs of construction on affected projects will increase.
Agreed Statement of Facts, App. to Pet. for Cert. A37.
   8 The Mayor’s executive order itself states that one of its purposes is to
satisfy the city’s “statutory obligation to give preference to its residents in
hiring for publicfly] funded construction projects pursuant to [Massachu-
setts] G. L. c. 149, §26.” App. to Pet. for Cert. A19. The statute to
which the order refers provided: “Each county, town or district in the con-
struction of public works, or persons contracting or subcontracting for such
works, shall give preference [in hiring] to veterans and citizens who are
residents of such county, town or district.” Mass. Gen. Laws Ann., ch.
149, §26 (West 1982). In its decision holding the city order unconstitu-
tional, the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts also struck down this
statute. 384 Mass. 466, 476-478, 425 N. E. 2d 346, 352-353 (1981). The
Commonwealth has not appealed that ruling.
      WHITE v. MASS. COUNCIL OF CONSTR. EMPLOYERS           225

204                 Opinion of Bla ckmun , J.

Court held that the ordinance was invalid because “reason-
able nondiscriminatory alternatives, adequate to conserve
legitimate local interests, [were] available.” Ibid.
  Boston has at its disposal reasonable alternatives to ac-
complish its central goal—the alleviation of unemployment
among Boston residents. It can create training programs
for its unemployed residents or establish aggressive referral
practices aimed at promoting employment for its residents at
all construction projects in the city without implicating Com-
merce Clause concerns. It also can undertake some of the
construction projects itself, and hire Boston residents to
work on them, without imposing discriminatory restraints on
the private market.
  Moreover, as in Hicklin v. Orbeck, 437 U. S. 518 (1978),
the order is ill-suited to eliminating unemployment because it
applies the preference to all Boston residents, not just the
underemployed or undertrained. See id., at 527-528. Fi-
nally, since Dean Milk, the Court has indicated that a dis-
crimination against interstate commerce is unjustified unless
there is a legitimate reason, apart from their out-of-state ori-
gin, to treat differently articles of commerce or individuals
engaging in commerce originating outside the State. Phila-
delphia v. New Jersey, 437 U. S., at 626-627. No such rea-
son has been shown in this case.
   Insofar as the Massachusetts court held Boston’s executive
order violative of the Commerce Clause as applied outside
the context of federal grant programs, I would affirm its
judgment. To this extent, therefore, I respectfully dissent.
