BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559 (1996). LII Supreme Court BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore (94-896), 517 U.S. 559 (1996). Dissent [ Scalia
]Dissent [ Ginsburg ]Opinion [ Stevens ]Concurrence [ Breyer ]Syllabus HTML version WordPerfect versionHTML version WordPerfect versionHTML version WordPerfect
versionHTML version WordPerfect versionHTML version WordPerfect version NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in
connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter
of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200 U.S. 321, 337. SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES Syllabus BMW OF
NORTH AMERICA, INC. v. GORE certiorari to the supreme court of alabama No. 94-896. Argued October 11, 1995 -- Decided May 20, 1996 After respondent Gore
purchased a new BMW automobile from an authorized Alabama dealer, he discovered that the car had been repainted. He brought this suit for compensatory and
punitive damages against petitioner, the American distributor of BMW's, alleging, inter alia, that the failure to disclose the repainting constituted fraud
under Alabama law. At trial, BMW acknowledged that it followed a nationwide policy of not advising its dealers, and hence their customers, of predelivery damage
to new cars when the cost of repair did not exceed 3 percent of the car's suggested retail price. Gore's vehicle fell into that category. The jury returned a
verdict finding BMW liable for compensatory damages of $4,000, and assessing $4 million in punitive damages. The trial judge denied BMW's post-trial motion to
set aside the punitive damages award, holding, among other things, that the award was not "grossly excessive" and thus did not violate the Due Process Clause of
the Fourteenth Amendment. See, e.g., TXO Production Corp. v. Alliance Resources Corp., 509 U.S. 443, 454. The Alabama Supreme Court agreed, but reduced the
award to $2 million on the ground that, in computing the amount, the jury had improperly multiplied Gore's compensatory damages by the number of similar sales
in all States, not just those in Alabama. Held: The $2 million punitive damages award is grossly excessive and therefore exceeds the constitutional limit. Pp.
7-26. (a) Because such an award violates due process only when it can fairly be categorized as "grossly excessive" in relation to the State's legitimate
interests in punishing unlawful conduct and deterring its repetition, cf. TXO, 509 U. S., at 456, the federal excessiveness inquiry appropriately begins with an
identification of the state interests that such an award is designed to serve. Principles of state sovereignty and comity forbid a State to enact policies for
the entire Nation, or to impose its own policy choice on neighboring States. See e.g., Healy v. Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324, 335-336. Accordingly, the economic
penalties that a State inflicts on those who transgress its laws, whether the penalties are legislatively authorized fines or judicially imposed punitive
damages, must be supported by the State's interest in protecting its own consumers and economy, rather than those of other States or the entire Nation. Gore's
award must therefore be analyzed in the light of conduct that occurred solely within Alabama, with consideration being given only to the interests of Alabama
consumers. Pp. 7-13. (b) Elementary notions of fairness enshrined in this Court's constitutional jurisprudence dictate that a person receive fair notice not
only of the conduct that will subject him to punishment but also of the severity of the penalty that a State may impose. Three guideposts, each of which
indicates that BMW did not receive adequate notice of the magnitude of the sanction that Alabama might impose, lead to the conclusion that the $2 million award
is grossly excessive. Pp. 13-14. (c) None of the aggravating factors associated with the first (and perhaps most important) indicium of a punitive damages
award's excessiveness--the degree of reprehensibility of the defendant's conduct, see e.g., Day v. Woodworth, 13 How. 363, 371--is present here. The harm BMW
inflicted on Gore was purely economic; the presale repainting had no effect on the car's performance, safety features, or appearance; and BMW's conduct evinced
no indifference to or reckless disregard for the health and safety of others. Gore's contention that BMW's nondisclosure was particularly reprehensible because
it formed part of a nationwide pattern of tortious conduct is rejected, because a corporate executive could reasonably have interpreted the relevant state
statutes as establishing safe harbors for nondisclosure of presumptively minor repairs, and because there is no evidence either that BMW acted in bad faith when
it sought to establish the appropriate line between minor damage and damage requiring disclosure to purchasers, or that it persisted in its course of conduct
after it had been adjudged unlawful. Finally, there is no evidence that BMW engaged in deliberate false statements, acts of affirmative misconduct, or
concealment of evidence of improper motive. Pp. 14-20. (d) The second (and perhaps most commonly cited) indicium of excessiveness--the ratio between the
plaintiff's compensatory damages and the amount of the punitive damages, see e.g., TXO, 509 U. S., at 459--also weighs against Gore, because his $2 million
award is 500 times the amount of his actual harm as determined by the jury, and there is no suggestion that he or any other BMW purchaser was threatened with
any additional potential harm by BMW's nondisclosure policy. Although it is not possible to draw a mathematical bright line between the constitutionally
acceptable and the constitutionally unacceptable that would fit every case, see, e.g., id., at 458, the ratio here is clearly outside the acceptable range. Pp.
20-23. (e) Gore's punitive damages award is not saved by the third relevant indicium of excessiveness--the difference between it and the civil or criminal
sanctions that could be imposed for comparable misconduct, see, e.g., Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Haslip, 499 U.S. 1, 23--because $2 million is substantially
greater than Alabama's applicable $2,000 fine and the penalties imposed in other States for similar malfeasance, and because none of the pertinent statutes or
interpretive decisions would have put an out of state distributor on notice that it might be subject to a multimillion dollar sanction. Moreover, in the absence
of a BMW history of noncompliance with known statutory requirements, there is no basis for assuming that a more modest sanction would not have been sufficient.
Pp. 23-25. (f) Thus, BMW's conduct was not sufficiently egregious to justify the severe punitive sanction imposed against it. Whether the appropriate remedy
requires a new trial or merely an independent determination by the Alabama Supreme Court of the award necessary to vindicate Alabama consumers' economic
interests is a matter for that court to address in the first instance. Pp. 25-26. 646 So. 2d 619, reversed and remanded. Stevens, J., delivered the opinion of
the Court, in which O'Connor, Kennedy, Souter, and Breyer, JJ., joined. Breyer, J., filed a concurring opinion, in which O'Connor and Souter, JJ., joined.
Scalia, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which Thomas, J., joined. Ginsburg, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which Rehnquist, C. J., joined.
