Romer, Governor of Colorado, et al. v. Evans et al., 517 U.S. 620 (1996). LII Supreme Court Romer, Governor of Colorado, et al. v. Evans et al. (94-1039), 517
U.S. 620 (1996). Opinion [ Kennedy ]Syllabus Dissent [ Scalia ]HTML version WordPerfect versionHTML version WordPerfect versionHTML version WordPerfect version
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The
syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See United States
v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200 U.S. 321, 337. SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES Syllabus ROMER, GOVERNOR OF COLORADO, et al. v. EVANS et al. certiorari to the
supreme court of colorado No. 94-1039. Argued October 10, 1995 -- Decided May 20, 1996 After various Colorado municipalities passed ordinances banning
discrimination based on sexual orientation in housing, employment, education, public accommodations, health and welfare services, and other transactions and
activities, Colorado voters adopted by statewide referendum "Amendment 2" to the State Constitution, which precludes all legislative, executive, or judicial
action at any level of state or local government designed to protect the status of persons based on their "homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct,
practices or relationships." Respondents, who include aggrieved homosexuals and municipalities, commenced this litigation in state court against petitioner
state parties to declare Amendment 2 invalid and enjoin its enforcement. The trial court's grant of a preliminary injunction was sustained by the Colorado
Supreme Court, which held that Amendment 2 was subject to strict scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because it infringed the
fundamental right of gays and lesbians to participate in the political process. On remand, the trial court found that the Amendment failed to satisfy strict
scrutiny. It enjoined Amendment 2's enforcement, and the State Supreme Court affirmed. Held: Amendment 2 violates the Equal Protection Clause. Pp. 4-14. (a) The
State's principal argument that Amendment 2 puts gays and lesbians in the same position as all other persons by denying them special rights is rejected as
implausible. The extent of the change in legal status effected by this law is evident from the authoritative construction of Colorado's Supreme Court--which
establishes that the amendment's immediate effect is to repeal all existing statutes, regulations, ordinances, and policies of state and local entities barring
discrimination based on sexual orientation, and that its ultimate effect is to prohibit any governmental entity from adopting similar, or more protective,
measures in the future absent state constitutional amendment--and from a review of the terms, structure, and operation of the ordinances that would be repealed
and prohibited by Amendment 2. Even if, as the State contends, homosexuals can find protection in laws and policies of general application, Amendment 2 goes
well beyond merely depriving them of special rights. It imposes a broad disability upon those persons alone, forbidding them, but no others, to seek specific
legal protection from injuries caused by discrimination in a wide range of public and private transactions. Pp. 4-9. (b) In order to reconcile the Fourteenth
Amendment's promise that no person shall be denied equal protection with the practical reality that most legislation classifies for one purpose or another, the
Court has stated that it will uphold a law that neither burdens a fundamental right nor targets a suspect class so long as the legislative classification bears
a rational relation to some independent and legitimate legislative end. See, e.g., Heller v. Doe, 509 U.S. 312, 319-320. Amendment 2 fails, indeed defies, even
this conventional inquiry. First, the amendment is at once too narrow and too broad, identifying persons by a single trait and then denying them the possibility
of protection across the board. This disqualification of a class of persons from the right to obtain specific protection from the law is unprecedented and is
itself a denial of equal protection in the most literal sense. Second, the sheer breadth of Amendment 2, which makes a general announcement that gays and
lesbians shall not have any particular protections from the law, is so far removed from the reasons offered for it, i.e., respect for other citizens' freedom of
association, particularly landlords or employers who have personal or religious objections to homosexuality, and the State's interest in conserving resources to
fight discrimination against other groups, that the amendment cannot be explained by reference to those reasons; the Amendment raises the inevitable inference
that it is born of animosity toward the class that it affects. Amendment 2 cannot be said to be directed to an identifiable legitimate purpose or discrete
objective. It is a status based classification of persons undertaken for its own sake, something the Equal Protection Clause does not permit. Pp. 9-14. 882 P.
2d 1335, affirmed. Kennedy, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Stevens, O'Connor, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, JJ., joined. Scalia, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which Rehnquist, C. J., and Thomas, J., joined.
