S j , Ed 1) 
No. 94-1837__| 9385 
' 

IN THE | 

' CLERK ie 
Supreme Court of the Gnited-States——— 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A., 

Petitioner, 
v. 

BILL NELSON, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER 
OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA, 
FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE, 
FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF LIFE UNDERWRITERS, 
PROFESSIONAL INSURANCE AGENTS OF FLORIDA, INC., 
AND FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE AGENTS, 

Respondents. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 

NATHAN LEWIN 
(Counsel of Record) 
Scott L. NELSON 

J. BRADLEY BENNETT 

RICHARD E. SWARTLEY JAMES R. HEAVNER, JR. 

Genera! Counsel MILLER, CASSIDY, 

BARNETT BANKS, INC. LARROCA & LEWIN 

50 N. Laura Street 2555 M Street, N.W. 

Jacksonville, FL 32202 Washington, D.C. 20037 

(904) 791-7505 (202) 293-6400 
Attorneys for Petitioner 

PRESS OF BYRON S. ADAMS WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 

(i) 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED 

1. Whether a federal statute that gives a national 
bank operating in a town with a population not exceeding 
5,000 the right to sell insurance (12 U.S.C. § 92) preempts 
a state law that prohibits such a bank from selling insurance. 

2. Whether a state law prohibiting banks from 
selling insurance is a law enacted “for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance” within the meaning of 
the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b). 

2 Whether 12 U.S.C. § 92 is an “Act [that] 
specifically relates to the business of insurance” within the 
meaning of the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. 
§ 1012(b). 

(ii) 
LIST OF PARTIES 

_ The caption of this case reflects the 
rene ee of Bill Nelson, current Insurance Commissioner 

the State of Florida, for his predecessor, Tom Gallagher. 
Otherwise, the names of all parties to the proceeding below 
appear in the caption of this case. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

(iii) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED .........-++eee5> (i) 
BT GPE cc cccceeccoeeeeseseces (ii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ........-eseee> (vi) 
Ee ie i 
CC EE ar a ee 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED ..........66550068: 2 
EE a a a ee 2 
1. In 1916, Congress Authorizes Certain 
National Banks To Sell Insurance. .... 2 
2. In 1945, Congress Passes the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act To Confirm 
State Regulatory Authority. ........ 5 

3. In 1974, Florida Prohibits Certain 
National Banks from Selling Insurance. . 8 

4. In 1993, Barnett Bank Buys an 

5. Barnett Bank Litigates and Loses. .... 10 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .........-++55. 12 

(iv) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS — CONTINUED 

Section 626.988 Does Not Satisfy 

(1) | Why was the Florida law 

(2) How does the Florida law 

Page 
” ioe... 36 
(3) Royal Drug and Pireno ...... 37 
(4) The Governing Principle ..... 39 

the Business of Insurance” ............. 41 
A The Specific Subject Matter of 
Section 92 Is Bank Sales of 
DT at otade éwhubeks cucs 41 
B The McCarran-Ferguson Act Uses 
Broad Language in Preserving Federal 
Legislation that “Specifically Relates” 
nn nceediobwtbwes cose 42 
Cc The Eleventh Circuit’s Holding 
Distorts the Statutory Language. .... . 44 
(1) Specific Rejection of State 
Law Is Not Required. ....... 44 
(2) The Federal Law “Relates” to 
Insurance Regardless of Whether 
It "Regulates" Insurance. ..... 45 
DE dt biedédee cans boeee ce een 48 

(vi) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page(s) 

CASES: 
Adamo Wrecking Co. v. United States, 

434 U.S. 27S (IDTE) ww cc ccc cccccccccccse 43 
Child Labor Tax Case, 

250 UB. BO CBED ccccccccccscccsccccess 24 

of Revenue of Montana v. Kurth Ranch, 

114 BS. Ce. 19BT CIGDE) 0c ccccccccccccccses 24 
District of Columbia v. Greater Washington Bd. of Trade, 

, PER. f,  Prrerrrirrereree 43 
Felder v. Casey, 

GBT UB. TSE CIGD ccc cccccccccccccecs 15 
Fidelity Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. De La Cuesta, 

458 UB. 061 (IGG cc ccccccccccccces 16, 17 
First Nat'l Bank of Eastern Arkansas v. Taylor, 

907 F.2d 775 (8th Cir.), 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Florida Ass'n of Ins. Agents, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 
591 F.2d 334 (Sth Cir. 1979)... 2... eee eee 19 

Franklin Nat'l Bank v. New York, 
SF Gas SED cb bh edece seoeuns 3, 15, 16, 17 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

(vii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 

Page(s) 
Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Ass'n, 
Te EE EE Decoceesdoccceescoces 15 
Garcia v. Island Program Designer, Inc., 
J. f fl. | | re 17 

Glendale Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Florida Dep’t of Ins., 
587 So. 2d 534 (Fla. App. 1991), 
review denied, 599 So. 2d 656 (Fla. 1992)... 9, 27, 28 

Group Life & Health Ins. Co. v. Royal Drug Co., 
GED Gap See IPOD cccccccccccs 29, 37, 38, 39 

Hanover Ins. Co. v. Commissioner, 
598 F.2d 1211 (1st Cir.), 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

PPE ocCeoccccceuseseseces 30 
Independent Ins. Agents of America, Inc. v. Ludwig, 

997 F.2d 958 (D.C. Cir. 1993).............. 5 

John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Harris Trust & Sav. 
Bank, 
PPC deoeeseseeseeedeunes 42 

McCulloch v. Maryland, 
17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316 (1819) .............. 45 

Morales v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 
ee alk a ln dee 43, 44 

(viii) 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 
Page(s) 

- aleaaaaat asain Carolina v. Variable Annuity Life Ins. 
115 S. Ct. 810 (1995)... cece ccc cuucee 3, 14 

NBD Bank, N.A. v. Bennett, 
No. 95-1310, 1995 U.S. App. LEXIS 27835 5, 14, 42 

New York State Conf. of Blue Cross & Blu: Shield Plans v. 
Travelers Ins. Co.., 
a Gb Ss wont deceectéoseene 43 

Norman v. Baltimore & O.R. Co., 
SP EE “bs wkd co dabeceeeceteunt 45 

Owensboro National Bank v. Stephens, 
44 F.3d 388 (6th Cir. 19/5), 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Energy Resources Conservation 
and Dev. Comm'n, 

Se ee ED co cdbctcdcecceesédccos 29 
Paul v. Virginia, 

75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 168 (1869) .............4.4. 30 
Perez v. Campbell, 

Se 60 ckevelved bles Jéelen 15 

Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux, 
Cae Wee PE 64 « ded ed-ceeb dees es 39, 41 

(ix) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 

Page(s) 

Prudential Ins. Co. v. Benjamin, 

328 U.S. 408 (1946) ...-. ce ee eee eee 22, 24 
Russello v. United States, 

464 U.S. 16 (1983) 2... ee ee ee eee 29 
SEC v. National Securities, Inc., 

393 U.S. 453 (1969) ...... cee ee eee 35, 36, 40 
Smith v. United States, 

113 BS. Ce. FASO CIGSS) 2 wer ccccccsvescees 43 
St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Barry, 

438 U.S. $31 (IDTE) on ccc cer ccsccscscces 30 
Texas Employers’ Ins. Ass'n v. Jackson, 

820 F.2d 1406 (Sth Cir. 1987), 

rev'd on rehearing on other grounds, 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

490 U.S. 1035 (1988) 2... . cee ee ees 46 
Union Labor Life Ins. Co. v. Pireno, 

458 U.S. 119 (1982) .. 1... ce eee eee 37, 38, 39 
United Services Auto. Ass'n v. Muir, 

792 F.2d 356 (3d Cir. 1986), 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

ie 0). | re re ee 29 

United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters Ass'n, 
322 U.S. 533 (1944) 2... eee ee eee eee passim 

14 

immunity under the second clause of McCarran-Ferguson is 
necessary if the first clause is to offer protection to most insur- 
ance consumer protection laws. 

The National Securities test, which looks to the insurer- 
policyholder relationship, contemplates a “public action” per- 
spective whereby states enact laws to adjust, manage or control 
this relationship. On the other hand, the Pireno test, by looking 
to: (1) whether the practice has the effect of transferring or 
spreading a policyholder’s risk; (2) whether the practice is an 
integral part of the policy relationship between the insurer and 
insured; and (3) whether the practice is limited to entities within 
the insurance industry; contemplates a “private action” perspec- 
tive whereby an insurer’s practices are examined to determine 
if antitrust immunity applies to that action. 

The “business of insurance” under the Pireno test, focusing 
on an insurer’s practices to determine if that insurer is acting 
within the confines of the antitrust immunity granted by the 
second clause of McCarran-Ferguson, does not contemplate the 
broader context of regulation of the elements of the business of 
insurance. 

Therefore, the proper inquiry is whether Section 626.988, 
under the holdings of National Securities and Fabe, is a law 
enacted “for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance” 
by regulating the insurer-policyholder relationship. Even if 
Pireno were applicable, Section 626.988 satisfies that test be- 
cause it is critical to the relationship between the insurer and 
insured. 

The practical effect of the McCarran-Ferguson Acct is that 
each state can enact laws to regulate the business of insurance 
in keeping with the particular needs and conditions in that state. 
The result is a diverse set of insurance regulatory schemes (with 
many similarities) reflecting the perspective of each individual 
state. One of the strengths of state regulation of the business of 
insurance is that a state’s regulatory regime can be focused on 

15 

the unique circumstances of that particular state. In this regard, 
it is important to keep in mind that Flonda’s insurance regula- 
tory laws were enacted to apply to Florida’s (and only Florida’s) 
insurance environment. The context within which to view the 
Florida Legislature’s aim in enacting 626.988 is Florida’s 
unique demographic composition. Florida’s large population of 
senior citizens and newcomers to the state (from other states and 
other countries) are especially vulnerable to coercion or unfair 
trade practices. 

B. Section 626.988 is Part Of A Comprehensive 
Legislative Scheme That Protects Policyholders 
And Was Enacted For The Purpose Of Regulat- 
ing The Business Of Insurance. 

Appellants characterize Section 626.988, Florida Statutes, 
as a “bare pin-pointed prohibition, not part of a scheme of 
regulation.” (Barnett Br. p. 13) Nothing could be further from 
the truth. Section 626.988 is an important element of a compre- 
hensive regulatory scheme (the Florida Insurance Code) enacted 
for the purpose of protecting the Florida insurance-buying pub- 
lic. Section 626.988 is contained in Florida’s Insurance Code 
in Part X of Chapter 626, Florida Statutes. Part X is entitled the 
“Unfair Insurance Trade Practices Act” and was enacted to 
implement the legislative intent of Congress in passing the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act. 

The practices prohibited in Part X of Chapter 626 are those 
unfair and deceptive acts which occur during the solicitation, 
negotiation, effectuation, and servicing of insurance contracts. 
Thus, the provisions of Part X (of which 626.988 is a part), 
necessarily regulate the relationship between insurance compa- 
nies and current and prospective policyholders in order to pre- 
vent unfair methods of competition, and unfair or deceptive acts 
or practices. The regulated activities extend to agents, insurers, 
and all other persons involved in the relationship between the 

16 

insurance company and the policyholder. See, e.g., Fla. Stat. 
Ann. § 626.9511(1). 

In Florida, soliciting, negotiating, effectuating, and servic- 
ing of insurance policies for current or prospective policyholders 
must be accomplished through agents licensed by the Depart- 
ment. For example, Section 626.041, Florida Statutes, requires 
that only licensed agents may: solicit insurance or procure 
applications, receive insurance premiums on behalf of an in- 
surer, deliver any insurance contract or any renewal thereof, 
analyze insurance policies or give opinions with respect thereto, 
or in any way cause to be effected any insurance contract. 
Similarly, Section 624.425, Florida Statutes, requires that an 
insurance policy may be issued only through a licensed agent. 

Because an insurance company can only act .hrough agents 
licensed by the State of Florida to solicit and service insurance 
policies, laws which govern agent activities and proscribe vari- 
ous unfair and deceptive trade practices in connection with the 
solicitation, negotiation, and effectuation of the insurance con- 
tract are laws enacted for the purpose of regulating the business 
of i.surance. By regulating the relationship between the insur- 
ance company and policyholders carried out through insurance 
agents, Florida has enacted statutes which fall within the class 
of statutes described in Nat'l Securities, and Fabe. The question 
then becomes whether 626.988 was enacted to be part of this 
system. 

C. It Has Been Well Established That 626.988 Was 
Enacted To Avoid Unfair Trade Practices, 
Coercion, And Undue Concentration Of 
Resources. 

The need to ascertain the aim of the Legislature in enacting 
a particular law for McCarran-Ferguson analysis requires what 
is essentially a “state-by-state” and “case-by-case” process. 
Barnett, in its brief at page 11, refers to the decision of the Sixth 
Circuit in Owensboro National Bank v. Stephens, 44 F.3d 388 

17 

(6th Cir. 1994), as a “contrary decision” which was “ignored” 
by the Eleventh Circuit. However, the holding in Owensboro 
in no way controls the result in the instant case, as the | Ith 
Circuit properly found. Barmett fails to recognize that the 
Owensboro case dealt with a different Kentucky law, with the 
particular aims of the Kentucky legislature in enacting it, and 
with an entirely different history of construction and application 
than Florida’s Section 626.988. Owensboro was decided by the 
Sixth Circuit based upon that Court’s conclusion that Kentucky 
law Section 287 was not enacted for the purpose of regulating 
the business of insurance. The Sixth Circuit did not consider 
the issue of whether Section 92 of the National Bank Act 
“specifically relates to the business of insurance” for McCarran- 
Ferguson purposes. Thus, the Sixth Circuit Owensboro deci- 
sion is plain and simply a decision which turned on the merits 
of Kentucky law Section 287. 

Ascertaining the aim of the Florida Legislature in enacting 
626.988 is aided by the considerable amount of scrutiny this law 
has received over the years. The Court of Appeals began its 
analysis of the aim of 626.988 with the location of the law in the 
Florida Insurance Code. Section 626.988 is located in the part 
of the Florida Insurance Code entitled “Unfair Insurance Trade 
Practices.” As expressed in Fabe, location informs (but does 
not determine) as to whether a statute regulates the business of 
insurance. The expressed purpose of the statutory provisions 
within the Unfair Trade Practices Act is found at Section 
626.951, Florida Statutes: 

The purpose of this part is to regulate trade practices 
relating to the business of insurance in accordance 
with the intent of Congress of March 9, 1945 (Pub. L. 
No. 15, 79th Congress) [the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act], by defining, or providing for the determination 
of, all such practices in this state which constitute 
unfair methods of competition or unfair or deceptive 

18 

acts or practices and by prohibiting the trade practices 
so defined or determined. 

Id. Placing Section 626.988 within the Unfair Trade Practices Act 
suggests that the Legislature’s aim in enacting this provision was 
to prohibit unfair methods of competition or unfair or deceptive acts 
or practices relating to the business of insurance. 

The next source of information on the Legislature’s aim in 
enacting 626.988 is the preamble (amended out prior to passage) 
to the bills leading to the enactment of 626.988, extensively 
referred to in Barnett’s brief.? 

The preamble cites a series of findings by a federal admin- 
istrative law judge in a recommended decision for consideration 
by the Federal Reserve Board regarding bank holding companies’ 
applications to the Federal Reserve Board to engage in insurance 
agency activities. The actual preamble provisions found at 
Barnett’s Bnef Appendix pages Sa-7a are much more instructive 
than Barnett’s paraphrase at page 19 of its Brief. In particular, 
finding (d) of the administrative law judge cited in the preamble 
found: 

...[w]hile it is difficult to accurately measure the psychol- 

ogy of voluntary tieing, nevertheless the weight of evi- 

dence realistically evaluated suggests that in times of 

scarcity of lending funds, the average borrower finds 
himself in a weakened bargaining position vis-a-vis the 
lender and the offer of insurance placement is another 

of other borrowing services with which the borrower can 

increase the probability that a needed loan will be 

granted. 
Barnett Br. App. 6a-7a. 

2 The preamble was not introduced into evidence at trial. 

19 

The preamble describes the findings as based upon “an exhaus- 
tive presentation of evidence.” The text of the preamble shows that 
the preamble drafters were incredulous that despite finding (d), and 
the other cited findings, the administrative law judge nonetheless 
recommended that the bank applicants be authorized to engage in 
insurance agency activities in a limited manner and subject to various 
restrictions. The preamble drafters then proceeded to express their 
concems over insurance agents being employed by, associated, or 
affiliated with bank holding companies by stating: 

WHEREAS, the undue concentration of economic 

resources, a substantial decrease in competition 

among insurance agents, unfair competition, conflicts 

of interest, and voluntary tieing are against the public 

policy of the state and against the best interests of the 

people of Florida, and 

* * * 

WHEREAS, to preserve the public policy and protect 

the public interest insurance agents and solicitors 

should be prohibited from soliciting, negotiating and 

selling insurance contracts if employed by, associated 

or affiliated in any way with specified institutions. 
Barnett Br. App. 7a. 

It is noteworthy that 626.988 is characterized in the pream- 
ble as a prohibition against insurance solicitors and agents 
soliciting, negotiating, and selling insurance contracts in the 
employ of or association with financial institutions. This per- 
spective shows the legislative aim was to protect the public 
interest with regard to an essential element of the insurance 
transaction — the point of sale by an insurance agent. Thus, the 
preamble provisions are entirely consistent with the Legisla- 
ture’s placement of 626.988 within the Unfair Trade Practices 
Act. 

20 

Barnett’s assertion that the legislature’s primary purpose 
in enacting Section 626.988 was to protect insurance agents is 
not supported by a fair reading of the preamble or any evidence 
presented in this case. 

Another source of insight regarding the rationale for 
626.988 is state litigation involving this law, particularly Glen- 
dale Federal S&L v. Department of Insurance, 587 So.2d 534 
(Fla. lst DCA 1991), cited by the Court of Appeals below. The 
Florida trial court’s summary judgment order in Glendale noted 
that the parties had developed a factual record through the filing 
of memoranda and through extensive discovery. Based on the 
evidence presented, the trial court found: 

Concerns regarding financial institutions’ entry into 
insurance activities, including the prevention of coer- 
cion, unfair trade practices, and undue concentration 
of resources, existed at the time of passage of the 
Statute and remain valid today. Expert testimony 
filed with this Court shows that a legislature could 
well have decided that some protection was required. 

Glendale, 587 So.2d at 536, n.1. (emphasis added). 

The language used by the District Court of Appeal reflects the 
Court’s conclusion, based on the evidence presented, that the 
perceived dangers were real and far from “implausible.” The 
District Court of Appeal, in affirming the trial court, held: 

[T]he cited rational bases of prevention of coercion, 
unfair trade practices and undue concentration of 
resources, in light of evidence in the form of affidavits 
and deposition testimony of expert witnesses, support 
the conclusions that the legislature could properly 
decide to act as it did, and that the statute accordingly 
does not violate due process. 

587 So.2d at 537. 

21 

The District Court below also noted this fact in an earlier 
decision, Production Credit Associations of Florida v. Depart- 
ment of Insurance, 356 So.2d 31 (Fla. Ist DCA 1978). In 
construing whether certain entities were “financial institutions” 
under 626.988, the Florida appellate court held: 

Insurance is an industry affected with a public interest 

and subject to regulation by the States. The Legisla- 

ture has determined that there is a potential for abuse 

inherent in financial institutions being involved in the 

sale of insurance, and that the licensing of employees 

of financial institutions as insurance agents is not in 

the public interest. 

Id. at 32. The Florida First District Court of Appeal in Produc- 
tion Credit clearly understood the legislative purpose of 626.988 
to be protecting the public from abuse. 

When the issue of financial institutions engaging in insur- 
ance agency activities has been subjected to extensive eviden- 
tiary exposition, both in Glendale and the administrative hearing 
cited in the preamble, the finding has been that unfair trade 
practices, coercion, undue concentration of resources, and con- 
flict of interest may arise from this practice. 

In another case involving implementation of 626.988, 
Great Northern Insured Annuity Corporation, et. al v. Depart- 
ment of Insurance and Treasurer, a state of Florida Division of 
Administrative Hearings Final Order (Fl. Bankers Assoc. Br. 
la-37a), independent Hearing Officer Mary Clark found, also 
after hearing extensive evidence: 

As stated in Glendale, the legislature was guarding 

against the dangers of financial institutions becoming 

involved in the business of insurance: the prevention 

of coercion, unfair trade practices, and undue concen- 

tration of resources. 

Fl. Bankers Assoc. Br. p. 22a. 

22 

As can be seen, for purposes of determining Legislative 
intent, Section 626.988 comes before this Court as the most 
battle-hardened state law in the nation involving the issue of 
insurance agents associating with financial institutions in the 
sale of insurance. Each time, however, the ultimate finding has 
been that 626.988 was enacted to prevent coercion, unfair trade 
practices, and undue concentration of resources. 

Barnett disingenuously argues that Ms. Linda Clifford, as 
a licensed insurance agent, was as personally qualified tu sell 
insurance after she became a Barnett Bank employee as she had 
been previously. This argument avoids the real issue. When 
Barnett purchased Ms. Clifford's insurance agency and she 
became a Barnett employee, it was the influence exerted on 
insurance transactions by Barnett and not by Ms. Clifford per- 
sonally, which gave rise to the Department's Immediate Final 
Order. The record is clear that the direction and mission of the 
Linda Clifford Insurance Agency changed dramatically upon 
purchase by Barnett. 

Barnett and its Amici further urge this Court to dismiss as 
implausible the expressions of legislative purpose of 626.988 
made by Florida's Legislature, insurance regulator, and courts. 
The crux of their argument is that no one could really believe 
that prohibiting bank holding companies from engaging in 
insurance agency activities safeguards insurer solvency and 
protects the public in insurance transactions. Barnett and its 
Amici base their entire reasoning on the premise that 626.988 is 
solely an economic conflict between banks and independent 
insurance agents and is not “truly regulatory”. If 626.988 has a 
greater public protection purpose and is “truly regulatory,” 
Barnett’s arguments collapse. 

Actual experience in Florida has demonstrated that unfair 
trade practices do occur when bank holding companies enter into 
arrangements with insurance agents for the sale of insurance on 
bank premises. 

23 

In the case of Department of Insurance and Treasurer v. 
James Mitchell and Company, et al. (Recommended Order 
dated August 30, 1994), State of Florida Division of Adminis- 
trative Hearings Independent Hearing Officer Charles C. 
Adams? made the following Finding of Fact at page 6, para- 
graph 12: 

As contemplated by the services agreement the cus- 

tomer base for the James Mitchell insurance agents 1s 

primarily constituted of Barnett Bank customers who 
have been referred by Barnett Bank employees. The 
insurance agents and other employees who work in 

Florida do not solicit insurance business unrelated to 

the tie-in with Barnett Banks, Inc. and its branches. 

The Hearing Officer made a Conclusion of Law at page 46, 
paragraph 121, of his Recommended Order, that the arrange- 
ment between James Mitchell and Company and Barnett had the 
following result: 

James Mitchell and Company has violated Section 

626.9541(1)(b), Florida Statutes, in the manner al- 

leged. Specifically, James Mitchell and Company has 
knowingly established its own advertising, and bene- 
fited from Barnett advertising pursuant to the services 
agreement. James Mitchell and Company has made 
statements about, and benefited from statements by 

Barnett employees pursuant to the services agree- 

ment. The advertising and statements concerned 1n- 

surance sales through the Tax Advantage Account by 

Mitchell Tax Advantage Account Specialists (insur- 

> The administrative proceedings in James Mitchell (as well as in Great 
Northern, supra.), were pursuant to Flonda's Administrative Procedures Act, 
Chapter 120, Florida Statutes, and as such the hearing officers in both 
proceedings were independent of, and not chosen by the Department. 

24 

ance agents). By these arrangements, James Mitchell 

and Company has placed before the consuming public 

information which is deceptive and misleading as to 

the fact that insurance products are being sold by 

insurance agents who work for James Mitchell and 

Company. James Mitchell and Company has com- 

mitted the violations both by direct and indirect ac- 

tions. Violations of Section 626.9541(1)(b), Flonda 

Statutes, pertaining to the deceptive and misleading 

actions by James Mitchell and Company are found in 

the use of business cards which the James Mitchell 

and Company insurance agents provide to customers, 

appointment cards prepared by Barnett employees, 

and brochures disseminated by Barnett employees 

and Mitchell employees, which materials contribute 

to the deceptive and misleading nature of the 

Mitchell/Barnett program. The office layout in which 

the James Mitchell and Company insurance agents 

market the products on the premises of the Barnett 

branch banks contributes to the deceptive and mis- 

leading nature of the program. The personal and 

telephonic solicitations of customers by James 

Mitchell and Company insurance agents and through 

actions of Barnett Bank employees, contemplated by 

the services agreement, contribute to the deceptive 

and misleading nature of the program. 
The Hearing Officer’s findings are exactly what Barnett is 
asserting is an implausible rationale for 626.988. The 
Barnett/Mitchell arrangement was a conscious effort to obscure 
ance products sold on bank premises. The result was consumers 
being deceived and misled as to the fact they were buying an 
insurance company product and not a bank product, and that 
individuals on Barnett premises who appeared to be bank em- 
ployees were actually insurance agents. Barnett customers were 

25 

being channeled into insurance transactions by Barnett employ- 
ees without understanding that the insurance product called a 
“Tax Advantage Account” was not part of Barnett’s bank serv- 
ices. 

The Department of Insurance in a Final Order issued July 
7, 1995, accepted the Hearing Officer’s recommended penalties 
and revoked the Florida nonresident life insurance agent’s li- 
cense issued to James K. Mitchell, ordered James K. Mitchell 
and Company, and James K. Mitchell, as an officer and director 
of James K. Mitchell and Company, to cease and desist the 
prohibited practices described in the Recommended Order, and 
ordered James K. Mitchell and Company to obtain an insurance 
agency license. The Department of Insurance additionally con- 
cluded in its Final Order that the Mitchell/Barnett arrangement 
was an illegal association with regard to insurance sales between 
an insurance agent and bank pursuant to 626.988. The Depart- 
ment’s Final Order is currently on appeal before the Florida First 
District Court of Appeal.* 

The holding of the District Court below was indeed pro- 
phetic with regard to the Hearing Officer’s conclusions in the 
Mitchell case eight months later. The District Court held: 

Additionally, and notwithstanding the existence of 

specific prohibitions on coercive credit extension, the 

Court finds that loan officers could steer customers to 

the bank’s insurance agent for the purpose of suggest- 

ing the sale of insurance that is not needed, in order 

for the bank to make a profit on the insurance policy. 

The concern herein expressed is that an arms-length 

* Eighteen copies of the Hearing Officer’s Recommended Order and 
Department Final Order in Department of Insurance and Treasurer v. James 
Mitchell and Company, et al. have been lodged with the Supreme Court 
Clerk's Office. These documents are official public records of the State of 
Florida. 

26 

relationship be maintained among the bank, the loan 
officer and the insurance agents. The maintenance of 
this relationship is for the protection of the solvency 
of the insurance industry, and the prevention of coer- 
cion, which in turn protects all potential, present and 
future policyholders. 

Barnett, 839 F.Supp. at 842, Pet. App. 31a. 

The Circuit Court below put an even finer point on this 
issue by holding: 
While Appellant Barnett Marion argues that the stat- 
ute exists only to protect “independent insurance 
agents from competition by financial institutions,” 
Appellants Brief at 35, we disagree. The danger in 
these situations, as the trial court correctly points out, 
is the loss of arms-length transactions and objectivity 
when the bank becomes involved with insurer and 
insured. 
Barnett, 43 F.3d at 636, Pet. App. 12a. 

D. The Established Purpose Of 626.988 Meets The 
First Prong Of The Fabe Test. 

Once the purpose of 626.988, as expressed by Florida’s 
Legislature, state regulator, and courts, is established, the next 
analysis is how the expressed purpose fits the federal definition 
of regulating “the business of insurance.” In Fabe, supra, this 
Court explained the issue by holding: 

The broad category of laws enacted “for the purpose 

of regulating the business of insurance” consists of 

laws that possess the “end, intention or aim” of ad- 

justing, managing, or controlling the business of in- 
surance. Black’s Law Dictionary 1236, 1286 (6th ed. 

1990). This category necessarily encompasses more 

than just the “business of insurance.” For the reasons 

expressed above, we believe that the actual perform- 

27 

ance of an insurance contract is an essential part of the 
“business of insurance.” 
113 S.Ct. at 2210 (emphasis added). 

The District Court, applying the Fabe test, characterized 
626.988 as appearing to: 

define or regulate a relationship between insurer and 
potential policyholder, that is, the insurance-purchas- 
ing public at large, rather than one between insurer 
and present policyholder. 

839 F.Supp. at 840., Pet. App. 28a. The distinction between 
“potential” and “present” policyholders utilized by the District 
Court is pointed to by Barnett as a flaw in the reasoning of the 
lower courts. However, Barnett’s argument reveals a lack of 
practical understanding of the business of insurance and its 
regulation. 

The point-of-sale transaction, when the insurance is solic- 
ited and sold, is an essential part of the business of insurance. 
Every person who purchases insurance is a “potential” policy- 
holder until an actual insurance policy is issued. What occurs 
during the solicitation and sale of the policy — what the con- 
sumer represents to the agent and what the agent represents to 
the consumer — influences the very existence and enforceability 
of an insurance contract. The consumer is still a “potential” 
policyholder when solicitation materials are provided, when 
coverage choices are made, and even when the vitally important 
application for coverage is filled out. In terms of regulating 
abuses such as unfair trade practices and coercion, the focus of 
regulatory efforts is protecting “potential” policyholders. 
Moreover, “potential” policyholders become “present” policy- 
holders generally with no personal contact with the insurer 
whatsoever. The insurance agent is the living link between the 
policyholder and the insurance company. “Insurance is a busi- 
ness greatly affected by the public trust, and the holder of an 

28 

agent’s license stands in a fiduciary relationship to both the 
client and insurance company.” Natelson v. Department of 
Insurance, 454 So.2d 31, 32 (Fla. Ist DCA 1984). In sum, the 
relationship between insurer and policyholder revolves around 
the axis of the role of the insurance agent. 

The District Court proceeded to cite the National Securities 
holding that statutes aimed at protecting the relationship be- 
tween insurer and insured, “directly or indirectly,” are statutes 
enacted for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance. 
The Court then concluded: 

Future policyholders then are “indirectly” affected by 
regulations such as section 626.988. Thus, the Court 
finds that Florida section 626.988 indirectly protects 
the relationship between insurer and insured because 
it is aimed at protecting the insurance purchasing 
public at large. 

Barnett, 839 F.Supp. at 841. 

The Court uses the term “indirect” to connote that laws 
which regulate the point-of-sale transaction involve persons 
who are not yet “insureds.” In this sense, as already indicated, 
many important insurance consumer protection laws “indi- 
rectly” affect the relationship between insurer and policy- 
holder.» Therefore, the important consideration is not the 
directness of the protection, but its role in protecting the public. 
The public can be much better protected by regulating against 
abuses at the point of sale rather than after “the horse is out of 
the barn” when a policy has been issued and a “direct” relation- 
ship exists. 

> E.g., misrepresentations and false advertising, defamation, boycott, 

coercion, intimidation, false statements, unfair discrimination, unlawful re- 
bate, twisting, misrepresentation in insurance applications, refusal to insure, 
prohibited arrangements as to funerals and funeral directors, and sliding. Fla. 
Stat. Ann. §626.9541(1) (a), (b), (c), (d), (g), (fh), (k), (1), (s), (x), (2). 

29 

The Circuit Court below summarized its reasoning for 
concluding 626.988 regulates the business of insurance as fol- 
lows: 

Relying on the state court interpretations, testimony 
at trial, reference in the Florida statute to McCarran- 
Ferguson, and explicit instruction from the United 
States Supreme Court in Nat'] Securities that regula- 
tory protection of policyholders may be indirect . . . 
626.988 regulates the business of insurance because 
it protects policyholders. 
Barnett, 43 F.3d at 636. 

This reasoning goes right to the heart of the reality that the 
purpose of 626.988, which was accepted by both the District 
Court and Circuit Court, is to protect policyholders. Thus, 
626.988 is “truly a form of regulation” of the business of 
insurance. The regulation takes place at the point of sale and 
“controls” and “manages” the potential for coercion, unfair trade 
practices, or undue concentration of resources by removing the 
potential for abuse perceived by the Legislature. 

The Solicitor General’s brief supporting Barnett makes an 
important concession at page 12: 

a as acer ores 

and the licensing of . . . agents” can be part of the 

“pusiness of insurance.” ‘See National Securities, 393 

U.S. at 460. Many state sales and licensing regulations 

may indeed be “enacted . . . forthe purpose of regulating” 

that business within the meaning of 15 U.S.C. 1012(b). 

Sol. Gen. Br. p. 12. 

However, the Solicitor General still asserts 626.988 is not such 
a law because an inquiry into the practical, realistic, actual purpose 
of 626.988 is not “protecting or regulating, even indirectly, the 
relationship between the insurance company and its policyholders.” 
The Department would respectfully submit that the practical, real- 

30 

istic, and actual purpose of 626.988 has been overwhelmingly 
demonstrated to be the protection of policyholders. It is the 
Petitioner and its Amici who ask this court to disregard the 
record and adopt an extremely cynical view of Florida’s support 
of 626.988. 

No state or federal court has permitted the established and 
worthwhile goals underlying 626.988, which operate to protect 
Florida consumers, to be mischaracterized as mere'y a conflict 

E. The District Court And Circuit Court Recognized 
The legitimate Peril Of Undue Concentration Of 
Resources. 

One of the stated purposes of 626.988 is the prevention of 
“undue concentration of resources.” As used in the context of 
626.988, the phrase “undue concentration of resources” refers 
to the situation where a third party marketer provides such a 
substantial source of income to an insurer that the third party 
controls, in effect, the decision-making of the insurer. This 
situation was credibly established by uncontroverted testimony 
at trial.’ This practice thus “indirectly” harms Florida consum- 
ers. 

© Glendale, n. 1. 

’ Trial transcript page 25, lines 7-19: “Q: You indicated that another 
purpose of 626.988 is to prevent concentration of economic resources 
through control of insurance companies by financia! institutions. Can you 
explain how the statute works in that regard? A: Yes. What we have seen 
is agents and other third parties who have access to a large customer base of 
potential insurance consumers have the potential through — by virtue of the 
cash flow and the premium writings that can be generated by that block of 
business, of controlling the decision making process of the insurers which 
would provide insurance to that group, to the extent that they have caused 
the insolvency of insurance companies in Florida and other states.” 

Trial transcript, pages 25-26: “...once the insurance company becomes 
dependent on the cash flow the marketers can begin to siphon off funds for 

; 
t 
; 
: 
| 
: 

31 

Both the District Court and Circuit Court placed great 
emphasis on the issue of avoiding threats to insurer solvency in 
examining Section 626.988. The District Court, in reliance on 
the testimony of Department witness Shropshire, held: 

The Court concurs with the concerns noted by the 
witness. For example, in order to make a profit on 
automobile loans or home mortgages, the insurance 
agents may incur business they might otherwise reject 
because they would be pressured by the bank to do so 
in order to consummate the bank’s loan transactions. 
This might lead to the over insurance of nsky busi- 
ness, which could result in the insolvency of the 
insurer. 

Barnett, 839 F Supp. at 842. 
The Circuit Court recognized the significance of Mr. 

Shropshire’s testimony, finding: 
At trial ... Mr. Shropshire testified about the need to 
protect policyholders by regulating the financial sta- 
bility of insurance companies so that they remain 
solvent and able to pay claims upon demand, which 
could be threatened by pressures to make improper 
insurance decisions. This pressure could force an 
insurer to assume a bad risk to quickly consummate a 

administrative expenses or reinsurance agreements with insurers that they 
are otherwise affiliated with, and...those administrative fees and consulting 
fees...drive the decisions with respect to the effectuation of coverage.” 

“If they [the third party marketer] control the insurer they can, therefore, 
effectuate a situation where they're focused on getting their income from the 
sale of the insurance that may not always be in the best interest [of the 
insurer]... They may lower underwriting standards in order to attract more 
insureds. The long run of that is that it could impact the solvency of the 
bad risks are put on the book and the insurance company incurred a bunch 
of claims.” 

32 

bank loan, or could push a bank customer to take out 
unnecessary insurance where the bank’s only motive 
is profit. 
Barnett, 43 F.3d at 636. This point is so critical that elaboration 
of this potential for harm is appropriate. 

Section 626.988 is only one of several statutory provisions 
where the Florida legislature has addressed the danger of de 
facto control of insurers by third parties. As testified at trial,*® 
the Florida legislature has addressed the same danger in several 
other contexts, including: 

(1) holding companies, Fla. Stat. Ann. § 628.801; 
(2) managing general agents, Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.7451; 
(3) third party administrators, Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.88; 

(4) producer-controlled business, Fla. Stat. Ann. 
§ 626.7491; 

(5) favored-agent, Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.730(3). 

The Department presented testimony at trial as to the 
similarities between the dangers addressed in 626.988 from 
“undue concentration of resources,” and the same type of dan- 
gers addressed in other statutes. The motivation to push poor 
quality business on an insurer is present in each circumstance 
addressed in the above-cited statutes. Most individual insurance 
agents are compensated through a system of sales-based com- 
missions, and so some will act upon the same motivation. The 
difference is that an individual agent, or even an independent 

* Trial Transcript, page 27-28. “Q: Okay. Mr. Dowdell, are there other 
Statutes within the [Florida Insurance] Code in addition to 626.988, which 
were enacted for the purpose of regulating the potential for control of insurers 
by insurance marketers? A: Yes. There are a number of statutes which have 
been enacted for that purpose. There is a producer controlled insurer stat- 
ute...a managing general agent law...a holding company statute...a third party 
administrator statute...” 

33 

small town bank, does not have sufficient leverage to compel 
insurer management to do something management knows would 
be adverse to the insurer’s solvency. This is not true when an 
insurer becomes so dependent on a large bank holding company 
for its dominant income production that the insurance company 
management cannot afford to make objective decisions. An 
insurer’s management decisions could certainly be adversely 
influenced by Barnett, with its 600 Florida branches (Lodging, 
Tab C. p. 9) and enormous potential income stream. 

Other commentators have recognized the very real danger 
to insurer solvency that results when third parties obtain de facto 
control of an insurer’s decision making? with the attendant 
inability of the insurer to pay claims of policyholders. 

Moreover, a Report of the U.S. House of Representatives 
closely echoes the testimony of the Department’s witnesses 
below, and reveals that the Florida Legislature’s concerns, are 
neither illusory nor hypothetical. This Congressional report is 
entitled Failed Promises — Insurance Company Insolvencies — 
A Report by the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 
of the Committee On Energy and Commerce, U.S. House of 
Representatives, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. (1990). (The Subcom- 
mittee was chaired by Rep. John Dingell, and the February 1990 
Report is sometimes referred to as the “Dingell Report.”) The 
first two of a list of six “key weaknesses in the present system 

’ The insolvency of the Baldwin-United insurance company, one of the 
largest insurer insolvencies ever to occur in the United States, is attributed 
by commentators to outside control of the insurer by affiliated parties that 
did not have the insurer’s best interest at heart. See, e.g., Dunne, /ntercom- 
pany Transactions Within Insurance Holding Companies, 20 The ABA 
Forum 445, 446 (1985): “The bottom line question for insurance regulators 
is: Can our present laws assure the preservation of the money people have 
entrusted to insurers that operate within holding company systems to cover 
risks they are committed to insure? In other words, can the laws keep 
insurers from getting milked to impotence...” 

34 

of solvency regulation,”!° identified in the Subcommittee Re- 
port, directly address the danger of outside influence and control 
of an insurer by third parties. The Report notes that “through 
excessive reliance on the judgements of managing general 
agents, brokers, and other companies, many insurance company 
managers essentially delegate their most fundamental responsi- 
bilities to third parties who may have conflicting interests or 
inadequate abilities.”'' The Subcommittee termed the prob- 
lems posed by managing general agents, as third parties who 
can come to control an insurer, as “exceedingly dangerous.”!? 
Managing general agents are, in essence, “super agents” who 
control the marketing efforts of an insurer. This arrangement 
is very similar to the sort of arrangements likely to occur 
between bank holding companies and insurers. Moreover, con- 
trary to Barnett’s assertion, financial institutions could exert 
undue influence on insurance company decisions without nec- 
essarily meeting the definition of a Managing General Agent or 
other licensed marketer and thus a specific prohibition is re- 
quired. 

While failing to acknowledge that Section 626.988 ad- 
dresses the same concern, Barnett, at footnote 2, page 28 of its 
brief, concedes Florida laws regarding third party administrators 
and managing general agents protect the solvency of insurers 
stating: 

There is no dispute that these laws of general applica- 

tion were intended to protect the solvency of insur- 

ance companies by limiting the opportunity for 

powerful third parties to influence underwriting deci- 
sions. 

10 Subcommittee Report, page 3. 
'! Subcommittee Report at 3. 
'2 Subcommittee Report at 10. 

35 

Although more precise in its focus, Section 626.988 deals with 
a far more powerful third party than managing general agents or 
third party administrators, and the potential for influencing 
underwriting decisions is correspondingly greater. 

Il. The Federal Reserve Act, Including Section 92, Specifi- 
cally Relates To The Business Of Banking. n 

Barnett argues in its brief at page 41 that even if Section 
626.988 clears the first hurdle of the McCarran-Ferguson test 
and regulates the business of insurance, this Florida law must 
clear a second hurdle, that Section 92 does not specifically relate to 
the business of insurance. Barnett describes this second hurdle as 
“virtually insurmountable.” Barnett’s argument makes a subtle, but 
inappropriate modification of the actual McCarran-Ferguson test. 

When McCarran-Ferguson is properly applied, and Section 
626.988 clears the hurdle of the first part of the McCarran-Ferguson 
test, it is Section 92 which then must be tested and clear the hurdle 
of “specifically relating to the business of insurance.” Barnett's 
argument seeks to obscure the fact that there has been a shifting of 
the burden of preemption (the concept of reverse-preemption). 
Barnett must now prove that Section 92 passes muster as a federal 
law which overcomes the state insurance regulatory law. By 
suggesting the Florida law must clear both the McCarran-Ferguson 
test hurdles, Barnett manufactures the argument that: 

[I)f a prohibition on banks selling insurai. = regulates the 
“business of insurance,” section 92's express authoriza- 
tion of bank insurance sales must at least specifically 
relate to the insurance business. 

Barnett Br. p. 41. This argument is flawed because it attempts to 
answer the second test simply by looking at the answer to the first 
test. Contrary to this flawed logic, this Court must scrutinize 
Secticn 92 on its own merits to determine whether Section 92 was 
enacted to “specifically relate to the business of insurance.” This 

36 

analysis is independent of that applied in the first test to the state 
law. 

A. The Second Part Of The Mccarran-Ferguson Test 
Must Be Applied In A Manner Which Gives 
Substance To McCarran-Ferguson’s Protection 
Of Regulation Of The Business Of Insurance By 
The States. 

In determining whether Section 92 “specifically relates” to 
the business of insurance, the weight given to the preemptive 
effect of McCarran-Ferguson has great bearing on the outcome 
reached. The reasoning of the District Court and Circuit Court 
below, and of the Owensboro courts, reflects a strong recogni- 
tion of the reverse-preemptive power of McCarran-Ferguson. 
This perspective was well expressed by the Circuit Court below 
as follows: 

With McCarran-Ferguson guiding our analysis, this 

Court must ask whether Fla.Stat. ch. 626.988 regu- 

lates insurance, so as to presumptively preempt con- 

trary federal law. Second, we must ask whether 

section 92 specifically relates to insurance, so that it 

will fit within the McCarran-Ferguson exception that 

reinstates federal law as supreme. / 
Barnett, 43 F 3d at 634. 

The McCarran-Ferguson tests thus proceed as follows: A 
state law which passes the first test preempts the federal law. 
The federal law can only be “reinstated” by passing the second 
test. 

The cases considering whether Section 92 “specifically 
relates” to the business of insurance have two common points 
in their reasoning. First, under McCarran-Ferguson, a federal 
enactment “specifically relates” only to its primary subject. A 
provision cannot specifically relate to two things at once. That 
is, is the primary subject of Section 92 banking or the business 

37 

of insurance? Second, the Courts analyze whether the federal 
law “specifically relates” to the business of insurance with 
enough substance to reinstate the federal law over the state law. 
In other words, the federal law must “specifically relate” with 
enough preemptive horsepower to displace the state law. This 
perspective is expressed in the District Court’s reasoning that: 
. . . Section 92 simply fails to manifest any express 
intent to preempt state insurance laws. That silence 
is particularly understandable given the historical fact 
that section 92 was enacted “at a time when the 
business of insurance was believed to be beyond the 
reach of Congress’ power under the Commerce Clause.” 

Barnett, 839 F Supp. at 843. 

The perspective and reasoning of the lower courts in applying 
McCarran-Ferguson give substance to Congress’ intent for regula- 
tion of the business of insurance to lie primarily with the states. 
Through the “clear statement rule,” state laws enjoy the protection 
necessary to maintain the integrity of the state insurance regulatory 
system. 

However, Barnett and its Amici approach the issue from an 
entirely different perspective. They view McCarran-Ferguson as a 
mere “bump in the road” of federal law supremacy, with any 
connection to the business of insurance being sufficient to move the 
federal law past the McCarran-Ferguson obstacle: For example, the 
Solicitor General, at page 20 of its brief concedes: 

We may certainly assume that in authorizing national 
banks in small towns to sell insurance, Congress’ pri- 
mary purpose was to regulate banking. 
Yet, the Solicitor General proceeds to assert Section 92 “specifically 
relates to the business of insurance by permitting some banks to 
engage in one aspect of that business.” (Solicitor General's Br. at 
21.) This reasoning is understandable from individuals accustomed 
to the supremacy of federal laws under the National Banking Act. 

38 

Howevei, any attempt to preempt state regulation of insurance 
requires a different preemption analysis under McCarran-Ferguson. 

B. The Courts Which Have Addressed The Issue 
Agree: section 92 Is Not An “Act Specifically 
Relate|d] To The Business Of Insurance.” 

In determining whether Section 92 “specifically relates to the 

business of insurance,” it is very instructive how the District and 

issue. 
1. The Owensboro District Court 

The Owensboro Distnct Court conducted its McCarran-Fer- 
guson analysis “in reverse order” and determined first whether 12 
U.S.C. § 92 is an Act of Congress which relates to the business of 

The “business of insurance” has been narrowly 
defined, and it seems fairly obvious that § 92 does not 
constitute Congressional regulation of that business. 
This section is a part of the National Bank Act, and 
its function is to grant additional powers to national 
banks. That the power granted to the national banks 
involves insurance does not transform this section into 
a regulation of the business of insurance. Accord- 
ingly, § 92 will not invalidate the Kentucky statute on 
these grounds. 

Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Moore, 803 F.Supp. 24, 36 (E.D.Ky. 
1992). The Owensboro District Court looked at the function of 
Section 92 — to grant additional powers to national banks — and 
properly concluded that the fact that this grant of power involved 
insurance did not transform Section 92 into regulation of the 
business of insurance. 

39 

2. The Owensboro Circuit Court 

On appeal, the Owensboro Circuit Court majority stated, 
“we need not consider whether Section 92 ‘specifically relates 
to the business of insurance’; for without regard to whether 
Section 92 so relates, McCarran-Ferguson cannot save Section 
“287 from preemption.” Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Stephens, 44 
F.3d 388, 392 (6th Cir. 1994). Thus, the Owensboro majority 
took no position on whether Section 92 “specifically relates to 
the business of insurance.” 

Judge Batchelder, in a dissenting opinion (Pet. App. 50a- 
64a), did address whether Section 92 specifically relates to the 
business of insurance. Her position squared with the 
Owensboro District Court that Section 92 is not an Act specifi- 
cally related to the business of insurance. (Pet. App. 61a ef seq.) 
Citing Section 92’s legislative history, she found the District 
Court’s Owensboro analysis “sound” because the primary in- 
tent of Section 92 was to strengthen small national banks by 
providing them with additional sources of revenue Owensboro, 
44 F.3d at 397-398. 

3. The Barnett District Court 

The District Court addressed the issue of Section 92 “spe- 
cifically relat{ing]} to the business of insurance” at footnote 3 of 
its opinion: 

In the alternative, Plaintiff [Barnett] could prevail 

under a McCarran-Ferguson analysis if the Court 

found that section 92 was specifically related to the 
business of insurance, and if 626.988 is deemed to be 

a law enacted for the purpose of regulating insurance. 

However, Plaintiff has consistently stated and/or con- 

ceded that section 92 is a “bank” law, and has prem- 

ised its argument accordingly. 

40 41 

Barnett, 839 F Supp. at 839, Pet. App. 25a. The Court’s obser- Although Nat’! Bank of Or. did not address 
vation that Barnett had stated and/or conceded Section 92 is a whether section 92 relates to insurance, it did empha- 
“bank” law is supported by the following trial excerpt: size at length the relation between section 92 and both 

the National Bank Act and the Federal Reserve Act, 
neither of which suggests section 92 relates specifi- 
cally to insurance or was a specific attempt to preempt 

The Court: And your belief is that Section 92 
is a banking statute? 

Mr. Wells: I believe that Section 92 is in the Na- state insurance laws. Both Acts concern banking, not 
tional Bank Act and provides that a insurance. Moreover, Congress enacted section 92 
national bank can engage in certain “at a time when the business of insurance was believed 
insurance agency activities. to be beyond the reach of Congress’ power under the 

The Court: So would you classify it as a banking Commerce Clause.” Fabe, U.S. at__ , 113 S.Ct. 
statute or an insurance statute or a com- at 2212. As the trial court pointed out, “[e}ven South- 
bination thereof? Eastern Underwriters, which briefly altered the pre- 

, e emption landscape, noted that prior to 1944 Congress 

Mr. Wells: | wanes canmy 3050 SaENG | ——. ‘st no Gane’ had chemapted to conteel the business of 

TR-108. Barnett made the same concession in its pleadings, insurance.” {citations omitted] Before 1944, both 
stating: Congress and the Supreme Court understood Paul v. 

This issue was also squarely addressed in Owensboro. Virginia [citation omitted] to place insurance outside 

There, the court recognized that a national bank en- the Commerce Clause power. Accordingly, when 

gaged in insurance agency activities pursuant to Sec- Congress enacted section 92 in 1916 — nearly 30 

tion 92 is not engaged in the business of insurance, it years before South-Eastern Underwriters — Con- 

is engaged in the business of banking: “that the power gress could not have been attempting to regulate a 

granted to the national banks involves insurance does business that it believed it had no power to regulate. 

not transform this section [92] into a regulation of the Congress was concerned wi.h banking, not insurance. 

business of insurance.” Owensboro, 803 F.Supp. at This Court concludes that section 92 neither “‘spe- 

36. cifically relates to the business of insurance,” 15 

R. 2-28, p.21. U.S.C. § 1012(b), nor “specifically requires,” Fabe, 
4. The Barnett Circuit Court pada a. S.Ct. at 2211, that apparently 
The Circuit Court below began its analysis of this issue by Se ee 
tracing the history of Section 92, which it took in “compacted form” Barnett, 43 F.3d at 637. 
from United States Nat'l Bank of Or. v. Independent Ins. Agents, The pertinent decisions reveal that there is no conflict 
__US.__, 113 S.Ct. 2173, 124 L.Ed.2d 402 (1993). Barnett, among the federal circuits on the issue of whether Section 92 
43 F.3d at 637. n. 2; (Pet. App. 13a-14a). The Circuit Court, “specifically relates to the business of insurance.” To the con- 

relying on this Court’s decision in Fabe, stated: trary, each Court which has considered the question has dis- 

42 

posed of this issue in the negative with relative ease. (See also 
Louisiana state court decision: First Advantage Ins., Inc. v. 
Green, 652 So.2d 562 (La. Ct. App.), writ. denied, 654 So.2d 
331 (La. 1995).) 

C. The Court Should Examine The 1916 Act As A 
Whole To Determine Whether Section 92 Speci- 
fically Relates To The Business Of Insurance. 

The McCarran-Ferguson Act provides that no “Ac?” of 
Congress shall impair state law enacted for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance unless the Act specifically 
relates to the business of insurance. Therefore, in determining 
whether the exception to McCarran’s reverse preemption ap- 
plies to Section 92, examination of the 1916 Act as a whole is 
instructive. (See Judge Schlesinger’s remarks at Transcript of 
Motions Hearing, 41-42.) 

Section 92 was enacted in 1916 as a part of a comprehen- 
sive amendment of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.'> The 1916 
legislation is entitled “An Act to Amend Certain Sections of the 
Act Entitled ‘Federal Reserve Act.”” The 1916 Act (Lodging, 
Tab A) amended numerous sections of the 1913 Federal Re- 
serve Act in a variety of ways distinctively relating to banking, 
including: permitting member banks to maintain reserves in 
their own vaults; increasing the amounts of certain instruments 
a bank could receive if secured by collateral; permitting any 
Federal reserve bank to make advances to member banks for a 
period not exceeding fifteen days; permitting member banks to 
accept certain instruments for the purpose of furnishing dollar 
exchange; authorizing member banks to open and maintain bank 
accounts for foreign correspondents; permitting banks to make 
loans secured by farm land and real estate situated within 100 

7 A copy of the 1916 Amendment to the 1913 Federal Reserve Act is 
included in the Department’s Lodging with the Supreme Court Clerk. 

43 

miles of the bank’s location; and authorizing national banking 
associations with capital and surplus of $1 million or more to 
invest in the stock of banks engaged in international and foreign 
banking. One provision of the 1916 Act, now codified as 12 
U.S.C. 92, permitted national banks located in a place of 5,000 
or less population to act as insurance agents. 

However, Section 92 is not an “Act.” It constitutes only a 
small part of chapter 461, “An Act To amend certain sections of 
the Act entitled ‘Federal reserve Act,’ ....”. H.R. 13391, 64th 
Cong., Ist Sess. Ch. 461 (1916). The 1916 amendment to the 
Federal Reserve Act, taken in its entirety, cannot be said to 
“specifically relate” to the business of insurance. As noted by 
this Court in U.S. Nat'l Bank of Or., “Section 92 travels together 
with the paragraphs that surround it.” 113 S.Ct. at 2185. 

D. Section 92 Does Not Meet The McCarran- 
Ferguson “Clear Statement Rule”. 

Even assuming arguendo that Section 92 is an “Act,” 
Section 92 still does not “specifically relate” to the business of 
insurance within McCarran-Ferguson’s “clear statement rule,” 
as described in Fabe, supra, as follows: 

The McCarran-Ferguson Act did not simply overrule 

South-Eastern Underwriters and restore the status 

quo. To the contrary, it transformed the legal land- 

scape by overturning the normal rules of pre-emption. 

Ordinarily, a federal law supersedes any inconsistent 

state law. The first clause of § 2(b) reverses this by 

imposing what is, in effect, a clear-statement rule, a 

rule that state laws enacted “for the purpose of regu- 

lating the business of insurance” do not yield to 
conflicting federal statutes unless a federal statute 
specifically requires otherwise. 

113 S.Ct. at 2211 (emphasis added). 

as 

The “clear statement rule” arises in part as a result of the 
strong presumption against imputing to Congress an intent to 
preempt state regulation in an area which has been traditionally 
left to the states. Jones v. Rath Packing Co., supra, 430 U.S. at 
525. The Fabe Court’s recognition of this rule also arises from 
the legislative history statements “animating” the first clause of 
15 U.S.C. § 1012(b): 

Elaborating upon the purpose animating the first 
clause of § 2(b) of the McCarran-Ferguson Act, Sena- 
tor Ferguson observed: 

“What we have in mind is that the insurance 
business, being interstate commerce, if we merely 
enacta law relating to interstate commerce, or if there 
is a law now on the statute books relating in some way 
to interstate commerce, it would not apply to insur- 
ance. We wanted to be sure that the Congress, in its 
wisdom, would act specifically with reference to in- 
surance in enacting the law.” 91 Cong Rec 1487 
(1945). This passage later confirms that “no existing 
law and no future law should, by mere implication, be 
applied to the business of insurance” (statement of 
Mr. 

Mahoney). /bid. 

Fabe, 113 S.Ct. at 2211, n. 7 (emphasis added). 

These excerpts from the legislative history of the McCar- 
ran-Ferguson Act reflect that Congress intended to avoid any 
inadvertent preemption of state insurance law by federal law. It 
is not enough for a federal act to involve the business of 
insurance. Something more was envisioned. In the words of 
Senator Ferguson, Congress must act “specifically” with refer- 
ence to insurance. 

When used as an adjective, “specific” is defined as “con- 
stituting or falling into a specified category” or “restricted by 

45 

nature to a particular individual, situation, relation, or effect.” 
Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (1981). A given law 
cannot “specifically relate” to two different subjects. Section 
92 is but one of a variety of provisions contained in the 1916 
Act amending the Federal Reserve Act which confers additional 
authority to national banks. Section 92 only relates to the 
business of banking, not the business of insurance. 

When used as a noun, “specific” means “details” or “par- 
ticulars.” Jd. In this context, Section 92 must therefore deal 
with the business of insurance in a detailed manner in order to 
qualify as an exception under the McCarran-Ferguson Act. The 
1916 Act contains a variety of detailed provisions relating to the 
intricacies of numerous banking activities. Section 92, by con- 
trast, does not describe insurance-related activities in any detail 
whatsoever. The fact that the word “insurance” is mentioned 
several times in Section 92 does not transform the statute into 
an act which specifically relates to the business of insurance. 

Further, in addition to authorizing insurance sales, Section 
92 also authorizes a national bank to act as a broker for real estate 
loans and to receive fees and commissions in that regard. The 
common element of the two activities is the receipt of commis- 
sions. Section 92 therefore specifically relates to bank income, 
not the business of insurance. 

The version of the McCarran-Ferguson Act which was 
passed by both the House of Representatives and the Senate 
read: 

No Act of Congress shall be construed to invalidate, 

impair or supersede any law enacted by any State for 

the purpose of regulating the business of insurance, or 

which imposes a fee or tax upon such business, unless 

such act specifically so provides. 
91 Cong. Rec. 329-30 (1945), 91 Cong. Rec. 478-88 (1945) 
(emphasis added). 

46 

The McCarran-Ferguson Act was amended in Conference 
Committee to exempt a Federal act which “specifically relates 
to the business of insurance.” Barnett asserts that the Confer- 
ence Committee “jettisoned the narrow savings clause in favor 
of an expansive clause that validates any federal statute that 
‘specifically relates to the business of insurance.’”” However, 
the Conference Committee Report (Lodging, Tab B) states it 
was the purpose of the agreement between the House and Senate 
to state in as clear language as possible that a moratorium be 
granted to the insurance business from the operation of antitrust 
laws, “leaving the taxing and regulatory powers of the several 
States fully protected.”'4 This statement makes it clear the 
language change was not intended to dilute protection of state 
regulation. 

E. In Enacting Section 92, Congress Never In- 
tended To Permit The Comptroller To Unilat- 
erally Supplant Established State Insurance 
Regulatory Schemes. 

There can be little doubt that in 1916, Congress had no 
intention of placing the Comptroller of the Currency in the 
position of regulating the business of insurance. Any authority 
granted to the Comptroller is based on the Comptroller’s author- 
ity over the business of banking, not the business of insurance. 
Regulation of the business of insurance is entirely outside the 
Comptroller’s area of jurisdiction and expertise. To conclude 
that Section 92 specifically relates to the business of insurance 
would produce the absurd result of the Comptroller of the 
Currency regulating the business of insurance. 

Congress’ purpose in enacting Section 92 was to allow a 
limited group of small national banks to pursue another revenue 
source. Prior to Section 92’s enactment, national banks had no 

7 A copy of the Conference Committee Report is included in the 

Department's Lodging with the Supreme Court Clerk. 

47 

authority to sell insurance even in the absence of state law 
prohibiting such sales. Thus, Section 92 has been properly 
construed to merely permit (as opposed to mandate) national 
banks to sell insurance in towns of under 5,000 population, only 
if a state law does not prohibit such activity. However, in 
Florida, state law does prohibit such activity for valid reasons 
unique to Florida. There is no indication whatsoever that Sec- 
tion 92 was intended to remove any power heid by the states. 

F. Cases Cited By Barnett Construing “Specifically 
Relates To Insurance” Are Distinguishable. 

Barnett’s position is not strengthened by reference to cases 
involving the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA). 29 U.S.C. § 1001, et seg. ERISA comprehensively 
regulates insured and self-insured health and life insurance plans 
offered by employers to employees. “ERISA, both in general 
and in the guaranteed benefit policy provision in particular, 
obviously and specifically relates to the business of insurance.” 
John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Harris Trust & Sav. Bank, 
__ US. _, 114 S.Ct. 517, 525, 126 L.Ed.2d 524 (1993). In 
contrast, Section 92 does not comprehensively regulate the 
business of insurance. 

Further, ERISA’s “deemer” clause cleariy evidences an 
intent to exempt employee benefit plans from the preemption 
language of McCarran-Ferguson. In this regard, 29 U.S.C. 
1144(b)(2)(B) expressly provides that no employee benefit plan 
“shall be deemed to be an insurance company .. . or to be 
engaged in the business of insurance . . . for purposes of any law 
of any state purporting to regulate insurance companies.” 
Whereas several courts have found ERISA to specifically relate 
to insurance, none have found Section 92 to relate to anything 
other than banking. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

48 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

“Because the power of the federal government to tax 
was not delegated to the states” by the Act ... [citation 
omitied] the application of federal laws to insurance 
companies is not inconsistent with the intent of Con- 
gress to refrain from interfering with state regulation 
of the insurance business. 

Hanover, 598 F.2d at 1218. Further, unlike Section 92, the Internal 
Revenue Code provision considered in that case is part of a perva- 
sive regulatory scheme in which Congress has indicated an intent 
to occupy the field. (Sections 801 to 843 of Subchapter L of Chapter 
1 of the Internal Revenue Code) 

Similarly, the Texas Employers’ Court addressed the Long- 
shore and Harbor Workers Compensation Act. 33 U.S.C. § 901, et 
seq. Unlike Section 92, the Federal worker’s compensation act 
expressly provides that an employer’s liability under the Act is 
“exclusive and in place of all other liability.” 33 U.S.C. § 905. 
Further, the Act is a comprehensive scheme addressing worker’s 
compensation benefits provided by employers through insured and 
self-insured programs. Section 935 of the Act subjects insurers to 
all of the requirements and obligations applicable to employers, and 
expressly indicates that such a requirement facilitated the admini- 
stration of the entire regulatory scheme. Again, unlike Section 92, 
the intent of the Act to preempt may be inferred from the creation 
of a pervasive federal regulatory system. 

49 

Finally, Wisner v. Wisner, 338 U.S. 655 (1950), cited by 
Barnett, is irrelevant. The case dealt with a conflict between the 
National Service Life Insurance Company Act of 1940 and a state’s 
community property law. No state law enacted for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance was involved and the case has 
no bearing on the interpretation of the McCarran-Ferguson Act. 

Ill. Under Traditional Preemption Doctrine, Petitioner 
Cannot Overcome The Strong Presumption That Con- 
gress Did Not Intend To Oust State Regulation Of The 
Conduct Of Insurance By Preempting Section 626.988. 

The Eleventh Circuit did not reach the question whether 
Section 92 preempts Section 626.988 under a traditional pre- 
emption analysis because it concluded that the McCarran-Fer- 
guson Act’s “reverse-preemption” rule precludes an 
interpretation of Section 92 as superseding state law. Neverthe- 
less, even under traditional preemption doctrine, Section 
626.988 is fully applicable to Barnett, regardless of its national 
bank charter. 

Petitioner cannot overcome the strong presumption that 
Congress did not intend to displace the States’ traditional role 
in regulating the conduct of insurance within their borders. See 
N.Y. Conf. of Blue Cross v. Travelers Ins.,__ U.S. __, 115 $.Ct. 
1671, 1676 (1995). There is no “clear and manifest” evidence, 
id., that Congress intended to convey an indefeasible nght on 
small-town national banks to sell insurance even where state 
insurance law would limit or preclude that activity, especially 
where, as here, the state law is evenly applied to both state-char- 
tered and federally chartered banks. Section 92’s legislative 
history demonstrates that it was designed to enable small-town 
national banks to obiain additional fee income in order to better 
compete with state-chartered banks that were permitted to en- 
gage in these nonbanking activities. See 53 Cong. Rec. 11001 
(1916); Barnett Br. at 3. There is no evidence Congress believed 
that this authority. was critical to the banking functions of 

50 

national banks, and there is no evidence that it serves such a 
purpose. In enacting Section 92, Congress did no more than 
grant small-town national banks the charter capacity to engage 
in a business that was universally understood to be controlled 
exclusively by the states. Section 626.988, which has the effect 
of precluding a// bank subsidiaries of bank holding companies 
from selling non-credit insurance, does not create an “obstacle” 
to the accomplishment of Congress’ goals. See Hillsborough 
County, Fla. v. Automated Medical Labs., Inc., 471 U.S. 707, 
713 (1975). 

To avoid repetition and preserve space, the Department 
will not reiterate the traditional preemption arguments more 
fully set out in the Brief of the Florida Association of Life 
Underwriters, et al., and fully adopts those arguments. 

CONCLUSION 

The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Eleventh Circuit should be affirmed. 

Respectfully submitted, 

DAVID J. BUSCH 
Counsel of Record 

DANIEL Y. SUMNER 
General Counsel 
DENNIS SILVERMAN 
KAREN ASHER-COHEN 
FLORIDA DEPARTMENT 
OF INSURANCE 
200 E. Gaines Street 
Tallahassee, FL 32399-0333 
(904) 413-4146 

Attorneys for Respondents 
Bill Nelson and the Florida 

; Department of Insurance 
December 8, 1995. 


