) Supreme Onur, UE. 
’icneRD 

No.94- 941837 MAY 8 1995 

VirTilbe wv fete ULCERK 

IN THE 

Supreme Court of the United States 

OCTOBER TERM, 1994 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N. A.. 

Petitioner. 
V. 

TOM GALLAGHER, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER OF 
THE STATE OF FLORIDA, FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE, 
FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF LIFE UNDERWRITERS, 
PROFESSIONAL INSURANCE AGENTS OF FLORIDA, INC., 
AND FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE AGENTS, 

Respondents. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

NATHAN LEWIN 
(Counsel of Record) 
ScoTT L. NELSON 

+ Yar fea ersaad JAMES R. HEAVNER, JR. 
sina tg sence ; MILLER, CASSIDY, 

7 qh ney “7 : LARROCA & LEWIN 
Jechasnuitie Fi, 22000 2555 M Street, N.W. 
904 . 701. zane oat Washington, D.C. 20037 
tale nan (202) 293-6400 

Attorneys for Petitioner 

PRESS OF BYRON S. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 

+ lal 

(i) 

QUESTIONS PRESENTED 

l. Whether a federal statute that gives a 
national bank operating in a town with a population not 
exceeding 5,000 the right to sell insurance (12 U.S.C. § 
92) preempts a state law that prohibits such a bank from 
selling insurance. 

2. Whether a state law prohibiting banks from 
selling insurance is a law enacted “for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance" within the meaning 
of the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b). 

3. Whether 12 U.S.C. § 92 is an “Act [that] 
specifically relates to the business of insurance” within the 
meaning of the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. 

§ 1012(b). 

(ii) 
LIST OF PARTIES 

The names of all parties to the proceeding 
below appear in the caption of this case. 

The petitioner Barnett Bank of Marion 
County, N.A., is a wholly owned subsidiary of a bank 
holding company, Barnett Banks, Inc. The petitioner has 
a subsidiary, Barnett Investment Properties, Inc., which is 
a bank service corporation that petitioner owns jointly with 
other Florida-based banking subsidiaries of Barnett Banks, 
Inc. The parent, Barnett Banks, Inc., has a direct 
Ownership interest in two non-wholly owned subsidiaries: 
Barnett Bank of Lake Okeechobee (a state bank) and 
Southeast Switch, Inc. (a regional ATM/EFT network). 
In addition, Barnett Banks, Inc., through a wholly owned 
subsidiary, indirectly holds a fifty percent ownership 
interest in Main America Capital, L.C., a joint venture 
with MAC Partners. 

O- Gabe 

(iii) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED ..........-.5555: (i) 
EE ee (ii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ...........-55. (v) 
6 | dE Re 2 
DT Ce ceeseebccececccoccscces 2 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

I. THERE IS A SQUARE CONFLICT OF 

CIRCUITS ON THE LEGAL ISSUES ...... 10 

Il. THE LEGAL PRINCIPLES ARE IMPORTANT 
AND SHOULD BE APPLIED UNIFORMLY 
ACROSS THE COUNTRY ............. 12 

(iv) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS — CONTINUED 
Page 

Ill. THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY 
HAS ACTIVELY SUPPORTED THE 
PETITIONER’S POSITION IN 
FEDERAL LITIGATION .............. 14 

IV. THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT'S DECISION 
ip GUE ccc ecewesececeseses« 16 

V. THIS CASE IS THE MORE APPROPRIATE 
VEHICLE FOR DECISION OF THE 
Sees GUE ccc ccc ceseecerceses 17 

CUURMNETD ccc ccc cece eee esse eeeeeens 18 

ela at. a Al ay al 

(v) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

Page(s) 

CASES: 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Barnett Bank of Marion County, N.A. v. Gallagher, 
GD Fie Ge Gee Gs GUD cece cc cece. passim 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

First Nat'l Bank v. Smith, 
610 F.2d 1258 (Sth Cir. 1980) .............. 14 

Independent Ins. Agents of Am. v. Ludwig, 
Ge ede See Ge Ge Te cc ccc cece cece: 14 

Independent Ins. Agents, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 
736 F.2d 468 (8th Cir. 1984) ............... 14 

Independent Ins. Agents, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 
ff ff | a. 8 eee 14 

(vi) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — CONTINUED 
Page(s) 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Nations Bank of North Carolina, N.A. v. Variable 
Annuity Life Ins. Co., 
SP SD 066s 24Gb sd oe e-ctsuweds 14 

Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Moore, 
803 F. Supp. 24 (E.D. Ky. 1992) ............ 11 

Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Stephens, 
44 F.3d 388 (6th Cir. 1994)............. passim 

Union Labor Life Insurance Co. v. Pireno, 
ee nen Cad eed bee Ces 11 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

United States Dep't. of Treasury v. Fabe, 
Xe TTT TT eT Tee ee 9 

United States Nat’! Bank of Oregon v. 
Independent Ins. Agents, 
—  & Ss 5 rrr rrrreEieeeer 5, 14 

(vii) 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — CONTINUED 

Page(s) 
Variable Annuity Life Ins. Co. v. Clark, 
13 F.3d 833 (Sth Cir. 1994) .........000 2 ees 14 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS: 
FR. © 4 © & PPP rrierrererleeee 2 
STATUTES: 
a Pe ee ee ee passim 
i ee ved eseebaeeseweeee passim 
Be es EEE wer cc ccc sceesoenseces 2 
am WG, § TERS ccc csesccces pevnceccecs 8 
Ark. Code Ann. § 23-64-203 (Michie 1994) ....... 6 
Colo. Rev. Stat. § 10-2-221(2) (1994)........... 6 
Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 38a-755 
(West 1992 & Supp. 1994) ............. 6 
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.988 
(West 1984 & Supp. 1995) .......... passim 
Ga. Code Ann. § 33-3-23(b) (1992) ............ 6 

Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 287.030 (Michie 1988) . . . passim 

(viii) No. 94- 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — CONTINUED 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Tex. Ins. Code. Ann. art. 21.07-3 § S(h) (West 1993). 6 a , 
The petitioner, Barnett Bank of Marion County, 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 8, § 4811 (1993) ............, 6 

W. Va. Code §§ 31A-8C-1, 31A-8C-2(f).... 2... 6 

2 
OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the Court of Appeals is reported at 
43 F.3d 631 (11th Cir. 1995), and is reproduced at Pet. 
App. A, infra, la-16a. The opinion of the United States 
District Court for the Middle District of Florida (Pet. App. 
B, infra, 17a-36a) is reported at 839 F. Supp. 835. The 
Court of Appeals’ order denying a timely petition for 
rehearing (Pet. App. C, infra, 37a-38a) is unreported. The 
opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit that 
conflicts with the decision in this case (Pet. App. D, injfra, 
39a-64a) is reported at 44 F.3d 388. 

JURISDICTION 

The opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Eleventh Circuit was issued on January 30, 1995. A 
timely petition for rehearing and suggestion for rehearing en 
banc was denied on March 28, 1995. This Court has 
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED 

l. The Supremacy Clause of the United States 
Constitution (art. VI, cl. 2) provides in pertinent part: 

This Constitution, and the Laws of the United 
States which shall be made in Pursuance 
thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall 
be made, under the Authority of the United 
States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land 

3 
2. 12 U.S.C. § 92, 39 Stat. 753, provides: 

In addition to the powers now vested by law 
in national banking associations organized 
under the laws of the United States any such 
association located and doing business in any 
place the population of which does not exceed 
five thousand inhabitants, as shown by the last 
preceding decennial census, may, under such 
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by 
the Comptroller of the Currency, act as the 
agent for any fire, life, or other insurance 
company authorized by the authorities of the 
State in which said bank is located to do 
business in said State, by soliciting and selling 
insurance and collecting premiums on policies 
issued by such company; and may receive for 
services so rendered such fees or commissions 
as may be agreed upon between the said 
association and the insurance company for 
which it may act as agent: Provided, 
however, That no such bank shall in any case 
assume or guarantee the payment of any 
premium on insurance policies issued through 
its agency by its principal: And provided 
further, That the bank shall not guarantee the 
truth of any statement made by an assured in 
filing his application for insurance. 

a The McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. 
§ 1012(b), 59 Stat. 34, provides in pertinent part: 

No Act of Congress shall be construed to 
invalidate, impair, or supersede any law 
enacted by any State for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance, or which 

4 

imposes a fee or tax upon such business, 
unless such Act specifically relates to the 
business of insurance... . 

4. Florida Statutes Annotated § 626.988 
provides in pertinent part: 

626.988. Financial institutions; agents and 
solicitors prohibited from employment; 

exceptions 

(1) For the purpose of this section, the 
following definitions shall apply: 

(a) "Financial institution” means any 
bank, bank holding company, savings and 
loan association, savings and loan association 
holding company, or savings and loan 
association service corporation or any 
subsidiary, affiliate, or foundation of any of 
the foregoing. This definition shall not, 
however include any financial institution 
which has been granted an exemption by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System pursuant to s. 4(d) of the federal Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, [] 
or any financial institution which neither owns 
more than 10 percent of the capital stock, nor 
exercises effective control, of a bank, savings 
and loan association, or entity licensed under 
chapter 494 and licensed or authonzed to 
transact business in this state. Specifically 
excluded from this definition is any bank 
which is not a subsidiary or affiliate of a bank 
holding company and is located in a city 

= ee he Se 

5 

having a population of less than 5,000 
according to the last preceding census. 

(b) “Insurance agency activities” 
means the procurement of applications for, or 
the solicitation, negotiation, _ selling, 
effectuating, or servicing of, any policy or 
contract of insurance other than credit life 
insurance and credit disability insurance. 

(2) No insurance agent or solicitor 
licensed by the Department of Insurance 
under the provisions of this chapter who is 
associated with, under contract with, retained 
by, owned or controlled by, to any degree, 
directly or indirectly, or employed by, a 
financial institution shall engage in insurance 
agency activities as an employee, officer, 
director, agent, or associate of a financial 
institution agency. 

STATEMENT 

In United States Nat'l Bank of Oregon v. Independent 
Ins. Agents, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2173 (1993), this Court 
unanimously held that 12 U.S.C. § 92, enacted in 1916, 
"remains in force” (113 S. Ct. at 2187) notwithstanding its 
omission from recent editions of the United States Code. 
Section 92 states that national banks in small communities 
(those with populations of 5,000 or less) “may, under such 
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the 
Comptroller of the Currency, act as the agent for any fire, 
life, or other insurance company.” 

6 

At least fifteen States' have laws purporting to 
restrict the ability of national banks to sell insurance within 
the State’s borders to the full extent permitted under Section 
92.? The Eleventh Circuit’s decision in this case upholds 
such a law on the ground that the McCarran-Ferguson Act 
of 1945, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b), insulates the local law against 
a federal preemption challenge. The Sixth Circuit, on the 
other hand, has very recently held that a similar Kentucky 
law is preempted by the federal statute and may not be 
enforced to prevent national banks in small communities in 
Kentucky from selling insurance. Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. 
Stephens, 44 F.3d 388 (6th Cir. 1994) (reproduced as Pet. 
App. D, infra, 39a-64a). 

The Comptroller of the Currency has actively 
supported the authority of national banks in small towns to 

' See Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 38a-755 (West 1992 & Supp. 1994); 
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.988(2) (West 1984 & Supp. 1995); Ky. Rev. 
Stat. Ann. § 287.030 (Michie 1988); La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 
6:121B(2) (West 1954 & Supp. 1995): Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 24-A, 
§ 1514-A (West 1990 & Supp. 1994); Mass. Ann. Laws ch. 175, § 
174E (Law. Co-op. 1987 & Supp. 1995); Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 
683A.110 (Michie 1992 & Supp. 1993); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 
384: 16-b(II) (1983); N.J. Stat. Ann. § 17:3C-1 (West 1993); Pa. Stat. 
Ann. tit. 40, § 281(b) (1992); R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 27-3-46, 27-3-47 
(1994); Tenn. Code Ann. § 56-6-201 (1994); Tex. Ins. Code. Ann. 
art. 21.07-3 § Sth) (West 1993); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 8, § 4811 (1993), 
W. Va Code § 31A-8C-1, 31A-8C-2(f) (1994). 

2 Several other States apparently acknowledge the effect of Section 
92 and exempt from a general prohibition any banks in municipalities 
of 5,000 or less population. See, e.g., Ark. Code Ann. § 23-64-203 
(Michie 1994); Colo. Rev. Stat. § 10-2-221(2) (1994); Ga. Code 
Ann. § 33-3-23(b) (1992); N.M. Stat. Ann. § 59A-12-10 (Michie 
1978 & Supp. 1994). See also, Miss. Code Ann. § 83-17-229 (1972) 
(permitting insurance sales by lending institutions located in 
communities with populations of 7,000 or less). 

a. ee 2 | 

aes i egies whi cow ue 

7 

sell insurance pursuant to 12 U.S.C. § 92. The Comptroller 
intervened in the Owensboro case and participated as a 
plaintiff in the District Court and as an appellee in the Court 
of Appeals. The Comptroller also participated in this case by 
submitting declarations to the District Court in support of the 
Bank’s position and by filing a brief in the Eleventh Circuit 
as amicus curiae, seeking reversal of the District Court's 
judgment. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

l. Factual Background 

Petitioner Barnett Bank of Marion County (“Barnett 
Bank" or “the Bank") is a national bank doing business in 
the State of Florida. The Bank has a branch in Belleview, 
Florida, a town with a population of 2,666. In 1993, 
Barnett Bank purchased an insurance agency that had been 
owned by Ms. Linda Clifford, a licensed Florida insurance 
agent. Ms. Clifford became an employee of Barnett Bank, 
with an office located in Belleview. Four days later, the 
Florida Department of Insurance issued an order pursuant to 
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.988 directing Ms. Clifford and her 
associates to cease all their insurance agency activities other 
than the selling of credit life and disability insurance (which 
the Flonda statute permits). 

8 
2. District Court Proceedings 

Simultaneously with its acquisition of Ms. Clifford’s 
agency, Barnett Bank filed this action against the Insurance 
Commissioner of the State of Florida and the Florida 
Department of Insurance in the United States District Court 
for the Middle District of Florida, seeking a declaratory 
judgment that 12 U.S.C. § 92 preempted Fla. Stat. Ann. 
§ 626.988, which otherwise would prohibit the Bank or any 
of its employees from acting as an insurance agent.’ The 
District Court had jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. 
When the Florida Department of Insurance issued its order 
requiring the Bank’s insurance agency to cease operations, 
the Bank moved for a temporary restraining order and 
preliminary injunction. The District Court denied the TRO, 
and consolidated the motion for preliminary injunction with 
a trial on the merits of the Bank’s claims for permanent 
declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as with the 

> The Florida statute prohibits financial institutions (including their 
affiliates and employees) from acting as insurance agents. Financial 
institutions are defined by the statute to include banks, bank holding 
companies, and their subsidiaries, affiliates and foundations. Fla. 
Stat. Ann. § 626.988(1)(a). The statute furtuer provides that 
"[s]pecifically excluded from this definition is any bank which is not 
a subsidiary or affiliate of a bank holding company and is located in 
a city having a population of less than 5,000 according to the last 
preceding census." /d. As the District Court stated, this exclusion 
“[meets] federal section 92 halfway” in that it allows some banks — 
those that are not affiliated with bank holding companies — to 
operate insurance agencies in towns with populations less than 5,000. 
Pet. App. B., infra, 23a-24a. Barnett Bank, however, was forbidden 
by the terms of the Florida statute to operate an insurance agency, 
because it is a subsidiary of a bank holding company, Barnett Banks, 
Inc. 

9 

defendants’ counterclaims for a declaratory judgment that the 
Florida statute was not preempted. ‘ 

After trial, the District Court denied the motion for 
a preliminary injunction, and issued a final judgment denying 
Barnett Bank's requests for permanent injunctive and 
declaratory relief. The court acknowledged that the Flonda 
Statute prohibiting the Bank from operating an insurance 
agency directly conflicted with 12 U.S.C. § 92. 
Nonetheless, the court held that the Florida law was saved 
from preemption by the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which 
provides that federal law shall not preempt state laws 
“regulating the business of insurance,” unless the federal law 
in question “specifically relates to the business of insurance.” 
According to the court, the Florida statute prohibiting banks 
from acting as insurance agents was a law “regulating the 
business of insurance,” but the federal statute permitting 
banks to act as insurance agents was not a law “specifically 
relat{ing] to the business of insurance." 

3. The Eleventh Circuit’s Ruling 

Barnett Bank appealed, and the Eleventh Circuit 
affirmed. Ignoring the contrary decision of the Sixth Circuit 
in Owensboro, the Eleventh Circuit accepted both parts of 
the District Court's analysis of the application of the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act. First, purporting to apply a test 
derived from this Court's decision in United States Dep't. of 
Treasury v. Fabe, 113 S. Ct. 2202 (1993), the cour 
concluded that the Florida statute “regulat(es] the business of 
insurance” within the meaning of the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act because the Florida law “was enacted to regulate the 

* By the time of trial, the state defendants had been joined by 
various associations of Florida insurance agents, who intervened as 
defendants and counter-claimants. 

10 

relationship between insurers and potential policyholders or, 
more broadiy, ‘the insurance-purchasing public at large.’” 
Pet. App. A, infra, lla. The Eleventh Circuit also held that 
12 U.S.C. § 92, the federal statute permitting small-town 
national bank branches to operate insurance agencies, does 
not “specifically relat{e] to the business of insurance.” The 
court reasoned that in perreittiug such banks to sell 
insurance, “Congress was concerned with banking, not 
insurance.” Pet. App. A, infra, 1Sa. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

THERE IS A SQUARE CONFLICT 
OF CIRCUITS ON THE LEGAL ISSUES 

This case presents issues on which federal courts of 
appeals are in direct conflict. The Eleventh Circuit's 
decision that the McCarran-Ferguson Act immunizes the 
Florida statute at issue from preemption by 12 U.S.C. § 92 
is directly contrary to the result and the reasoning of the 
Sixth Circuit in Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Stephens, 44 F.3d 
388 (6th Cir. 1994) (Pet. App. D, infra, 39a-64a). 

Owensboro concerned a Kentucky statute that, like 
the Florida statute at issue here, bars certain banks doing 
business in Kentucky from acting as insurance agents (except 
with respect to credit life and credit health insurance and real 
property mortgage insurance). Several national banks with 
small-town branches had unsuccessfully applied to 
Kentucky's insurance commissioner for licenses to act as 
insurance agents. The banks sought declaratory and 
injunctive relief based on the claim that Section 92 
preempted the Kentucky statute. The District Court granted 

ll 

summary judgment for the plaintiff banks. Owensboro Nat'l 
Bank v. Moore, 803 F. Supp. 24, 37 (E.D. Ky. 1992). 

The Sixth Circuit affirmed the District Court's 
judgment. It held that Section 92 preempts the Kentucky 
Statute (Pet. App. D, infra, 48a-49a), and specifically 
rejected the claim that the McCarran-Ferguson Act insulates 
a contrary state statute. The Sixth Circuit said that the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act was inapplicable because the state 
prohibition on banks acting as insurance agents was not 
“enacted . . . for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance.” See Pet. App. D, infra, 49a. 

The Sixth Circuit's decision that the Kentucky statute 
is not a law “regulating the business of insurance” conflicts 
with the reasoning of the Eleventh Circuit in this case. The 
Sixth Circuit noted that “[t}he ‘business of insurance’ is 
made up of ‘practices’ and ‘activities’ that satisfy the criteria 
set forth in Union Labor Life Insurance Co. v. Pireno: 458 
U.S. 119 (1982)." Pet. App. D, infra, 46a. These criteria, 
the Sixth Circuit observed, are: 

first, whether the practice has the effect of 
transferring or spreading a policyholder’s 
risk; second, whether the practice is an 
integral part of the policy relationship 
between the insurer and insured; and third, 
whether the practice is limited to entities 
within the insurance industry. 
Id. at 46a-47a (quoting Pireno, 458 U.S. at 129). 
Applying these criteria, the Sixth Circuit concluded 
that “[e}]xcluding a person from participation in an activity, 
however, is different from regulating the manner in which 
that activity is conducted. The former is the regulation of 

12 

the person; the latter is the regulation of the activity.” Pet. 
App. D, infra, 48a. ° 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

THE LEGAL PRINCIPLES ARE IMPORTANT AND 
SHOULD BE APPLIED UNIFORMLY. 
ACROSS THE COUNTRY 

The conflict between the Sixth and Eleventh Circuits 
has important consequences. As matters now stand, national 
banks with small-town branches in the four States of the 
Sixth Circuit (and, most likely, the three States of the Third 
Circuit) may operate insurance agencies through those 
branches, as permitted by federal law, without concern that 

5 Once it concluded that the Kentucky statute did not regulate the 
business of insurance within the meaning of the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act, the Sixth Circuit did not reach the question whether 12 U.S.C. 
§ 92 “specifically relates to the business of insurance.” Pet. App. D, 

13 

State regulators may shut them down under local statutes 
protecting the insurance agents’ industry. ®° National banks 
in Florida, Alabama and Georgia, by contrast, may not 
exercise their federally granted powers in this area if state 
law prohibits their sale of insurance. ’ 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Resolution of this uncertainty is of great practical 
importance to banks and insurance agents. There has been 
extensive litigation in the past decade over the question 
whether banks may sell insurance, and this reflects the 

* Such statutes exist in Kentucky, Tennessee, Pennsylvania and New 
Jersey. 

” Of the three States in the Eleventh Circuit, only Florida currently 
has a statute that directly conflicts with 12 U.S.C. § 92. Under the 
Eleventh Circuit's ruling, however, the legislatures of Alabama and 
Georgia ma impose such a restriction if they are persuaded to do so 
by competing inte--st groups. 

14 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

IT! 

THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY HAS 
ACTIVELY SUPPORTED THE PETITIONER’S 
POSITION IN FEDERAL LITIGATION 

The importance of the legal issues is underscored by 
the active participation of the Executive Branch of the 
federal government in this case and in the Owensboro case. 
The Comptroller of the Currency, represented by the Civil 
Division of the Department of Justice, challenged the 
Kentucky and Florida laws at issue in these cases. Noting 
that the Comptroller of the Currency “has an obvious interest 
in assuring that national banks are able to exercise the 
powers granted to them by Congress,” the United States 

15 

participated as amicus curiae in support of petitioner in the 
Eleventh Circuit in this case. Brief for the Comptroller of 
the Currency of the United States as Amicus Curiae at 2, 
Barnett Bank of Marion County, N.A. v. Gallagher, 43 F.3d 
631 (llth Cir. 1995) (No. 93-3508). The Justice 
Department argued that the Florida statute was not enacted 
“for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance” 
within the meaning of McCarran-Ferguson because "the aim 
of the Florida statute is not to adjust, manage or control the 
insurance business, but to regulate the powers of financial 
institutions, including banks.” /d. at 18. The United States 
further asserted that 12 U.S.C. § 92 "specifically relates” to 
the business of insurance under the McCarran Ferguson Act 
since it "describes — in indisputably specific terms — the 
insurance agency activities in which certain nationa! banks 
may engage.” /d. at 22. 

In Owensboro, the United States intervened to support 
the plaintiff banks and, as it did in this case, voiced concern 
about the impact of the state law on the ability of national 
banks to conduct business activities specifically authorized by 
Congress. Arguing that Kentucky's statute was preempted 
by 12 U.S.C. § 92, the Department of Justice contended that 

[i]t is simply unreasonable to conclude that 
the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which was 
primarily intended to restore to the states the 
“power to regulate or tax the business of 
insurance” .. . H.Rep. No. 143, 79th Cong., 
Ist Sess. 3 (1945) . . . has the effect of 
intruding upon the longstanding and 
traditional federal governance of national 
banks. 

16 

Brief of the Appellee United States at 29, Owensboro Nat'l 
Bank v. Stephens, 44 F.3d 388 (6th Cir. 1994) (Nos. 92- 
6330, 92-6331). 

The United States’ participation in the resolution of 
these legal issues by the Courts of Appeals manifests the 
important national interests at stake. Although the 
government did not formally intervene in this case, it made 
its position clear to both the District Court and the Eleventh 
Circuit. 

IV 

THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT’S 
DECISION IS ERRONEOUS 

Given the square Circuit conflict on the applicable 
legal issues, we will not here belabor the merits of the case. 
However, even a brief review of the Eleventh Circuit's 
decision shows it to be dubious. In holding that the Flonda 
statute — which simply excludes certain banks from acting 
as insurance agents — is for the “purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance,” the Eleventh Circuit adopted a 
particularly expansive view of both the “business of 
insurance” and of what it means to "regulate" that business. 
By contrast, it adopted an exceedingly narrow definition of 
both the “business of insurance" and what it means for a 
statute to “relate” to that business under the second prong of 
its preemption analysis under the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 
thereby arriving at the curious holding that a statute that 
specifically authorizes a national bank to sell insurance does 
not “relate” to the business of insurance. 

The two halves of the Eleventh Circuit’s analysis 
manifestly do not fit together. The category of statutes that 
"regulate" the business of insurance should, by any ordinary 

17 

standards of construction, be narrower than that of statutes 
that “relate” to that business. If a statute that says a bank 
may not sell insurance regulates the business of insurance, 
it necessarily follows that a statute that specifically says a 
bank may sell insurance specifically relates to the business 
of insurance. One of the two parts of the Eleventh Circuit's 
analysis must be wrong. And if either part is wrong, the 
Eleventh Circuit’s conclusion that the Florida statute is not 
preempted cannot stand. 

Vv 

THIS CASE IS THE MORE APPROPRIATE 
VEHICLE FOR DECISION OF 
THE LEGAL ISSUES 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

First, this case presents the issue in a particularly 
concrete setting: Barnett Bank has purchased an insurance 
agency and employs a licensed agent ready to carry on the 
business as soon as Florida’s statutory prohibition on that 
activity is declared preempted. The same cannot be said of 
the facts in Kentucky, where the litigation was initiated at a 
much less ripe state. Second, the Eleventh Circuit's decision 
addresses both halves of the McCarran-Ferguson Act 
analysis, and thus frames both issues for this Court's review. 
Finally, the decision of the Eleventh Circuit is incorrect and, 
unlike that of the Sixth Circuit, merits reversal by this 
Court. 

18 
CONCLUSION 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Respectfully submitted, 

NATHAN LEWIN 

(Counsel of Record) 

Scott L. NELSON 

JAMES R. HEAVNER, JR. 

MILLER, CASSIDY, 
LARROCA & LEWIN 

2555 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 293-6400 

RICHARD E. SWARTLEY 
General Counsel 
BARNETT BANKS, INC. 
50 N. Laura Street 
Jacksonville, FL 32202 
(904) 791-7505 

May 1995 Attorneys for Petitioner 

APPENDIX 

la 

APPENDIX A 
43 F.3d 631 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A., 
a national banking association, Plaintiff-Counter- 
Defendant, Appellant, Cross-Appellee, 

v. 

Tom GALLAGHER, Insurance Commissioner 
of the State of Florida, Fla. Dept. Insurance, a 
state agency, Defendants-Appellees, Cross- 

Appellant, 

Florida Association of Life Underwriters, 
Professional Insurance Agents of Florida, Inc., 
Florida Associations of Insurance Agents, 
Defendants-Counter-Claimant, Appellees-Cross- 
Appellants. 

No. 93-3508 

United States Court of Appeals, 
Eleventh Circuit 

Jan. 30, 1995. 

David M. Wells, Peter E. Nicandri, Jacksonville, FL, 
for appellant. 

David J. Busch, Tallahassee, FL, Scott A. Sinder, 
Ann M. Kappler, Arti K. Rai, Washington, DC, J. Robert 
McClure, Jr., F. Townsend Hawkes, Tallahassee, FL, for 

appellee. 

2a 

Virginia B. Townes, Akerman, Senterfitt & Eidson, 
P.A., Orlando, FL, Anthony J. Steinmeyer, Jacob M. 
Lewis, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Civ. Div., Appellate Staff, 
Washington, DC, Daniel Y. Sumner, Florida Dept. of Ins., 
Tallahassee, FL, for amicus, Florida Bankers Ass'n. 

Appeals from the United States District Court for the 
Middle District of Florida. 

Before COX, Circuit Judge, FAY, Senior Circuit 
Judge, and CARNES “, District Judge. 

FAY, Senior Circuit Judge: 

This appeal arises from a final order following a 
bench trial on the merits of plaintiff Barnett Bank of Manon 
County’s ("Barnett Marion") suit for permanent injunctive 
and declaratory relief against Florida Insurance 
Commissioner Tom Gallagher and the Florida Department of 
Insurance. The Florida Association of Life Underwriters, 
Professional Insurance Agents of Florida, Inc., and the 
Florida Associations of Insurance Agents intervened in the 
district court. Appellant Barnett Marion alleges the district 
court erred in concluding that Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 
regulates insurance, and in concluding that 12 U.S.C. § 92 

* Honorable Julie E. Carnes, U.S. District Judge for the Northern 
District of Georgia, sitting by designation. 

ee. 

3a 

(“section 92") does not relate to insurance. ' We disagree, 
and AFFIRM the district court judgment. ~ 

Appellee/Cross-Appellants Tom Gallagher and the 
Florida Department of Insurance allege the district court 
erred in holding section 92 permits national banks to sell 
insurance nationwide. Appellee/Cross-Appellants Florida 
Association of Life Underwriters, Professional Insurance 
Agents of Florida, Inc., and the Florida Associations of 
Insurance Agents allege the district court erred in finding 
that Appellant Barnett Marion was “located and doing 
business in a place with a population of less than 5000" 
pursuant to section 92. Based on our reading of the Federal 
and Florida statutes, we find it unnecessary to reach either 
of these issues. 

I. BACKGROUND 

Florida law precludes bank subsidiaries or bank 
holding company affiliates from conducting insurance 
activities in Florida. Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 (1993). Federal 
law, however, allows national banks—despite their status as 
subsidiaries or affiliates—to act as insurance agents in 
localities with fewer than five thousand people. 12 U.S.C. 
§ 92 (1988). 

' Recently the United States Supreme Court resolved a conflict 
among the Circuit Courts of Appeals by holding that section 92 
properly is included in § 13 of the Federal Reserve Act (Act Dec. 23, 
1913, ch. 6) rather than the National Bank Act. See United States 
Nat'l Bank of Or. v. Indep. Ins. Agents, _ U.S. __, __, 113 S. 
Ct. 2173, 2182-86, 124 L. Ed. 2d 402 (1993). Both the parties and 
the district court at various times refer to the section as part of the 
National Bank Act. While this nomenclature does not affect the 
section’s validity in light of the Supreme Court case, for clarity’s 
sake this Court will refer to the statute simply as “section 92." 

4a 

Barnett Marion is a national-bank subsidiary of a 
bank holding company, Barnett Banks, Inc. Barnett 
Marion’s principal place of business is Ocala, Florida, but 
it maintains a branch office in Belleview, Florda. 
Belleview’s population is fewer than five thousand, as shown 
by the last decennial census. Barnett purchased an insurance 
agency from Linda K. Clifford in Belleview. As a result, 
Ms. Clifford, a Florida licensed insurance agent, became an 
employee of Barnett Marion and maintained her office inside 
the bank. 

The day of the purchase, Barnett Marion sought a 
declaration allowing it to use this branch office to “market 
insurance to existing and potential customers regardless of 
where the insurance customers are located." Barnett Manon 
argued that 12 U.S.C. § 92 preempted Fla. Stat. ch. 
626.988, and asked the district court to find that: 

Barnett Bank and, specifically Barnett Bank 
Belleview, is authorized and empowered by federal 
law to act as an agent for any insurance company 
authorized by the State of Florida to do business in 
Flonda. 

(R1-1-7). 

Four days later, the Florida Department of Insurance 
("Department") issued an Immediate Final Order ("IFO") 
directing Linda Clifford and her associate agents to cease 
insurance agency activities other than selling credit life and 
credit disability insurance. Barnett Marion moved for a 
temporary restraining order ("TRO") and sought to enjoin 
the Department from acting on the IFO. _ 

The district court denied Barnett Marion's motion for 
TRO and held a hearing on the motion for preliminary 

Sa 

injunction. The court denied the motion for the preliminary 
injunction and set the case for trial. 

The issues before this court are as follow: First, 
whether Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 regulates insurance. Second, 
whether 12 U.S.C. § 92 relates to insurance. Third, 
whether Barnett Marion is located and doing business in a 
place with fewer than five thousand people, and if so, 
whether the bank may sell insurance nationally or only 
within this small town. To answer these questions of law we 
must examine the history and purposes of these statutes. 

fl. JURISDICTION 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

The Court’s decision today in Franchise Tax 
Board v. Construction Laborers Vacation Trust, ante, 
[463 U.S.] p. 1, [103 S.Ct. 2841, 77 L. Ed. 2d 420] 
(1983) does not call into question the lower courts’ 
jurisdiction to decide these cases. Franchise Tax 
Board was an action seeking a declaration that state 
laws were not pre-empted by ERISA. Here, in 
contrast, companies subject to ERISA regulation seek 
injunctions against enforcement of state laws they 
claim are pre-empted by ERISA, as well as 
declarations that those laws are pre-empted. 

6a 

It is beyond dispute that federal courts have 
jurisdiction over suits to enjoin state officials from 
interfering with federal rights. See Ex parte Young, 
209 U.S. 123, 160-162 [28 S.Ct. 441, 454-55, 52 L. 
Ed. 714] (1908). A plaintiff who seeks injunctive 
relief from state regulation, on the ground that such 
regulation is pre-empted by a federal statute which, 
by virtue of the Supremacy Clause of the 
Constitution, must prevail, thus presents a federal 
question which the federal courts have jurisdiction 
under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 to resolve. 

Id. at 96, n. 14, 103 S.Ct. at 2899, n. 14. 

In accord with Supreme Court case law, we hold that a 
federal court has federal question jurisdiction to decide a 
claim against a state officer or agency alleging that a federal 
statute preempts a state statute under the Supremacy Clause 
and that the state statute cannot be enforced. This Court has 
appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. 

Ill. STANDARD OF REVIEW 

This appeal requires review of the district 
court’s statutory interpretation. Such review is de novo. 
Centel Cable Television Co. of Fla. v. Thomas J. White Dev. 
Corp., 902 F.2d 905, 908 (11th Cir. 1990); Keys Jer Ski, 
Inc. v. Kays, 893 F.2d 1225, 1227 (11th Cir. 1990). We 
review the district court’s fact findings in a bench trial for 
clear error. Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a); Anderson v. Bessemer 
City, 470 U.S. 564, 573, 105 S.Ct. 1504, 1511, 84 L. Ed. 
2d 518 (1985). 

a 

7a 
IV. ANALYSIS 

A. Findings of Fact 

While the parties dispute whether the trial court made 
findings of fact or merely conclusions of law, none of the 
parties alleges the trial court erred in its fact-finding. 
Appellant Barnett Marion's Initial Brief at 16; Appellee 
Gallagher’s Initial Brief at 13; Appellee Underwriter’s Initial 
Brief at 12. Accordingly, we review de novo the trial 
court’s conclusions of law. 

B. Conclusions of Law. 
1. McCarran—Ferguson 

In the late 19th Century, the United States Supreme 
Court held insurance contracts were not in_ interstate 
commerce. Paul v. Virginia, 75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 168, 183, 
19 L. Ed. 357 (1868). The states then developed extensive 
insurance regulations. In 1944, the Supreme Court rejected 
that analysis in United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters 
Ass'n, 322 U.S. 533, 64 S. Ct. 1162, 88 L. Ed. 1440 
(1944), holding Congress could regulate insurance under its 
Commerce Clause power. /d. at 553, 64S. Ct. at 1173-74. 

In response, Congress passed the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act, which proclaimed that "[nJo Act of Congress shall be 
construed to invalidate, impair, or supersede any law enacted 
by any State for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance, or which imposes a fee or tax upon such business, 
unless such Act specifically relates to the business of 
insurance." 59 Stat. 34 (1945), 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b) 
(emphasis added). This statutory scheme creates a reverse- 
preemption doctrine for insurance legislation. That is, a 
State statute that regulates insurance presumptively preempts 

8a 

a contrary Congressional statute unless the Congressional 
statute specifically relates to insurance. Congress declared 
this state regulation to be in “the public interest." 15 U.S.C. 

§ 1011. 

With McCarran-Ferguson guiding our analysis, this 
Court first must ask whether Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 regulates 
insurance, so as to presumptively preempt contrary federal 
law. Second, we must ask whether section 92 specifically 
relates to insurance, so that it will fit within the McCarran- 
Ferguson exception that reinstates federal law as supreme. 

2. Florida Law 

The state statute at issue, Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988, is 
part of the Unfair Insurance Trade Practices Act (Part X), 
located within the Florida Insurance Code. Florida Statute 
chapter 626.951 declares that: 

The purpose of this part [X] is to regulate 
trade practices relating to the business of 
insurance in accordance with the intent of 
Congress as expressed in the Act of Congress 
of March 9, 1945 (Pub. L. No. 15, 79th 
Congress) [McCarran-Ferguson], by defining, 
or providing for the determination of, all such 
practices in this state which constitute unfair 
methods of competition or unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices and by prohibiting the trade 
practices so defined or determined. 

To this end, Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 provides, in relevant 
part: 

ee oe a Tow ee 

9a 

(2) No insurance agent or solicitor licensed by 
the Department of Insurance under the 
provisions of this chapter who is associated 
with, under contract with, retained by, owned 
or controlled by, to any degree, directly or 
indirectly, or employed by, a financial 
institution shall engage in insurance agency 
activities as an employee, officer, director, 
agent, or associate of a financial institution 

agency. 

Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988(2). Subsection (1)(a) defines a 
"financial institution” to include any bank or bank holding 
company, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or foundation thereof. 
"Specifically excluded from this definition is any bank which 
is not a subsidiary or affiliate of a bank holding company 
and is located in a city having a population of less than 
5,000 according to the last preceding census." /d. Barnett 
Marion’s status as a national-bank subsidiary removes it 
from this narrow exception and prohibits it from engaging in 
insurance activities under the Florida statute. 

At first blush, it seems evident that a Statutory 
chapter entitled “Insurance Field Representatives and 
Operations," Fla. Stat. ch. 626, and a statutory part entitled 
"Unfair Insurance Trade Practices," Fla. Stat. ch. 626, part 
X, must regulate insurance. The Supreme Court, however, 
has cautioned that location informs but does not determine 
whether a Statute regulates “the business of insurance.” 
United States Dept. of Treasury v. Fabe, U.S. __, ___, 
113 S. Ct. 2202, 2210, 124 L. Ed. 2d 449 (1993). More 
important, held the Court, is whether the statute’s aim is to 
regulate “an essential part of the "business of insurance." 
Id. 

10a 

In Fabe, the Supreme Court held that an Ohio statute 
that accorded policyholders priority over an insolvent 
insurance company’s other creditors was a law enacted to 
regulate the business of insurance because it regulated 
policyholders and their relationship to the insurance 
company. Jd. at__, 113 S. Ct. at 2212. Under McCarran- 
Ferguson, this portion of the Ohio statute preempted a 
contrary federal statute giving the United States priority over 
other creditors of a bankrupt. See id. The Supreme Court 
in Fabe took this “relationship” test directly from S.E.C. v. 
Nat’l Sec., Inc. , 393 U.S. 453, 89 S. Ct. 564, 21 L. Ed. 2d 
668 (1969), which involved an Arizona statute designed to 
protect insurance companies’ shareholders. In finding that 
the Arizona statute was not enacted to regulate the business 
of insurance, the Court held: 

The relationship between insurer and insured, 
the type of policy which could be issued, its 
reliability, interpretation, and 
enforcement—these were the core of the 
“business of insurance” [as used within 
McCarran-Ferguson.] Undoubtedly, other 
activities of insurance companies relate so 
closely to their status as reliable insurers that 
they too must be placed in the same class. 
But whatever the exact scope of the statutory 
term, it is clear where the focus was—it was 
on the relationship between the insurance 
company and the policyholder. Statutes 
aimed at protecting or regulating this 
relationship, directly or indirectly, are laws 
regulating the “business of insurance." 

Id. at 460, 89 S. Ct. at 568-69 (emphasis added). 

ok ts 

| 
) 
: 
| 
: 
: 
; 
{ 

lla 

The question we now ask is whether the Florida 
Statute meets this test because it was enacted to protect 
policyholders by regulating their relationship with the 
insurer. In the instant case, the trial court relied on state 
court interpretations of the Florida statute and testimony 
from the Director of Legal Services for the Florida 
Department of Insurance to hold that Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 
was enacted to regulate the relationship between insurers and 
potential policyholders or, more broadly, “the insurance- 
purchasing public at large." (R3-69-12). Specifically, the 
Florida cases relied on express a concern underlying the 
statute with overreaching by financial institutions if permitted 
to sell insurance. The Florida First District Court of 
— has spoken at least twice on the subject, finding 

at: 

[b]ecause the statute concerns the regulation 
of insurance, it is a matter within the state’s 
exercise of police power and large discretion 
is vested in the legislature... . Concerns 
regarding financial institutions’ entry into 
insurance activities, including the prevention 
of coercion, unfair trade practices, and undue 
concentration of resources, existed at the time 
of passage of the statute and remain valid 
today ... [A] Jegislature could well have 
decided that some protection was required. 

Glendale Fed. § & L. Ass'n v. Fla. Dept. of Ins. , 587 So.2d 
534, 536 n.1 and 537 (Fla. Ist Dist. Ct. App. 
1991)(citations omitted), rev. denied, 599 So.2d 656 (Fla. 
1992). 

(Moreover, ] insurance is an industry affected 
with a public interest and subject to regulation 
by the States. The Legislature has determined 

12a 

that there is potential for abuse inherent in 
financial institutions being involved in the sale 
of insurance, and that the licensing of 
employees of financial institutions as 
insurance agents is not in the public interest. 

Prod. Credit Ass’ns of Fla. v. Fla. Dept. of Ins. , 356 So.2d 
31, 32 (Fla. Ist Dist. Ct. App. 1978). 

At trial, the Director of Legal Services for the 
Florida Department of Insurance, Mr. Shropshire, testified 
about the need to protect policyholders by regulating the 
financial stability of insurance companies so that they remain 
solvent and able to pay claims upon demand, which could be 
threatened by pressures to make improper insurance 
decisions. This pressure could force an insurer to assume a 
bad risk to quickly consummate a bank loan, or could push 
a bank customer to take out unnecessary insurance where the 
bank’s only motive is profit. While appellant Barnett 
Marion argues that the statute exists only to protect 
"independent insurance agents from competition by financial 
institutions," Appellant’s Brief at 35, we disagree. The 
danger in these situations, as the trial court correctly points 
out, is the loss of arms-length transactions and objectivity 
when the bank becomes involved with insurer and insured. 
"The maintenance of this relationship is for the protection of 
the solvency of the insurance industry, and the prevention of 
coercion, which in tum protects all potential, present and 
future policyholders." (R3-69-16). 

Relying on the state court interpretatio: s, testimony 
at trial, reference in the Florida statute to McCarran- 
Ferguson, and explicit instruction from the United States 
Supreme Court in Nat'l Securities that regulatory protection 
of policyholders may be indirect, 393 U.S. at 460, 89 S. Ct. 
at 568-69, the trial court found that Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 

13a 

regulates the business of insurance because it protects 
policyholders. We agree. “Under the terms of the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b), therefore, 
federal law must yield to the extent the [state] statute 
furthers the interests of policyholders." Fabe, _ U.S. at 
__, 113 S. Ct. at 2208. 

3. Section 92 

"State laws enacted ‘for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance’ do not yield to conflicting federal 
Statutes unless a federal statute specifically requires 
otherwise." Fabe, _—~aU:.S. at ___, 113 S. Ct. at 2211. 
The question now is whether section 92 specifically requires 
otherwise. To answer this question, we examine the 
section’s history. 

In 1863, the Civil War Congress enacted the National 
Bank Act, which it then reenacted in 1864. The Act created 
federally chartered national banks and empowered them to 
issue and accept a uniform national currency. One section 
of the National Bank Act limited the indebtedness of national 
banks. In 1874, Congress revised, reorganized, and 
reenacted all statutes in effect at the time, including this 
indebtedness provision, and simultaneously repealed all prior 
statutes. With minor stylistic changes, Title 62 of the 
Revised Statutes § 5202 contained the National Bank Act's 
indebtedness provision. 

In 1913, Congress amended Rev. Stat. § 5202 to 
include a fifth exception to the indebtedness provision. The 
amendment was a detail of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913, 
which created Federal Reserve banks and the Federal 
Reserve Board, and required national banks to become 
members of the new Federal Reserve System. Finally, in 

1916, Congress enacted what we today call section 92. One 

l4a 

portion of section 92 authorized national banks located and 
doing business in places with fewer than five thousand 
inhabitants, as shown by the last preceding decennial census, 
to be agents for any fire, life, or other insurance company 
authorized to do business in the State where the bank is 
located. 

Two years later, however, Congress repealed all of 
§ 5202 except the indebtedness provision. The story, 
however, does not end here. In 1982, Congress actually 
amended section 92. See Garn-St. Germain Depository 
Institutions Act of 1982, § 403(b), 96 Stat. 1511; see also 
Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987, § 201(b)(5), 101 
Stat. 583 (imposing a one-year moratorium on section 92 
activities). Amid confusion over whether section 92 still 
lived, the Supreme Court tackled the issue in United States 
Nat’! Bank of Or. v. Indep. Ins. Agents, __ U.S. ___, 113 
S. Ct. 2173, 124 L. Ed. 2d 402 (1993). Finding the 
apparent repeal of section 92 to have been mere scrivener’s 
error in placing section 92 in the Rev. Stat. § 5202 rather 
than the Federal Reserve Act, as the Court divined Congress 
had intended, the Supreme Court held section 92 had escaped 

repeal. ? 

Although Nar’! Bank of Or. did not address whether 
section 92 relates to insurance, it did emphasize at length the 
relation between section 92 and both the National Bank Act 
and the Federal Reserve Act, neither of which suggests 
section 92 relates specifically to insurance or was a specitic 
attempt to preempt state insurance laws. Both Acts concern 

? All of the above history of section 92 and the National Bank Act 
is taken in compacted form from Nat'l Bank of Or., ___=—~aU.S. __, 
113 S. Ct. 2173 (1993). For a more detailed discussion replete with 
citations and authorities, see Justice Souter’s opinion for a unanimous 
Court, id. at -__, 113 S. Ct. at 2179-82. 

- —— ms dee tee 

1Sa 

banking, not insurance. Moreover, Congress enacted section 
92 “at a time when the business of insurance was believed to 
be beyond the reach of Congress’ power under the 
Commerce Clause.” Fabe, _:* U.S. at_, 113 S. Ct. at 
2212. As the trial court pointed out, “[e]ven South-Eastern 
Underwriters, which briefly altered the preemption 
landscape, noted that prior to 1944 Congress ‘at no time’ 
had attempted to control the business of insurance." (R3-69- 
18)(citing 322 U.S. at 544, 64 S. Ct. at 1168-69). Before 
1944, both Congress and the Supreme Court understood Paul 
v. Virginia, 75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 168, 183, 19 L. Ed. 357 
(1868), to place insurance outside the Commerce Clause 
power. Accordingly, when Congress enacted section 92 in 
1916—nearly 30 years before South-Eastern 
Underwriters—Congress could not have been attempting to 
regulate a business that it believed it had no power to 
regulate. Congress was concerned with banking, not 
insurance. 

This Court concludes that section 92 neither 
“specifically relates to the business of insurance," 15 U.S.C. 
§ 1012(b), nor “specifically requires," Fabe, _ US. at 
__,» 113 S. Ct. at 2211, that apparently conflicting state 
laws be preempted. Accordingly, under McCarran- 
Ferguson, Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 need not yield to section 
92. Based on this determination that Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 
may proscribe national-bank subsidiaries from conducting 
insurance activities within Florida, we do not reach the 
issues of whether, if such banks could sell insurance, they 
could do it nationally. 

V. CONCLUSION 

We hold that the district coun correctly interpreted 
both the federal and state statutes at issue in this case. 

16a 

Further, we hold that the district court’s findings of fact 
were not clear error. We AFFIRM. 

AFFIRMED. 

17a 

APPENDIX B 
839 F. Supp. 835 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A., 
a national banking association, Plaintiff, 

v. 

The Honorable Tom GALLAGHER, Insurance 
Commissioner of the State of Florida; The Florida 
Department of Insurance, a state agency; Florida 
Association of Life Underwriters; Professional 
Insurance Agents of Florida, Inc.; and Florida 
Association of Insurance Agents, Defendants. 

No. 93-178-Civ-Oc-20. 
United States District Court, 
M.D. Florida, 

Ocala Division. 

Dec. 3, 1993. 

David M. Wells, Mahoney, Adams & Cniser, 
Jacksonville, FL, for plaintiff. 

Robert Prentiss, Office of Legal Affairs, David J. 
Busch, Law Office of David J. Busch, Tallahassee, FL, for 
Tom Gallagher. 

Don Dowdell, Daniel Y. Sumner, Robert Prentiss, 
Office of Legal Affairs, David J. Busch, Law Office of 
David J. Busch, Tallassee, FL, for Florida Dept. of Ins. 

18a 

J. Robert McClure, Jr. Carlton, Fields, Ward, 
Emmanuel, Smith & Cutler, PA, Tampa FL, Ann M. 
Kappler, Arti K. Rai, Jenner & Block, Washington, DC, for 
Florida Ass’n of Life Underwriters, Professional Ins. Agents 
of Florida, Inc., and Florida Ass’n of Ins. Agents. 

OPINION and ORDER 
SCHLESINGER, District Judge. 

This cause came before the Court on November 19, 
1993 on Plaintiff's Motion for a Preliminary Injunction 
(Doc. No. 4, filed October 25, 1993) and Plaintiff's 
Renewed Motion filed on November 4, 1993 (Doc. No. 24), 
consolidated, pursuant to Rule 65(a)(2), Fed. R. Civ. P., 
with a trial on the merits of the requested declaratory relief. 

INTRODUCTION 

Plaintiff filed this action for permanent injunctive and 
declaratory relief on October 18, 1993 asking the Court “to 
construe the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. § [21, ef seq.], 
and its preemptive effect on State regulation of federally 
chartered banking associations.” Complaint at ¢ 1. While 
Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988 precludes bank subsidiaries from 
engaging in insurance activities in the state of Florida, 12 
U.S.C. §92 ("section 92") allows’ national 
banks—presumably without regard to their status as 
subsidiaries or affiliates—to act as insurance agents in 
localities where the population is less than 5,000. 
Accordingly, Plaintiff asserts, the Court should declare, inter 
alia, that the state statute is preempted by the federal one, 
and that Plaintiff is allowed to act as an insurance agent for 
any Florida-authorized insurance company. 

19a 

On October 22, 1993, Defendant Gallagher issued an 
Immediate Final Order to Cease and Desist to Linda K. 
Clifford and Linda Clifford Insurance, Inc. ("LCI"), an 
insurance agency purchased by Plaintiff on October 18, 
1993. Defendant Gallagher ordered Clifford and LCI, in 
light of their current association with Plaintiff, to cease and 
desist from any and all insurance agency activity other than 
credit life insurance and credit disability insurance. 

On October 25, 1993, Plaintiff filed a Motion seeking 
immediate injunctive relief in the form of either a Temporary 
Restraining Order ("TRO") or a Preliminary Injunction. The 
Court found that Plaintiff failed to demonstrate that the 
alleged injury was “so imminent that notice and a hearing on 
the application for preliminary injunction is impractical if not 
impossible.” Local Rule 4.05(b)(2). Accordingly, that 
portion of the Motion seeking a TRO was denied. 

The Court heard argument on the Motion for a 
Preliminary Injunction on October 27, 1993, left intact its 
prior ruling on the TRO, and set the matter for a 
consolidated trial and hearing on the Motion for Preliminary 
Injunction. 

Defendants have counterclaimed against Plaintiff, 
asking the Court for the opposite declaratory relief, namely, 
that section 92 prohibits Plaintiff from, inter alia, soliciting 
insurance or acting as an agent for others soliciting insurance 
in such localities. 

Having presided over the trial in this matter, and 
having considered the entire record, the Court makes the 
following findings of fact and conclusions of law. 

20a 

FINDINGS OF FACT AND 
CONCLUSIONS OF 
LAW 

Plaintiff, a subsidiary of the bank holding company 
Barnett Banks, Inc., is a national banking association 
organized and existing under the National Bank Act, 12 
U.S.C. § 21, et seq. Plaintiff maintains its principal place 
of business in Ocala, Florida, and engages in the business of 
banking there and elsewhere within Marion County, Florida. 
Plaintiff owns and operates a branch bank located in 
Belleview, Florida, the population of which, according to the 
last decennial census, is less than 5,000. 

Prior to October 18, 1993, LCI operated from 
Belleview as a general lines agent for insurance companies 
authorized to do business in Florida. On that date, Plaintiff 
purchased certain of LCI’s assets, including its name, and 
LCI’s employees became employees of Plaintiff. The 
decision to purchase the assets of LCI was made by Plaintiff, 
based upon the recommendation of the Executive Committee 
of Barnett Banks, Inc., which is the largest bank holding 
company headquartered in Florida and one of the largest in 
the southeastern United States. 

Plaintiff has stated that all insurance sales made 
through the insurance division of Barnett Belleview are made 
from the office in Belleview through Linda Clifford or 
licensed agents acting under her supervision. Linda Clifford 
is licensed in the state of Florida as life, health and general 
lines insurance agent, and is subject to the jurisdiction and 
regulation of Defendant Florida Department of Insurance 
("DOI") pursuant to Chapters 624 and 626, Florida Statutes. 
Linda Clifford has insurance customers both inside and 
outside of incorporated Belleview. The Belleview branch of 

2la 

Plaintiff has banking customers inside and outside of 
incorporated Belleview. 

With respect to all insurance sales conducted by the 
insurance division of its Belleview branch, Plaintiff's stated 
intent is that such insurance will be marketed to existing and 
potential customers regasdless of where they are located, 
subject only to the requirements that (1) such sales be 
conducted only on behalf of insurance companies licensed to 
{do} business in Florida and (2) such insurance not be sold 
from bank branches in towns whose population is in excess 
of 5,000. 

On its face, section 626.988 purports to prevent the 
insurance agency activities of the Plaintiff's Belleview 
branch. 

Section 92 

As enacted in 1916, section 92 of the Federal Reserve 
Act ' provides that 

any [national banking] association located and doing 
business in any place the population of which does 
not exceed five thousand inhabitants, as shown by the 
last preceding decennial census, may, under such 
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the 
Comptroller of the Currency, act as agent for 
any... imsurance company authorized by the 

' Although the parties—and the Court in at least one prior Order — 
have referred to section 92 as being part of the National Bank Act, 
the Supreme Court, as discussed infra, has deemed the statute instead 
to be part of the Federal Reserve Act. See U.S. Nat'l Bank of Or. 
v. Independent Ins. Agents, ___:;U.S. __, __, 113 S. Ct. 2173, 
2185, 124 L. Ed. 2d 402 (1993). 

22a 

authorities of the State in which said bank is located 
to do business in said State... 

12 U.S.C. § 92. In 1963 the Comptroler issued a ruling that 
this section allows a branch of a national bank located in a 
community the population of which is 5,000 or less to sell 
insurance, even though the principal office of that bank may 
be in a community whose population exceeds 5,000. This 
policy presently is codified at 12 C.F.R. § 7.7100 (1993). 
The fact that 12 U.S.C. § 92 presently does not appear in 
the United States Code, and has not for some time, led at 
least two circuits to opposite conclusions regarding whether 
or not the section actually continued to exist. However, the 
Supreme Court recently resolved this inter-circuit conflict, 
stating that a 1918 amendment neither repealed nor affected 
section 92, which section remains current law. See Nat'l 
Bank of Or., __ U.S. at_-__, 113 S. Ct. at 2182-86. 

Accordingly, there is no question that section 92 
remains the law of the land. Moreover, this section places 
no limitations on the geographic scope of insurance sales 
authorized thereunder. See Independent Ins. Agents v. 
Ludwig, 997 F.2d 958, 961 (D.C. Cir. 1993). Thus, 
provided that the bank is selling the insurance from a 
community of fewer than 5,000 inhabitants, there are no 
limits as fo where the insurance may be sold. However, 
Defendant Gallagher, while accepting that proposition, also 
appears to ask the Court to read into section 92 a further 
requirement that such banks’ activities be confined to such 
localities. The Court finds no such restriction within the 
language of section 92. Thus, even if it is true that, as 
alleged by Defendant, only 35% of Plaintiff's business is 
located in Belleview, that fact would not deprive Plaintiff of 

23a 

standing to assert that its activities should be deemed 
permissible under that st~ ‘ute. ? 

Nevertheless, while Ludwig is highly instructive, it 
involved no state scheme alleged to contravene section 92, 
as does the case at bar. There was no patent federal-state 
conflict in Ludwig, and thus it did not present the preemption 
issues such as presently are before the Court. 

Florida statute 626.988 

Section 626.988 of the Florida statutes provides, in 
relevant part: 

(2) No insurance agent or solicitor licensed by the 
Department of Insurance under the provisions of this 
chapter who is associated with, under contract with, 
retained by, owned or controlled by, to any degree, 
directly or indirectly, or employed by, a financial 
institution shall engage in insurance agency activities 
as an employee, officer, director, agent, or associate 
of a financial institution agency. 

Fla. Stat. ch. 626.988(2). The statute defines a "financial 
institution” as, inter alia, any bank or bank holding 
company, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or foundation thereof. 
Id. at 626.988(1)(a). However, “specifically excluded" from 
this definition is a bank which is not a subsidiary or affiliate 
of a bank holding company and which is located in a city 
having a population of less than 5,000. /d. Thus, the 
legislature met federal section 92 halfway: banks in such 
communities are allowed under Florida law to sell insurance, 

: Accordingly, the Court is not required to make any factual finding 
concerning the percentage of Plaintiff's business that is located in 
Belleview. 

24a 

but only if they are not subsidiaries or affiliates of a (larger) 
bank holding company. 

As stated above, Plaintiff Barnett Marion is a 
subsidiary of the bank holding company Barnett Banks, Inc. 
Plaintiff's principal place of business is Ocala, Flomnda. 
Included among Plaintiff's business is the operation of a 
branch bank in Belleview, Florida, a town with a population 
of less than 5,000. Accordingly, Plaintiff asserts that it is 
authorized to engage in Belleview in insurance agency 
activities. Plaintiff asserts that the Florida statute is in direct 
conflict with section 92. Therefore, Plaintiff argues, this 
Court should render a declaration that the Florida provision 
is preempted by section 92, and that Plaintiff is allowed to 
engage in insurance activities. 

Defendants contend in opposition that the Florida 
Statute is a law regulating the business of insurance, that 
section 92 is not such a law and, therefore, that the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1011, et seq. 
("McCarran-Ferguson" or “the Act"), infra, saves section 
626.988 from preemption. 

The Court notes that this is a particularly “close” 
case. The questions presented are not particularly 
susceptible to easy resolution, especially in light of the 
dearth of precedent in this area. Nevertheless, the 
disposition of the matter may be simplified as follows: For 
Plaintiffs to prevail, the Court must find that section 92 is a 
"bank" law; that section 626.988 is a “bank” law; and, 
therefore, that the Florida provision, as inconsistent with 
federal law, is preempted and superseded by section 92. For 
Defendants to prevail, the Court must find that section 
626.988 is a law enacted for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance; that section 92 does not specifically 
relate to the business of insurance; and, therefore, that 

25a 

McCarran-Ferguson exempts section 626.988 from any 
preemption, thus allowing 626.988 to remain effective, even 
with the continued existence of section 92. ° 

Preemption and McCarran-Ferguson 
In relevant part, the McCarran-Ferguson Act states: 

No Act of Congress shall be construed to invalidate, 
impair, or supersede any law enacted by any state for 
the Purpose of regulating the business of insurance 

. unless such Act specifically relates to the 
business of insurance. 

15 U.S.C. § 1012(b). The Act was passed by Congress in 
1945 as an immediate response to the Supreme Court's 
decision in United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters 
Ass'n, 322 U.S. 533, 64 S. Ct. 1162, 88 L. Ed. 1440 
(1944). Noting that the “modern insurance business holds a 
commanding position in the trade and commerce of our 
Nation,” id. at 539, 64 S. Ct. at 1166, the Court there had 
held, for the first time, that insurance activity conducted 
across state lines was subject to the regulatory power of 
Congress under the Commerce Clause, in particular, the 
antitrust laws, id. at 562, 64 S. Ct. at 1178. By 
subsequently enacting McCarran-Ferguson, Congress 
“attempt[ed] to turn back the clock, to assure that the 
activities of insurance companies in dealing with their 
policyholders would remain in state regulation." SEC v. 

> In the alternative, Plaintiff could prevail under a McCarran- 
Ferguson analysis if the Court found that section 92 was specifically 
related to the business of insurance, and if 626.988 is deemed to be 
a law enacted for the purpose of regulating insurance. However, 
Plaintiff has consistently stated and/or conceded that section 92 is a 
“bank” law, and has premised its arguments accordingly. 

26a 

National Securities, Inc. , 393 U.S. 453, 459, 89 S. Ct. 564, 
568, 21 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1969) (emphasis supplied). 

The declaration-of-intent section of McCarran- 
Ferguson is particularly notable, wherein Congress stated 
that “the continued regulation and taxation by the several 
states of the business of insurance is in the public interest.” 
15 U.S.C. § 1011. Congress’ purpose was to provide 
“support to the existing and future state systems for 
regulating and taxing the business of insurance." Prudential 
Ins. Co. v. Benjamin, 328 U.S. 408, 429, 66 S. Ct. 1142, 
1155, 90 L. Ed. 1342 (1946) (emphasis supplied). Thus, 
while within the previous year the Supreme Court had stated 
that "[w]e cannot make an exception of the business of 
insurance,” South-Eastern Underwriters, 322 U.S. at 553, 64 
S. Ct. at 1173, Congress’ response, emphatically, was that 
it most certainly could. 

Under McCarran-Ferguson, then, the Court's initial 
inquiry must be to determine whether section 626.988 is a 
law enacted by the state of Florida “for the Purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance.” 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b). 

Upon cursory review, one might easily conclude that 
section 626.988 is such a law, as the provision is found in 
the middle of the myriad of Florida’s insurance rules, in the 
Statutory chapter (626) entitled "Insurance Field 
Representatives and Operations." Section 626.988 in 
particular is set in this chapter’s Part X, entitled "Unfair 
Insurance Trade Practices." Nevertheless, the Supreme 
Court has cautioned—as recent as its last term—that with 
respect to this inquiry, "’mere matters of form need not 
detain us.’" U.S. Dep't of Treasury v. Fabe, _ U.S. ___, 
__, 113 S. Ct. 2202, 2210, 124 L. Ed. 2d 449 (1993) 
(quoting National Securities, 393 U.S. at 460, 89 S. Ct. at 
568). Thus, while the Court finds the “location” of section 

27a 

626.988 to be relevant, it is not the sole factor upon which 
this inquiry turns. 

Instead, the Court must attempt to gauge the larger 
intent and design of section 626.988. In Fabe the Court 
Stated that this “broad category" consists of those laws 
possessing the “end, intention or aim’ of adjusting, 
managing or controlling the business of insurance." —__ 
U.S. at ___, 113 S. Ct. at 2210 (citation omitted). Fabe 
involved an Ohio statute which accorded the United States 
fifth priority in bankruptcy proceedings involving insurers. 
The question presented was whether the Ohio statute was 
preempted by a federal priority statute according the United 
States first priority with respect to a bankrupt debtor's 
obligations. The Court concluded that the Ohio priority 
Statute, to the extent that it furthers the interests of 
policyholders—indeed, to the extent that it “regulates” 
policyholders—was a law enacted for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance. Jd. _-~ U.S. at __, 
113 S. Ct. at 2212. Accordingly, that portion of the Ohio 
Statute was saved from preemption under McCarran- 
Ferguson. * 

Fabe was not the first instance in which the Court 
considered the relationship between insured and insurer in 
applying McCarran-Ferguson. In the National Securities 
case, the Court observed that the focus of the Act was “on 
the relationship between the insurance company and the 
policy-holder," and that "[s]tatutes aimed at protecting or 
regulating this relationship, directly or indirectly, are laws 
regulating the "business of insurance.’" 393 U.S. at 460, 89 
S. Ct. at 569 (emphasis supplied). 

* To the extent that it was designed to further the interests of other 
“creditors,” however, the Ohio statute was not a law enacted for the 
purpose of regulating the business of insurance. 

28a 

Simply put, section 626.988 purports to prevent 
certain entities from selling insurance. Thus, it would 
appear to define or regulate a relationship between insurer 
and potential policyholder, that is, the insurance-purchasing 
public at large, rather than one between insurer and present 
policyholder. In light of this, does the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act and its relevant jurisprudence, noted above, still apply? 
Particularly in light of state court construction of section 
626.988, the Court would answer in the affirmative. 

In Glendale Federal S & L v. Dept. of Ins., 587 
So.2d 534 (Fla. Ist DCA 1991), rev. denied, 599 So.2d 656 
(Fla. 1992), a Florida appellate court affirmed a final 
summary judgment that section 626.988 did not violate the 
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The 
court affirmed and specifically referenced the Circuit Court's 
finding that: 

Concerns regarding financial institutions’ entry into 
insurance activities, including the prevention of 
coercion, unfair trade practices, and undue 
concentration of resources, existed at the time of 
passage of the statute and remain valid today. . . 
[A] legislature could well have decided that some 
protection was required. 

587 So.2d at 536 n. 1 and 537. In an earlier decision 
construing whether certain entities were “financial 
institutions” with the meaning of section 626.988, the same 
court noted: 

Insurance is an industry affected with a public 
interest and subject to regulation by the States. The 
Legislature has determined that there is potential for 
abuse inherent in financial institutions being involved 
in the sale of insurance, and that the licensing of 

29a 

employees of financial institutions is not in the public 
interest. 

Production Cr. Ass'ns of Fla. v. Dept. of Ins., 356 So.2d 
31, 32 (Fla. Ist DCA 1978). 

Plaintiff also notes, correctly, that neither of those 
cases dealt with the McCarran-Ferguson Act. Nevertheless, 
the Court would be most remiss if it were to not consider 
these opinions merely because they addressed different /ega/ 
challenges. For example, Glendale involved an equal 
protection challenge, and the Court notes, emphatically, that 
the instant Complaint raises no such challenge. However, 
that the Glendale court proposed its findings concerning 
section 626.988 in the context of citing a “rational basis" for 
the statute does not mean that the “rationale” stated therein 
cannot be considered by this Court. 

The parties to the instant matter appear to be at odds 
over the extent to which this Court should defer to those 
state court findings, particularly those made within Glendale. 
Defendants cite the case of Michael M. v. Superior Court of 
Sonoma County, 450 U.S. 464, 101 S. Ct. 1200, 67 L. Ed. 
2d 437 (1981) for the proposition that a state court's 
interpretation of a state statute may be rejected only if it 
“could not have been a goal of the legislation." /d. at 470, 
101 S. Ct. at 1205. Plaintiff, on the other hand, argues that 
Michael M. is inapposite, as it, like Glendale, involved an 
equal protection challenge, a context in which state court 
determinations are more generally entitled to great deference. 

However, this Court needs no Supreme or other 
Court precedent to instruct it in the degree to which it 
may—or must—defer to state court interpretations of a stase 
Statute. The Florida courts—in particular the District Courts 
of Appeal—routinely are called on to evaluate, apply and 

30a 

interpret the Florida statutes, and do this far more often than 
the federal district courts sitting in this state. Thus, at least 
to the undersigned, it goes without saying that a great degree 
of deference ought ‘0 be given such decisions. State judges 
in Florida are just as capable and competent—if not more 
so—to interpret state laws as any federal judge. 

In National Securities, the Supreme Court held that 
statutes aimed at protecting the relationship between insurer 
and insured, “directly or indirectly,” are statutes regulating 
the business of insurance. 393 U.S. at 460, 89 S. Ct. at 
568. The Court construes the term “policyholder” in its 
broadest sense, as to encompass both existing and potential 
purchasers of insurance. Future policyholders, then, are 
“indirectly” affected by regulations such as section 626.988. 
Thus, the Court finds that Florida section 626.988 indirectly 
protects the relationship between insurer and insured because 
it is aimed at protecting the insurance purchasing public at 
large. This law “furthers the interests,” Fabe, ____ U.S. at 
__, 113 S. Ct. at 2208, of the potential policyholding 
public, regulates the potential policyholding public and, 
therefore, is a “law enacted for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance” within the meaning of McCarran- 

Ferguson. 

Additionally, this last point is supported by the tral 
testimony of Douglas Alan Shropshire, who is Director of 
Legal Services for Defendant DOI. In describing how DOI 
enforces the state's insurance laws, Shropshire related the 
need for protection of policyholders through regulating the 
financial stability of insurance companies. The concern of 
the state is that insurance companies remain solvent and have 
the ability to pay claims when demands are made. Such 
regulation by the state, according to Shropshire, often 
requires insurance companies and agents to abide by certain 
actuarial requirements in determining the extent of the risk 

3la 

involved in the coverage. The state’s concern, then, is that 
insurance not be sold through institutions which require such 
coverage in order to conduct other business, and that such 
institutions would be lax or indifferent to enforcing actuarial 
standards. Shropshire stated that such institutions, 
particularly banks, might require their customers seeking 
loans for certain properties (e.g., home or automobile) 

to purchase “needed” insurance through the institution's 
insurance agent. ; 

The Court concurs with the concerns noted by the 
witness. For example, in order to make a profit on 
automobile loans or home mortgages, the insurance agents 
may incur business they might otherwise reject because they 
would be pressured by the bank to do so in order to 
consummate the bank's loan transactions. This might lead 
to the over-insurance of risky business, which could result in 
the insolvency of the insurer. 

Additionally, and notwithstanding the existence of 
specific prohibitions on coercive credit extension, the Court 
finds that loan officers could steer customers to the bank's 
insurance agent for the purpose cf suggesting the sale of 
insurance that is not needed, in order for the bank to make 
a profit on the insurance policy. The concern herein 
expressed is that an arms-length relationship be maintained 
among the bank, the loan officer and the insurance agents. 
The maintenance of this relationship is for the protection of 
the solvency of the insurance industry, and the prevention of 
coercion, which in turn protects all potential, present and 
future policyholders. 

Furthermore, the Court notes that the declaration or 
purpose section of Part X of chapter 626, in which section 
626.988 is located, specifically references the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act: 

32a 

The purpose of this part is to regulate trade practices 
relating to the business of insurance in accordance 
with the intent of Congress as expressed in the Act of 
Congress of March 9, 1945 (Pub. L. No. 15, 79th 
Congress), by defining, or providing for the 
determination of, all such practices in this state which 
constitute unfair methods of competition or unfair or 
deceptive acts or practices and by prohibiting the 
trade practices so defined or determined. 

Fla. Stat. ch. 626.951(1). The statute also specifically refers 
to section 92. See id. at 626.988(8). Thus, the Flonda 
legislature was keenly aware that McCarran-Ferguson 
specifically affected section 92, and that in enacting section 
626.988 the legislature made it clear that this was an 
insurance law, not a banking law. 

Having concluded that section 626.988 is such a law, 
the Court must then determine the preemptive effect, if any, 
of section 92 of the Federal Reserve Act. As stated in Fade, 

The McCarran-Ferguson Act did not simply overrule 
South-Eastern Underwriters and restore the status 
quo. To the contrary, it transformed the legal 
landscape by overturning the normal rules of pre- 
emption. Ordinarily, a federal law supersedes any 
inconsistent state law. The first clause of § 2(b) [of 
the Act] reverses this by imposing what is, in effect, 
a Clear-statement rule, a rule that state laws enacted 

“for the purpose of regulating the business of 

insurance” do not yield to conflicting federal statutes 
unless a federal statute specifically requires 
otherwise. 

___-U.S. at ___, 113 S. Ct. at 2211 (emphasis supplied). 
Thus, unless section 92 specifically relates to the business of 

33a 

insurance,” 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b), or expressly requires that 
State law be preempted, then the validity and effectiveness of 
Florida’s section 626.988 is not disturbed by section 92. 

In National Bank of Oregon, the Supreme Court 
stated that section 92 “remains in force." __—SaeU.S. at _, 
113 S. Ct. at 2187. In reviewing the context of that 
legislation, and stating that “section 92 travels together with 
the paragraphs around it," id. =» ~U.S.at__, 113 S. Ct. 
at 2185, the Court noted that section 92 was placed between 
new provisions granting additional powers to Federal 
Reserve banks (which had existed only for three years prior 
to the 1916 addition of section 92) and also subjecting 
powers of such banks to regulation by the Federal Reserve 
Board. The Court did not address the question of whether 
section 92 was “specifically related" to the business of 
banking or insurance, but its emphasis on these 
amendments—in particular, section 92—being a part of the 
Federal Reserve Act does not tend to suggest that section 92 
either is specifically related to the business of insurance or 
that Congress specifically intended that section 92 preempt 
State insurance laws. 

Most significantly, though, section 92 fails to satisfy 
Fabe's (really McCarran-Ferguson’s) clear statement rule. 
As Plaintiff notes, section 92 does contain plain language 
entitling national banks to act as insurance agents under 
limited circumstances. However, section 92 simply fails to 
manifest any express intent to preempt state insurance laws. 
That silence is particularly understandable given the 
historical fact that section 92 was enacted “at a time when 
the business of insurance was believed to be beyond the 
reach of Congress’ power under the Commerce Clause.” 
Fabe,__ U.S. at__, 113 S. Ct. at 2212. Even South- 
Eastern Underwriters, which briefly altered the preemption 
landscape, noted that prior to 1944 Congress “at no time” 

34a 

had attempted to control the business of insurance. 322 U.S. 
at 544, 64 S. Ct. at 1168. Until that decision was rendered, 
neither Congress nor the Court believed that insurance fell 
under the Commerce Clause. See Paul v. Virginia, 75 U.S. 
(8 Wall.) 168, 183, 19 L. Ed. 357 (1869) (issuing policy of 
insurance “not a transaction of commerce"). Thus, in 1916, 
when section 92 was enacted, Congress could not have been 
attempting to regulate the business of insurance. 

One other district court, -faced with a somewhat 
analogous apparent conflict between section 92 and a state 
insurance regulation, held unequivocally that section 92 was 

a “bank” law: 

The “business of insurance” has been narrowly 
defined, and it seems fairly obvious that § 92 does 
not constitute Congressional regulation of that 
business. This section(’s] . . . function is to grant 
additional powers to national banks. That the power 
involves insurance does not transform this section 
into a regulation of the business of insurance. 

Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Moore, 803 F. Supp. 24, 36 (E.D. 
Ky.1992). ° 

> In that case a Kentucky statute prohibited any person owning 
greater than one-half the capital stock of a bank from acting as an 
insurance agent or broker, with the exception of certain credit-type 
insurance. Finding section 92 to be “contrary federal law,” the court 
concluded with “no difficulty,” that section 92 preempted the 
Kentucky statute. 803 F. Supp. at 35. 

Additionally, the outcome of that court's McCarran-Ferguson 
analysis differed from that in the present case, Judge Hood finding 
that the Kentucky statute did not constitute insurance regulation. 
Owensboro, however, is distinguishable for three important reasons. 
First, there was no state caselaw upon which Judge Hood could rely 
for the meaning and/or purpose of the state regulation. Second, the 

35a 

Accordingly, the Court concludes that section 92 
neither “specifically relates to the business of insurance,” 15 
U.S.C. § 1012(b), nor "specifically requires," Fabe, 
U.S. at__, 113 S. Ct. at 2211, that apparently conflicting 
state laws be preempted. Thus, under McCarran-Ferguson, 
section 626.988 is saved from preemption. 

7 As noted above, this case presents difficult questions 
concerning the interplay between federal and state 
legislation. Yet while the denouement of the present lawsuit 
will immediately frustrate Plaintiffs attempts to sell 
insurance, Plaintiff is not without other, more appropriate 
avenues of relief. In short, to remedy to this perceived 
inequity, Plaintiff and similarly situated financial institutions 
should consider looking neither to the Comptroller of 
Currency nor the federal courts, but rather, as a 
distinguished jurist once pointed, “to Congress." Saxon y. 
Georgia Ass'n of Independent Ins. Agents, Inc., 399 F.2d 
1010, 1021 (Sth Cir. 1968) (Thornberry, J., concurring). 

In accordance with the terms of this Opinion and 
Order, Plaintiff's Motions for a Preliminary Injunction 
(Docs. No. 4 and 24) are DENIED, and Plaintiff's request 

Kentucky provision was located within that chapter of the state 
statutes regulating banks and trust companies, not that portion which 
regulates insurance. Lastly, the court there applied the tripartite test 
announced in Union Labor Life ins. Co. v. Pireno, 458 U.S. 119. 
102 S. Ct. 3002, 73 L. Ed. 2d 647 (1982) for determining whether 
a state law governs the “business of insurance.” As the subsequently 
decided Fabe made clear, and as the instant Defendants have duly 
noted, the Pireno test applies to the second clause of McCarran- 
Ferguson (relating to the scope of antitrust immunity), while the 
instant analysis—and that in Fabe—relates to the first clause of the 
Act. In this vein, it should also be noted that Fabe was a Sixth 
Circuit case, and was remanded to that court of appeals, before which 
an appeal from Owensboro presently lies. 

36a 

for permanent injunctive and declaratory relief is DENTED 
in its entirety. In light of this holding, Defendants’ 
counterclaims are MOOTED. ° 

The Clerk hereby is directed to (1) enter judgment for 
Defendants on Plaintiffs Complaint; (2) tax costs 
accordingly; and (3) close the file. 

DONE AND ORDERED. 

® By virtue of the Court's refusal to enjoin Defendant Gallagher's 
enforcement of the Cease and Desist Order, Plaintiff cannoy sell 
insurance out of its Belleview branch. Thus, all the other requests set 
forth in the Counterclaims are moot, and the Court would 
furthermore be required to render advisory opinions, which it may 
not do under the case or controversy requirement of Article III of the 
Constitution. 

37a 

APPENDIX C 
Unreported 

IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 

FILED 
March 28, 1995 

No. 93-3508 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A., 
a national banking association, 

Plaintiff-Counter-Defendant-Appellant, 
Cross Appellee, 

versus 

TOM GALLAGHER, Insurance Commissioner of the State 
of Florida; FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE, 
a State agency, 

Defendants-Appellees, 
Cross-Appellants, 

FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF LIFE UNDERWRITEP*; 
PROFESSIONAL INSURANCE AGENTS OF FLORIDA, 
INC.; FLORIDA ASSOCIATIONS OF INSURANCE 
AGENTS, 

Defendants-Counter-Claimants- Appellees, 
Cross-Appellants. 

38a 

On Appeal from the United States District Court for the 
Middle District of Florida 

ON PETITION(S) FOR REHEARING AND 
SUGGESTION(S) OF REHEARING EN BANC 

Before: COX, Circuit Judge, FAY, Senior Circuit Judge, 
and CARNES’, District Judge. 

PER CURIAM: 

(X) The Petition(s) for Rehearing are DENIED and no 
member of this panel nor other Judge in regular active 
service on the Court having requested that the Court be 

polled on rehearing en banc (Rule 35, Federal Rules of 

Appellate Procedure; Eleventh Circuit Rule 35-5), the 
Suggestion(s) of Rehearing En Banc are DENIED. 

ENTERED FOR THE COURT: 

/S/ E R. Smit 
UNITED STATES CIRCUIT JUDGE 
ORD-42 
(9/91) 

“Honorable Julie E. Carnes, U.S. District Judge for the 
Northern District of Georgia, sitting by designation. 

39a 

APPENDIX D 
44 F.3d 388 

THE OWENSBORO NATIONAL BANK; 
The First National Bank of Louisa; Citizens 
National Bank of Paintsville; Kentucky Bankers 
Association, Plaintiffs-A ppellees, 

United States of America, Intervening 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 

v. 

Don W. STEPHENS, Commissioner, Department of 
Insurance, Commonwealth of Kentucky, Defendant- 
Appellant (92-6330), 

Kentucky State Association of Life Underwriters, 
Independent Insurance Agents of Kentucky, Inc.; 
Kentucky Association of Professional Insurance Agents, 
Intervening Defendants-Appellants (92-6331). 

Nos. 92-6330, 92-6331 

United States Court of Appeals, 
Sixth Circuit. 

Argued Sept. 29, 1994. 

Decided Dec. 29, 1994. 

M.T. Senn (argued and briefed), Morgan & 
Pottinger, Louisville, KY, M. Brooks Senn, Kentucky 
Bankers Ass'n, Louisville, KY, for plaintiffs-appellees. 

40a 

Joseph L. Famularo, U.S. Atty., Lexington, KY, 
Anthony J. Steinmeyer, Jacob M. Lewis (argued and 
briefed), Dept. of Justice, Appellate Staff, Civil Div., Rosa 
M. Koppel, Office of Comptroller of Currency, Paul W. 
Bridenhagen, Anne L. Weismann, Dept. of Justice, 
Washington, DC, for intervenor-appellee in No. 92-6330. 

Stephen B. Cox (briefed), Kentucky Dept. of Ins., 
Frankfort, KY, Ann M. Kappler (argued and briefed), 
Jenner & Block, Washington, DC, for defendant-appellant. 

Michael F. Crotty (briefed), American Bankers Ass'n 
Washington, DC, for amicus curiae American Bankers 

Ass'n. 

Joseph L. Famularo, U.S. Atty., Lexington, KY, 
Rosa M. Koppel, Office of Comptroller of Currency, Paul 
W. Bridenhagen, Anne L. Weismann, Dept. of Justice, 
Washington, DC, for intervenor-appellee in No. 92-6331. 

Jonathan B. Sallet, Ann M. Kappler (argued), Jenner 
& Block, Washington, DC, Terrell L. Black, Larry R. 
Blanton, Black, Carle, Maze & Wilmes, Louisville, KY, for 

intervenors-appellants. 

Before GUY and BATCHELDER, Circuit Judges: 
and McKEAGUE, District Judge. * 

RALPH B. GUY, Jr., Circuit Judge. 

Defendants, the Commissioner of the Kentucky 
Department of Insurance ("Commissioner") and various 
Kentucky insurance industry associations, appeal the district 

* Honorable David W. McKeague, United States District Court for 
the Western District of Michigan, sitting by designation. 

4la 

court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of plaintiffs, 
which are national banks doing business in Kentucky towns 
with populations of fewer than 5,000 persons. The district 
court concluded that a Kentucky statute that bars bank 
holding companies from acting as insurance agents was 
preempted by a federal statute that allows national banks 
operating in towns of fewer than 5,000 persons to act as 
insurance agents. On appeal, defendants argued that the 
Kentucky statute, Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 287.030(4) 
("section 287"), does not conflict with the federal statute, 12 
U.S.C. § 92, and that, in any event, the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1011 ef seg., and section 7 of the Bank 
Holding Companies Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1846, each 
"immunize" section 287 from preemption by § 92. We 
reject these arguments and affirm. 

I. 

In late 1990, plaintiffs submitted to the Commissioner 
requests for applications for licenses to act as life and 
general line insurance agents in Kentucky. The 
Commissioner denied these requests, but scheduled a hearing 
before a state administrative law judge ("ALJ") on the issue 
of whether section 287 barred plaintiffs from acting as 
insurance agents. Before the hearing was held, however, 
plaintiffs filed this lawsuit, seeking declaratory and 
injunctive relief. A Kentucky state court thereafter granted 
plaintiffs’ request for a stay of the administrative proceedings 
pending the outcome of this lawsuit. Meanwhile, a number 
of Kentucky insurance industry associations intervened on 
behalf of the Commissioner in this lawsuit. The United 
States intervened on behalf of plaintiffs. Defendants filed a 
motion to dismiss, arguing that the case was not justiciable 
because of the unfinished administrative proceeding before 
the ALJ. Plaintiffs then filed a motion for summary 
judgment, to which defendants responded by filing a cross- 

42a 

motion for summary judgment. In a published opinion, see 
803 F. Supp. 24 (E.D. Ky. 1992), the district court 
determined that the case was justiciable,' granted 
plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment, and granted 
plaintiffs the relief they sought. This appeal followed. 

Il. 

Defendants first argue that section 287 is not 
preempted by § 92 under conventional preemption analysis. 
Section 287 provides: 

No person who after July 13, 1984, owns or 
acquires more than one-half('2) of the Capital 
stock of a bank shall act as insurance agent or 
broker with respect to any insurance except 
credit life insurance, credit health insurance, 
insurance of the interest of a real property 
mortgagee in mortgage property, other than 
title insurance. 

Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 287.030(4). Section 92 provides: 

In addition to the powers now vested by law 
in national banking associations organized 
under the laws of the United States any such 
association located and doing business in any 
place the population of which does not exceed 
five thousand inhabitants, as shown by the last 
preceding decennial census, may, under such 
rules and regulations as may be prescnibed by 
the Comptroller of the Currency, act as the 
agent for any fire, life, or other insurance 

'Defendants have not raised any justiciability issues on appeal, and 
the district court appears to have decided them correctly. 

43a 

company authorized by the authorities of the 
State in which said bank is located to do 
business in said State, by soliciting and selling 
insurance and collecting premiums on policies 
issued by such company; and may receive for 
services so rendered such fees or commissions 
as may be agreed upon between the said 
association and the insurance company for 
which it may act as agent: Provided, 
however, That no such bank shall in any case 
assume or guarantee the payment of any 
premium on insurance policies issued through 
its agency by its principal: And provided 
further, That the bank shall not guarantee the 
truth of any statement made by an assured in 
filing his application for insurance. 

12 U.S.C. § 92 (emphasis added). 

It is well settled that “the Supremacy Clause, U.S. 
Const. Art. VI, cl. 2, invalidates state laws that ‘interfere 
with, or are contrary to,’ federal law.” Hillsborough County 
v. Automated Medical Labs, 471 U.S. 707, 712 (1985). One 
of the ways in which a state law may “interfere” with a 
federal law is by coming into “actual[] conflict{]" with it, 
i.e., by *stand[ing] as an obstacle to the accomplishment and 
eo of the full purposes and objectives of Congress[.]"" 

. at 713. 

The Supreme Court has applied this “actual conflict” 
standard in cases with facts similar to those presented here. 
In Franklin National Bank v. New York, 347 U.S. 373 
(1954), the Court considered whether a New York law that 
prohibited use of the word “savings” in advertising for banks 
other than state-chartered savings banks was preempted by 
a federal law that authorized national banks “to receive 

44a 

deposits without qualification or limitation, and. . . [to] 

‘all such incidental powers as shall be necessary to 
carry on the business of banking{.}"" /d. at 376. Although 
the federal law only implicitly permitted federal banks to use 
the word “savings” in their advertising, the Court concluded 
that there was “a clear conflict between the law of New 
York and the law of the Federal Government." /d. at 378. 
Similarly, in Fidelity Federal Savings and Loan Association 
y. de la Cuesta, 458 U.S. 141 (1982), the Court considered 
whether a California law that prohibited the inclusion of a 
due-on-sale clause in loan instruments was preempted by a 
federal regulation that expressly granted to federal savings 
and loans the power to include such clauses in loan 
instruments. Noting that the conflict between the state law 
and federal regulation did not “evaporate” because the 
“regulation simply permits, but does not compel, ‘ federal 
savings and loans to include due-on-sale clauses in their 
contracts[,]” id. at 155, the Court easily concluded that 

preemption was appropriate. /d. at 159. 

The conflict between section 287 and § 92 is no 
different than those present in Franklin National Bank and de 
la Cuesta. For purposes of deciding the federal preemption 
issue only, the plaintiff national banks assumed as correct the 
Commissioner’s position that section 287 applies not only to 
bank holding companies but also to subsidianes thereof, such 
as national banks. Thus, while § 92 provides that national 
banks such as plaintiffs “may” act as insurance agents, 
section 287 provides that they “may not.” 

Seizing upon the permissive nature of the nght 
created by § 92, however, defendants suggest that we should 
5 ile" the two sections by construing the right created 
by § to be subject to state law restrictions such as section 
287. That construction might be plausible if § 92 provided 
that certain national banks “may have the power” to act as 

45a 

insurance agents. But § 92 actually states that certain 
national banks “may under such rules. . . as may be 
prescribed by the Comptroller of the Currency, act as the 
agent for” certain insurance companies. Providing that a 
bank “may act” is no different than providing that a bank 
"shall have the power to act." Thus, the language of § 92 
does not permit the construction defendants advocate. That 
the power created by § 92 is permissive does not allow us to 
conclude that it does not exist. ? 

Defendants also contend that our construction of § 92 
assumes that Congress acted with an “unconstitutional 
motive” in passing § 92, since the regulation of the business 
of insurance was understood to be beyond Congress's 
Commerce Clause powers when § 92 was passed in 1916. 
But § 92 in no way governs the manner in which the 
business of insurance is conducted; rather, it merely helps to 
define the powers of national banks. Congress has been 
understood to have the authority to define those powers since 
the Court’s decision in McCulloch v. Maryland, \7 U.S. (4 
Wheat.) 316 (1819), so we reject defendants’ contention. 

Finally, we note that section 287 interferes with the 
realization of a chief object of § 92. That object is to 
increase the number of banks serving small towns by 
creating “additional sources of revenue” for such banks. 
Letter from Comptroller John Skelton Williams to Sen. 

2 The United States emphasizes that, in a 1990 letter to the Louisiana 
Commissioner of Insurance, the Chief Counsel of the Office of the 
Comptroller concluded that the right created by § 92 is not subject to 
state law restrictions. Because we reach the same conclusion without 
taking this letter into account, we need not determine whether such 
an informally expressed opinion is entitled to deference under the 
doctrine set forth in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984). 

46a 

Robert L. Owen, reprinted in 53 Cong. Rec. 11001 (1916). 
(App. at 159). Section 287 removes that source of revenue 
and thus “create[s] ‘an obstacle to the accomplishment and 
execution of the full purposes and objectives [of Congress]."” 
de la Cuesta, 458 U.S. at 156 (emphasis added). Like the 
district court, we conclude that, under conventional 

preemption analysis, § 92 preempts section 287. 

Defendants next argue that the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1011 ef seq., “immunizes” section 
287.030(4) from preemption by § 92. The relevant portion 
of the McCarran-Ferguson Act provides: 

No Act of Congress shall be construed to invalidate, 
impair, or supersede any law enacted by any State 
for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance, or which imposes a fee or tax upon such 
business, unless such Act specifically relates to the 
business of insurance... . 

15 U.S.C. § 1012(0). Thus, section 287.030(4) is not 
preempted by § 92 if (1) section 287 was “enacted .. . for 
the purpose of regulating the business of insurance,” and (2) 
§ 92 does not “specifically relate{] to the business of 
insurance. 

We first consider whether section 287 was 
“enacted . . . for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance." The “business of insurance” is made up of 
“practices” and “activities” that satisfy the criteria set forth 
in Union Labor Life Insurance Co. v. Pireno, 458 U.S. 119 
(1982). Those criteria are: 

first, whether the practice has the effect of 
transferring or spreading a policyholder’s risk, 
second, whether the practice is an integral part of the 

47a 

policy relationship between the insurer and insured; 
and third, whether the practice is limited to entities 
within the insurance industry. 

Id. at 129. 

Citing United States Department of Treasury v. Fabe, 
113 S. Ct. 2202 (1993), however, defendants contend that 
the Pireno criteria are “not applicable” to the determination 
of whether a state law was “enacted . . . for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance." (Defendants’ Brief at 
24 n.22). We disagree. It is true that Pireno addressed the 
scope of the antitrust immunity arising under the second 
clause of § 1012(b). That clause provides an exemption 
from federal antitrust laws for activities that (1) are regulated 
by state law and (2) qualify as the “business of insurance.” 
See 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b). Thus, “the first clause [of 
§ 1012(b)] commits laws ‘enacted . . . for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance’ to the States, while the 
second clause exempts only ‘the business of insurance’ itself 
from the antitrust laws.” Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 2209. 
Whether a particular activity is part of the “business of 
insurance” is, of course, a separate question from whether a 
state law was “enacted . . . for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance.” The Fabe Court accordingly noted 
that the latter question cannot be answered by reference to 
the Pireno criteria alone. But that does not mean those 
criteria simply are “not applicable” in cases involving the 
first clause of § 1012(b). If, in such a case, the issue arises 
of whether a particular activity is part of the “business of 
insurance,” the Pireno criteria apply. See Fabe, 113 S. Ct. 
at 2208 (noting in considering claim that arose under first 
clause of § 1012(b), that Pireno “identified the three 
criteria . . . that are relevant in determining what activities 
constitute the "business of insurance.’") (emphasis added). 
In short, the Fabe Court merely noted that the scope of the 

48a 

respective immunities created by the first and second clauses 
of § 1012(b) are different; it assuredly did not give “business 
of insurance” one meaning in the first clause and a different 
meaning in the second. 

The Fabe Court went on to hold that "(the broad 
category of laws enacted ‘for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance’ consists of laws that possess the ‘end, 
intention, or aim’ of adjusting, managing, or controlling the 
business of insurance.” 113 S. Ct. at 2210. Thus, to have 
been "enacted . . . for the purpose of regulating the business 
of insurance,” section 287 must possess the aim of regulating 
activities that meet the Pireno criteria. 

Section 287 does not possess such an aim. That 
section helps to define the powers of Kentucky bank holding 
companies by excluding such companies from participation 
in the activities that constitute the “business of insurance.” 
Excluding a person from participation in an activity, 
however, is different from regulating the manner in which 
that activity is conducted. The former is the regulation of 
the person; the latter is the regulation of the activity. 
Section 287 only regulates persons owning “more than one- 
half ('A) of the capital stock of a bank”; it in no way governs 
the manner in which the activities constituting the “business 
of insurance” are conducted. Section 287 thus is different in 
kind from the Ohio statute that was found to regulate the 
business of insurance in Fabe, since the Ohio statute set 
standards for “the actual performance of an insurance 
contract.” 113 S$. Ct. at 2210. See also United Servs. Auto. 
Ass'n v. Muir, 792 F.2d 356, 364 (3rd Cir. 1986) (state law 
forbidding banks from being licensed as insurers “ha[d] no 
part in the business of insurance under McCarran- 
Ferguson"); but see SEC v. National Securities, Inc., 393 
U.S. 453, 460 (1969) (stating in dicta that state laws 

49a 

governing “the licensing of [insurance] companies and their 
agents . . . [are] within the scope of” McCarran-Ferguson). 

Since we conclude that section 287 was enacted for 
the purpose of regulating certain conduct by bank holding 
companies, not the business of insurance, we need not 
consider whether § 92 “specifically relates to the business of 
insurance”; for, without regard to whether § 92 so relates, 
McCarran-Ferguson cannot save section 287 from 
preemption. 

Defendants’ remaining argument is that section 287 
cannot be preempted by § 92 because “section 7 of the Bank 
Holding Company Act [12 U.S.C. § 1846] expressly 
reserves to the Commonwealth the authority to regulate bank 
holding companies, and their subsidiaries, through state 
regulation such as [section 287]." (Defendants’ Brief at 28). 
In making this argument, defendants ignore the plain 
language of § 1846, which provides: 

No provision of this chapter shall be construed as 
preventing any State from exercising such powers and 
jurisdiction which it now has or may hereafter have 
with respect to companies, banks, bank holding 
companies, and subsidiaries thereof. 

12 U.S.C. § 1846 (emphasis added). Here, § 92 is the 
provision that prevents Kentucky from exercising the power 
to enforce section 287. Section 92 is found in chapter 2 of 
title 12, while § 1846 is found in chapter 17 of that title. 
Since § 92 is a provision of a chapter other than the chapter 
in which § 1846 is found, § 92 may be construed to prevent 

50a 

Kentucky from exercising the power to enforce section 287. 
Section 1846 simply is irrelevant to this case. 

AFFIRMED. 
BATCHELDER, Circuit Judge, dissenting. 

I disagree with the majority’s decision affirming the 
district court in granting summary judgment and injunctive 
relief for the plaintiffs. Therefore, I respectfully dissent 
from the Court’s opinion. 

Defendants-Appellants present three central arguments 
in this appeal: (1) that Kentucky Revised-Code § 287.030(4) 
("section 287") is not preempted by 12 U.S.C. § 92 under 
traditional preemption analysis; (2) that the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act protects section 287 from preemption by § 92; 
and (3) that section 287 cannot be preempted by § 92 
because of language contained in the Bank Holding Company 
Act (BHCA). 

I agree with the majority's analysis of the first and 
third issues raised by the defendants. I respectfully disagree, 
however, with the majority’s opinion on the issue of 
McCarran-Ferguson preemption. It is my belief that the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act does, in fact, shield the state 
statute, section 287, from preemption by the federal statute, 

§ 92. 
Il. 

As the majority accurately states, the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b) (referred to hereafter as 
§ 2(b)), protects section 287 from preemption by § 92 if two 

Sla 

factors are satisfied. First, the state statute, section 287, 
much have been “enacted . . . for the purpose of regulating 
the business of insurance." McCarran-Ferguson § 2(b). 
Second, the federal statute, § 92, must nor “specifically 
relate[] to the business of insurance." /d. if both of these 
requirements are met, the state statute will not be preempted 
by the federal statute. 

In this case, I believe both factors have been 
satisfied. First, section 287 was clearly enacted by the 
Kentucky legislature to regulate the business of insurance. 
Second, § 92 does not specifically relate to the business of 
insurance. 

A. McCarran-Ferguson 

The McCarran-Ferguson Act was enacted by 
Congress in 1945 in response to the Supreme Court's 
decision in United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters 
Ass'n, 322 U.S. 533 (1944). In South-Eastern Underwriters, 
the Court held that regulation of interstate insurance activity 
was within the Commerce Clause power of Congress. /d. at 
553. Congress responded adversely to the Court's decision, 
immediately enacting McCarran-Ferguson "to assure that the 
activities of insurance companies in dealing with their 
policyholders would remain subject to state regulation." 
Securities and Exchange Comm'n v. National Secs., Inc., 
393 U.S. 453, 459 (1969). 

Consistent with its view that the business of insurance 
is "’a local matter, to be subject to and regulated by the laws 
of the several States,’*" Congress explicitly intended the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act to restore state taxing and 
regulatory powers over the insurance business to their pre- 
South-Eastern Underwriters scope. Western and Southern 
Life Ins. Co. v. State Bd. of Equalization, 451 U.S. 648, 654 

52a 

(1981) (citing H.R.Rep. No. 143, 79th Cong., Ist Sess. 2 
(1945)). Undeniably, the purpose of the McCarran-Ferguson 
Act was to “give support to the existing and future state 
systems for regulating and taxing the business of insurance." 
Prudential Ins. Co. v. Benjamin, 328 U.S. 408, 429 (1946). 

Clearly, Article I, Section 8 of the United States 
Constitution grants Congress the power to regulate interstate 
commerce, including interstate insurance, if it so chooses. 
U.S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 3; see also South-Eastern 
Underwriters, 322 U.S. at 539-45. It is nonetheless true that 
Congress may limit its own Commerce Clause power to 
grant the states “an ability to restrict the flow of interstate 
commerce that they would not otherwise enjoy." Lewis v. 
BT Inv. Managers, Inc. 447 U.S. 27, 44 (1980). The 
enactment of the McCarran-Ferguson Act represents such a 
situation in which, once the Supreme Court held that the 
regulation of interstate insurance was within Congress's 
commerce power, Congress exercised its plenary power by 
enacting McCarran-Ferguson to limit its own power by 
providing for regulation by the states instead. 

B. Kentucky Section 287 

Section 287.030(4) of the Kentucky Revised Code 
purports to prevent state or national banks from selling any 
insurance other than those narrow categories permitted by 
the statute. The applicable language of the statute reads: 

(4) No person who after July 13, 1984, owns or 
acquires more than one-half ('2) of the capital stock 
of a bank shall act as insurance agent or broker with 
respect to any insurance except credit life insurance, 
credit health insurance, insurance of the interest of 
real property mortgagee in mortgaged property, other 
than title insurance. 

53a 

Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 287.030 (Baldwin 1987). In a 1970 
opinion, the Kentucky Attorney General determined that the 
provision applied to state banks as well as national banks 
a business in Kentucky. Ky. Op. Att'y Gen. 70-643 
(1970). 

Defendants contend that section 287 "falls squarely" 
within § 2(b)’s requirement that a state statute be enacted to 
regulate the business of insurance to escape preemption by 
federal law. The district court found, to the contrary, that 
the Kentucky statute was not enacted to regulate the business 
of insurance. Owensboro Nat'l Bank v. Moore, 803 F. 
Supp. 24, 36 (E.D. Ky. 1992). The district court's holding 
was based in part on the location of section 287 in the 
chapter of the Kentucky Revised Statutes regulating banks 
and trust companies. The lower court also based its decision 
on the three-part test set out in Union Labor Life Ins. Co. v. 
Pireno, 458 U.S. 119 (1982). In its opinion, the majority 
also relied upon Pireno to determine what activities 
constitute the “business of insurance." 

I respectfully disagree that the Pireno factors apply 
to this case. Rather, I believe that the defendants are correct 
that the Supreme Court’s recent opinion in United States 
Department of Treasury v. Fabe, 113 S. Ct. 2202 (1993), 
sets the controlling criteria in this case. See also Colonial 
Life and Accident Ins. Co. v. American Family Life 
Assurance Co., 846 F. Supp. 454, 459 (D.S.C. 1994) 
("while . . . the Pireno criteria are relevant in determining 
the applicability vel non of the antitrust exemption, they are 
not determinative with respect to the first clause of Section 

2(b)"). 

54a 

C. Fabe and the application of § 2(b) 

In Fabe, the Court held that an Ohio prionity statute 
was saved from federal preemption to the extent that it 
regulated the relationship between an insurance company and 
its policyholders. Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 2208. The Court, in 
its analysis, made an important distinction between the first 
and second clauses of § 2(b). According to the Court, the 
first clause deals with those state laws (such as section 287) 
enacted for the purpose of regulating insurance. The clause 
saves applicable state laws from federal preemption. The 
second clause, however, exempts from preemption “only ‘the 
business of insurance’ itself from the antitrust laws." Fabe, 
113 S. Ct. at 2209 (quoting § 2(b) of McCarran-Ferguson) 
(emphasis added). 

Thus, the Fabe Court explicitly distinguished the first 
clause of § 2(b) from the second clause, making it clear that 
the first clause “is not so narrowly circumscribed” as the 
second clause of § 2(b). /d. As the Court stated, 

The language of 2(b) is unambiguous: the first 
clause commits laws “enacted . . . for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance” to the States, 
while the second clause exempts only "the business 
of insurance” itself from the antitrust laws. To 
equate laws “enacted. . . for the purpose of 
regulating the business of insurance” with the 
"business of insurance” itself, as petitioner urges us 
to do, would be to read words out of the statute. 
This we refuse to do. 

Id. at 2209-10 (footnote omitted). 

The Court further disputed the allegation that it was 
violating a “’basic rule of statutory construction that identical 

55a 

words used in different parts of the same act are intended to 
have the same meaning.’"" Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 2210 n. 6. 
According to the Court, "[t]his argument might be plausible 
if the two clauses actually employed identical language." /d. 
As the Court illustrated, however, the two clauses do not use 
identical language, rather "the first clause contains the word 
‘purpose,’ a term that is significantly missing from the 
second clause.” /d. Failure to distinguish the first clause of 
§ 2(b) from the second clause therefore “overlooks another 
maxim of statutory construction: * that a court should “give 
effect, if possible, to every clause and word of a statute.""* 
Id. (citations omitted). Therefore, the majority here cannot 
justify its failure to distinguish between the two parts of 
§ 2(b) by “assur[ing]" us that the “business of insurance” has 
only one meaning. Maj. opinion at pp. 391-92. 

Clearly, the first clause applies to a broader category 
of laws than the second clause. However the Court did 
more than “merely note" that the scope of the first and 
second clause of § 2(b) are “different,” as the majority 
described the holding of Fabe. Maj. opinion at pp. 391-92. 
Rather, the Fabe Court described the first clause as 
applicable to “laws that possess the ‘end, intention, or aim’ 
of adjusting, managing, or controlling the business of 
insurance.” Jd. at 2210 (citation omitted). “This category 
necessarily encompasses more than just the "business of 
insurance.’" /d. 

Several prominent cases before Fabe dealt with the 
“business of insurance" within the meaning of the second 
clause of § 2(b). See Union Labor Life Ins. Co. v. Pireno, 
458 U.S. 119 (1982); Group Life & Health Ins. Co. v. Royal 

56a 

Drug Co., 440 U.S. 205 (1979). A _ tripartite test | 
consequently developed out of these cases when the second 
clause of § 2(b) was at issue. The district court in the case 
at hand understandably relied on Pireno’s tripartite test 
because Fabe had not yet been decided. In light of Fabe, 
however, I believe that both the district court’s and the 
majority’s reliance on Pireno is misplaced. For example, 
the majority relied on language from Fabe "that Pireno 
‘identified the three criteria . . . that are relevant in 
determining what activities constitute the “business of 
insurance."’" Maj. opinion at p. 392 (quoting Fabe, 113 S. 
Ct. at 2208). However, this quotation appeared in the Fabe 
Court’s presentation of the issues, before the Court actually 
analyzed Pireno and distinguished it from the Ohio statute 
then being considered. In its subsequent analysis of Pireno, 
the Court clearly limited the scope and application of 
Pireno’s tripartite test stating: “Pireno and Royal Drug held 
only that ‘ancillary activities’ that do not affect performance 
of the insurance contract or enforcement of contractual 
obligations do not enjoy the antitrust exemption for laws 
regulating the "business of insurance.’" Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 
2209 (quoting Pireno, 458 U.S. at 134 n. 8) (emphasis 
added). Furthermore, the Court distinguished the Ohio 
statute from Pireno stating that Pireno should “not [be] read 

. , to suggest that the business of insurance is confined 

‘Pursuant to Pireng’s tripartite test, the “business of insurance” under 
the second clause of § 2(b), is determined by considering the 
following: 
{F]irst, whether the practice has the effect of transferring or 
spreading a policyholder’s risk, second, whether the practice 
is an integral part of the policy relationship between the 
insurer and the insured; and third, whether the practice is 
limited to entities within the insurance industry. 
Pireno, 458 U.S. at 129. 

57a 

entirely to the writing of insurance contracts, as opposed to 
their performance.” /d. 

D. McCarran-Ferguson Analysis—First Clause of 2(b) 

After the Fabe Court distinguished the first and 
second clauses of § 2(b) from one another, it further 
examined the history of McCarran-Ferguson to determine 
Congress’s intent in drafting the first clause of § 2(b). 
Congress's reaction to the Supreme Court decision in South- 
Eastern Underwriters arose in part from its concern with the 
nature of the insurance contract. Ip enacting McCarran- 
Ferguson, Congress intended for ‘he contract between an 
insurer and its policyholder to be controlled and regulated by 
the state. The legislation was aimed at: 

The relationship between insurer and insured, the 
type of policy which could be issued, its reliability, 
interpretation, and enforcement—these were the core 
of the “business of insurance." Undoubtedly, other 
activities of insurance companies relate so closely to 
their status as reliable insurers that they too must be 
placed in the same class. But whatever the exact 
scope of the statutory term, it is clear where the 
focus was—it was on the relationship between the 
insurance company and the policyholder. Statutes 
aimed ai protecting or regulating this relationship, 
directly or indirectly are laws regulating the 
“business of insurance." 

Securities and Exch. Comm'n v. National Secs., Inc., 393 
U.S. 453, 460 (1969). 

58a 

1. Section 287: Enacted to Regulate the Business of 
Insurance 

The proper standard to apply, therefore, when 
determining whether the Kentucky statute at issue falls within 
the intended scope of McCarran-Ferguson, is to examine 
whether the statute is centrally concerned with policyholders. 
Defendants allege that section 287 was enacted to regulate 
the business of insurance. According to Fabe, this means 
the statute must have been enacted to protect or regulate the 
relationship between the insurer and the policyholder. 

According to the majority, section 287 merely 
regulates a group of people which it intended to prevent 
from entering the insurance industry. Such exclusion of a 
person from participation in an activity is not viewed by the 
majority as regulation of the activity itself. 1 do not agree 
with this concept. 

The only other federal court to address this issue 
recently examined a Florida statute that prevented insurance 
agents associated in any way with a financial institution from 
engaging in insurance agency activities. Barnett Banks v. 
Gallagher, 839 F. Supp. 835 (M.D. Fla. 1993). The 
Florida statute and section 287 therefore achieve the same 
goal—to prevent banks from selling general insurance—by 
slightly different means. Florida's statute restricted the 
activities of insurance agents while Kentucky's section 287 
restricts the activities of bank holding companies. Like 
section 287, the Florida statute regulates a particular group 
of people by prohibiting them from entering the insurance 
industry. Unlike the majority in the case at hand, however, 
the court in Barnett Banks gauged the “larger intent” of the 
Florida statute and found the law was enacted to “'further[] 
the interests’ of the potential policyholding public, [to] 
regulate[] the potential policyholding public and, therefore, 

59a 

[was] a ‘law enacted for the purpose of regulating the 
business of insurance’ within the meaning of McCarran- 
Ferguson." Barnett Banks, 839 F. Supp. at 840-41 (quoting 
Fabe and § 2(b) of McCarran-Ferguson). 

Even if the majority is correct in distinguishing 
statutes that regulate persons from those that regulate the 
manner in which an activity is conducted, it improperly fails 
to consider whether section 287 regulates the business of 
insurance indirectly. When Congress enacted the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act, it envisioned the “business of insurance” to 
focus upon those statutes “aimed at protecting or regulating 
{the relationship between insurer and policyholder], directly 
or indirectly . . . .” National Secs., 393 U.S. at 460 
(emphasis added). Therefore, it is sufficient for the 
Kentucky legislature to indirectly govern the relationship 
between an insurance company and future policyholders by 
enacting a statute such as section 287 to regulate those 
persons the state wishes to exclude from the insurance 
industry. See also Hoylake Inv. Lid. v. Washburn, 723 F. 
Supp. 42 (N.D. Il. 1989) (finding that an Illinois statute 
regulated the policyholder relationship in part because of the 
state’s concern for the future solvency of its insurance 
companies). Whether a state chooses to regulate its 
insurance industry by prohibiting particular persons, entities, 
activities, or conduct—directly or indirectly—is immaterial. 
If the state aims to protect or regulate the insurer/insured 
relationship, it is regulating the business of insurance. 
National Secs., 393 U.S. at 460. 

By enacting section 287, the Kentucky legislature 
likewise intended to protect and regulate the relationship 
between insurer and insured at its most basic level. In a 
1981 Advisory Opinion the Kentucky Attorney General 
outlined the amendments which led to section 287 and stated 
that it was “the clear intent of the legislature to limit the 

60a 

involvement of majority bank shareholders, including one- 
bank holding companies, in insurance related activities." 
Ky. Op. Att'y Gen. 81-173 (1981). Later, a Kentucky 
House Resolution stated: “if banks were licensed to sell 
homeowners, automobile, and other lines of insurance, the 
consumer could feel coerced into purchasing insurance from 
the bank to obtain the loan regardless of the insurance 
premium.” Ky. H.R. 91-SS-BR-198 (1991). The legislature 
enacted the statute out of a direct concern for future 
policyholders. It cannot be disputed, therefore, that section 
287 was aimed to protect the insurance relationship between 
insurers and policyholders. 

Obviously, the Kentucky legislature was concerned 
that if banks, national or state, were able to sell general 
insurance to their customers, the banks could unduly 
influence those Kentucky citizens and jeopardize the ability 
to pay claims when demands were made. See Barnett 
Banks, 839 F. Supp. at 840. The state has an important 
interest in protecting its citizens by ensuring that insurance 
companies remain solvent. /d. In an effort to protect the 
interests of its citizens, the Kentucky legislature should not 
be so constrained that all legislation intended to regulate the 
insurance industry, “‘directly or indirectly,’” must be located 
only within its Insurance Code. National Secs. , 393 U.S. at 
460. 

The district court in the case at hand also was 
persuaded by plaintiffs’ argument that section 287 does not 
regulate the business of insurance because it is not contained 
within Kentucky's Insurance Code, and is thus primarily 
intended to regulate bank holding companies rather than 
insurance. As the Supreme Court has said on this issue, 
however, “*mere matters of form need not detain us.’" Fabe, 
113 S. Ct. at 2210 (quoting National Secs. 393 U.S. at 460). 
It is not enough to state baldly that because the particular 

|. 

6la 

statute does not fall directly within the Insurance Code, it 
does not regulate the business of insurance. “Instead, the 
Court must attempt to gauge the larger intent and design" of 
section 287. Barnett Banks, 839 F. Supp. at 840. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

It is my opinion, therefore, that the district court 
erred in its holding. Contrary to the majority's opinion, | 
believe that section 287 was enacted to regulate the business 
of insurance. 

2. Section 92: Not Specifically Related to the Business 
of Insurance 

The second step in this McCarran-Ferguson analysis 
is to determine whether § 92 “specifically relates to the 
business of insurance.” McCarran-Ferguson § 2(b). 
Because it decided that section 287 was not enacted to 
regulate the business of insurance, the majority declined to 
consider this issue. However, there is little doubt that, as 
the district court determined below, § 92 does avi 

62a 

specifically relate to the business of insurance. Owensboro 
Nat’! Bank, 803 F. Supp. at 34-35. Rather, § 92's “prmary 
intent was to strengthen small national banks by providing 
them with an additional source of revenue.” /d. (citations 
omitted). As the district court further stated, the mere fact 
that “the power granted to the national banks involves 
insurance does not transform this section into a regulation of 
the business of insurance." Jd. at 36. On this issue, the 
district court’s analysis is sound and should be followed by 

this Court. 

The plaintiffs maintain, however, that § 92 does 
specifically regulate the business of insurance. The Supreme 
Court has not been explicitly clear how "specific" a federal 
statute must be to preempt a state law which regulates the 
business of insurance. The Fabe Court came the closest to a 
firm definition in determining that McCarran-Ferguson calls 
for a “clear statement rule." Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 2211. 
According to this rule, a .ederal statute such as § 92 must 
“clearly state” that it regulates the business of insurance or 
otherwise intends to preempt a contrary state law. /d. Upon 
examining the legislative history of McCarran-Ferguson, the 
Court found that only when “Congress, in its wisdom, 
[acted] specifically with reference to insurance in enacting 
the law" would such a law preempt any state statute enacted 
to regulate the business of insurance. Jd. at 2211 n.7. 
Therefore, "no existing law and no future law should, by 
mere implication, be applied to the business of insurance." 
Id. (quoting 91 Cong. Rec. 1487 (1945)). 

The context of § 92 has always been within the 
regulation of banking rather than insurance. In United States 
Nat'l Bank of Oregon v. Independent Insurance Agents of 
America, 113 S. Ct. 2173 (1993), in which the Court upheld 
the viability of § 92, the Court emphasized that § 92 was 
part of the Federal Reserve Act. /d. at 2182. The court in 

63a 

Barnett Banks relied on the language of Independent Ins. 
Agents stating that § 92 was to be read in context with the 
other paragraphs around it and the fact that neither the 
Independent Ins. Agents Court nor Congress ever suggested 
that § 92 was specifically related to the business of 
insurance. Therefore, § 92 was found not to specifically 
relate to the business of insurance. Barnett Banks, 839 F. 
Supp. at 843. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

ee ae ee Ne RS eee ae Oe ee ey 

64a 

provision was at issue. Once again, however, regulation of 
the business of insurance pervades ERISA. Not only have 
numerous courts agreed that ERISA specifically relates to the 
business of insurance, ERISA’s “deemer" clause explicitly 
exempts state employee benefit plans from the preemption 
language of McCarran-Ferguson. 

Finally, plaintiffs and an amicus brief from the 
American Bankers Association argue that if section 287 is 
found to regulate the business of insurance, then § 92 must 
also be found to specifically relate to the business of 
insurance. According to plaintiffs, common sense dictates 
that the definition of § 2(b)'’s “business of insurance” be 
applied equally to both Kentucky's section 287 and § 92. 
The plaintiffs’ argument is flawed, however, in its disregard 
for the exact wording of the statute. See supra subsection 
II.C. Section 2(b) states that a federal statute must 
“specifically relate[] to the business of insurance." Although 
this phrase is not clearly defined, the Court in Fabe termed 
ita “clear statement rule.” Fabe, 113 S. Ct. at 2211. Itis 
apparent from the Fabe decision that an analysis of the first 
clause of § 2(b) requires a broader standard for the state 
Statute at issue than for the federal statute at issue. 
Furthermore, cases such as Fabe reach the very result 
contested by plaintiffs—that a state statute can be found to 
regulate the business of insurance without also finding that 
the federal statute specifically relates to the business of 
insurance. 

Consequently, | would find that McCarran-Ferguson 
prevents federal preemption of section 287 and | would 
reverse and remand on that basis. 


