2 Supreme Court, U. 9, 
, FILED 
IN THE DEC 28 186 

Supreme Court of the Anite Statesexx 

OCTOBER TERM, 1995 

\ 

No. 94-1837 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A.., 

Petitioner, 
v. 

BILL NELSON, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER 
OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA, 

FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE, 
FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF LIFE UNDERWRITERS, 
PROFESSIONAL INSURANCE AGENTS OF FLORIDA, INC., 
AND FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE AGENTS, 

Respondents. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

PETITIONER’ S REPLY BRIEF 

NATHAN LEWIN 
(Counsel of Record) 
ScoTT L. NELSON 

J. BRADLEY BENNETT 

RICHARD E. SWARTLEY JAMES R. HEAVNER, JR. 
General Counsel MILLER, CASSIDY, 
BARNETT BANKS, INC. LARROCA & LEWIN 
50 N. Laura Street 2555 M Street, N.W. 
Jacksonville, FL 32202 Washington, D.C. 20037 
(904) 791-7505 (202) 293-6400 

Attorneys for Petitioner 

PRESS OF BYRON S.ADAMS WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 

(i) 

RULE 29.6 STATEMENT 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

(ii) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

RULE 29.6 STATEMENT ..... 2... 62 eee ees (i) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............+-+:. (iii) 

I. THIS CASE INVOLVES ACTUAL 
CONFLICT BETWEEN FEDERAL AND 
STATE LAW ....cccccccccsevveces l 

II. INVALIDATING SECTION 626.988 WILL 
NOT DISRUPT LEGITIMATE STATE 
REGULATION ......ccceeccvcvcees 6 

Ill. .THE CONTENT AND PREAMBLE OF 
SECTION 626.988 SHOW THAT ITS 
TRUE PURPOSE IS TO SUPPRESS 
COMPETITION, NOT TO REGULATE 
INSURANCE ..... cc cccvvccccccees 8 

IV. THE FLORIDA STATUTE IS NOT A 
CONVENTIONAL LICENSING OR 
REGULATORY MEASURE ........... 14 

V. | BECAUSE SECTION 92 EXPLICITLY 
REFERS TO INSURANCE SALES, IT 
"SPECIFICALLY" RELATES TO THE 
BUSINESS OF INSURANCE .......... 16 

CONCLUSION .....ccccccccvcvvcceces 20 

(iii) 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page(s) 

CASES: 
Covalt v. Carey Canada, Inc.., 

860 F.2d 1434 (7th Cir. 1988) ............. 12 
Davis v. Elmira Sav. Bank, 

EEE ee 6 
Easton v. Iowa, 

Te ce cece ccc ce cc: 6 
Farmers’ & Mechanics’ Nat’! Bank v. Dearing, 

EEG 6 
Ferguson v. Skrupa, 

Is Bs kn cee sc cccecs 16 
Fidelity Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. De la Cuesta, 

TT 2 ees ccc ccc ececs 2,3 
First Nat’l Bank v. Dickinson, 

EEE 4,5 
First Nat'l Bank v. Fellows, 

EE ee 6 
First Nat'l Bank v. Walker Bank & Trust Co., 

I Ee ee ces tc cece cece 5 

Franklin Nat’! Bank v. New York, 
DPT saccccccceccccecs 2,3, 5 

(iv) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 
Page(s) 
FTC v. National Casualty Co., 
oe ge .. eon 

Glendale Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Department of Ins., 
587 So.2d 534 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1991), 
review denied, 599 So.2d 656 (Fla. 1992) ...... 10 

Group Life & Health Ins. Co. v. Royal Drug Co., 
440 U.S. FOS (IGT) ow wc ccccccccsvccses 10 

John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. 
Harris Trust & Sav. Bank, 
i Cm oe 19 

Lawrence County v. Lead-Deadwood 
School Dist. No. 40-1, 
r St ® 1, Serra ye eee 3 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Mercantile Nat’l Bank v. Langdeau, 
yet S |. Beers ree 6 

Michael M. v. Superior Court, 
G50 UB. GER GREED oc ccc ccc ceccccces 11, 12 

Missouri ex rel. Burnes Nat'l Bank v. Duncan, 
, - ERS arr errr 5 

(v) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 

Page(s) 

Production Credit Ass’ns v. Department of Ins., 

356 So.2d 31 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1978) ....... 10 
Quern v. Mandley, 

i  ovdwud ds bide cs obo ok 12 
Ramapo Bank v. Camp, 

425 F.2d 333 (3d Cir.) 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

eee 14, 15, 16 
SEC v. National Sec., Inc., 

ee a 14 
Shaw v. Deita Air Lines, Inc., 

Re ie i 18 
Union Labor Life Ins. Co. v. Pireno, 

i 10 
United States Dep't of Treasury v. Fabe, 

.  & Sah Ae are 17 

STATUTES: 

McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1011-15, 
IED 6'eik'n ihre thc hice weie <' passim 

(vi) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - CONTINUED 

Page(s) 
12 U.S.C. § 24 (Seventh) .....-- eee eeeeee 8 
De ces ccevesooncesees ones 4,5 
DED coccevcccesecescecens passim 
16 U.S.C. § S90y 2... eee eee eee eens 18 
26 U.S.C. § 420(cM3MA) .. ee eee ees 18 
Fla. Stat. Ann. §§ 626.011 - 626.726 .........-- 15 
§ G26.74S1 . 0... wee eee ee eens 9 
§ 626.7491... 2... eee eee eee 9 
. )) eee 9 
§ G26.9541 ... 0.22 ce eeees 9, 10 
§ 626.988 .......----05> passim 
i) 9 

OTHER AUTHORITIES: 
Black’s Law Dictionary (6th ed. 1990) ........--- 16 

Keeton & Widiss, Insurance Law: A Guide to Fundamental 
Principles, Legal Doctrines, and Commercial Practices 

OCC Interp. Ltr. No. 475 [1989-90 Transfer Binder] Fed. 
Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 83,012, at 71,119 (March 22, 

BOT gc cece cee sees coescesscesesesces 8 
Webster’s New International Dictionary = 
CUED “cc ccctvdececceoceesesevesess 1 

No. 94-1837 

IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 

BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY, N.A., 

Petitioner, 
v. 

BILL NELSON, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER 
OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA, et al., 

Respondents. 

THIS CASE INVOLVES ACTUAL CONFLICT BETWEEN 
FEDERAL AND STATE LAW 

The briefs of both respondents and all five of their 
amici describe this case as one involving possible pre-emption 
of Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.988 ("Section 626.988") by 12 U.S.C. 
§ 92 ("Section 92"). “Pre-emption" substantially understates 
the relationship between the federal and state laws. Section 92 
conflicts with Florida’s law barring bank insurance sales. 

2 

The respondent Insurance Agents devote 15 pages of 
their brief (pp. 16-30) to arguing that “under traditional pre- 
emption analysis” Section 626.988 is not displaced. They 
discuss various general rules of pre-emption. But they ignore 
the central point of conflict. Federal law specifically authorizes 
national banks to do what Florida law forbids — sell insurance 
from small-town branches. The respondents claim there is no 
inconsistency because federal law merely grants a "power" to 
national banks and does not confer any “right” upon them 
(Insurance Agents Br. 26-29). This jurisprudential distinction 
conflicts with this Court’s decisions in Franklin Nat’! Bank v. 
New York, 347 U.S. 373 (1954), and Fidelity Fed. Sav. & Loan 
Ass'n v. De la Cuesta, 458 U.S. 141 (1982), which the 

Both Franklin Nat’! Bank and De la Cuesta involved far 
less direct conflict between federal and state law than exists 
here. The state law in Franklin Nat’l Bank did not prohibit 
national banks from doing what federal law authorized — “‘to 
receive time and savings deposits and to pay interest on the 
same.’” 347 U.S. at 375. The law only prohibited a national 
bank from using the word “saving” or “savings” in promoting 
its business. Nonetheless, this Court held that the federal law 
was not only “declaratory” of a national bank’s right to accept 
savings deposits, but that it also implicitly gave national banks 
the right to use the “commonly understood description” of that 
business in their advertising. This, said the Court, created “a 
clear conflict between the law of New York and the law of the 
Federal Government,” which the Supremacy Clause resolved in 
favor of the latter. 347 U.S. at 378-79 (emphasis added). 

Here, the dispute is not over the use of a term such as 
“insurance” in advertising. It is over the substantive right to 
enter the business of selling insurance. If the New York law 
in Franklin Nat'l Bank had not merely prohibited national banks 
from using the word “savings” but had prohibited them from 
accepting savings deposits, the Franklin Nat’! Bank case would 

ee 

3 

parallel this one. Had New York law imposed such a bar, it 
would, a fortiori, have been held to conflict with federal law. 

salt ate ee Sane GE ae ome 
explicitly address the subject of the allegedly pre-empted state 
law. Under a general grant of statutory authority, a federal 
agency had authorized savings-and-loan associations to use loan 
provisions prohibited by California law. Applying the principle 
that “state law is nullified to the extent that it actually conflicts 
with federal law" (458 U.S. at 153), this Court held that if a 
federal regulation authorizes a contract term that state law 
forbids, there is "an actual conflict between federal and state 
law." 458 U.S. at 159 n. 14 (emphasis added). 

It is inconsistent with Franklin Nat'l Bank and De la 
Cuesta to enforce a state law prohibiting banks from doing what 
federal law explicitly authorizes. The federal authorization 
necessarily conflicts with the State’s prohibition. See also 
Lawrence County v. Lead-Deadwood School Dist. No. 40-1, 
469 U.S. 256 (1985), which held that a state law restricting a 

county's spending of federal funds conflicted with a federal law 
wr den p ym asi may” expend funds for any purpose. ' 

Moreover, the language of Section 92 contradicts the 
notion that Congress merely conferred a “ power” and left the 
ultimate “right” to sell insurance to the judgment of state 
authorities. Section 92 says that small-town national banks may 

Franklin Nat’! Bank, supra, 347 U.S. at 377. 

4 

"act as the agent” for any insurance company "authorized" to 
issue policies by a State. Congress subjected the "right" of 
national banks only to “such rules and regulations as may be 
prescribed by the Comptroller of the Currency.” Congress did 
not make a bank’s “right” to sell insurance subject to regulation 
by the “authorities of the State." Section 92 thus requires 
(1) that the insurance company be authorized by the State, and 
(2) that the bank be authorized by the Comptroller. The 
respondents seek to add a level of authorization that Congress 
deliberately omitted — authorization by state regulators of the 
national bank’s "right" to sell insurance. 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

The Insurance Agents’ assertion that Section 92 reflects 
only a policy of “competitive equality" between national and 
state-chartered banks (Insurance Agents Br. 22), is even farther 
off the mark. The Insurance Agents rely on First Nat'l Bank 
v. Dickinson, 396 U.S. 122 (1969), but that case merely reveals 
the fallacy of their argument. The question in Dickinson was 
whether a Florida national bank could provide off-premises 
facilities for making deposits. Florida prohibited state-chartered 
banks from offering such services. This Court held that the 
McFadden Act, 12 U.S.C. § 36, which permits national banks 
to have branch offices only to the extent state law permits state 
banks to do so, barred the bank from offering these services. 

wane 
a ere a + 

5 

The Court ruled that, as a matter of federal law, state 
branching restrictions applied to national banks. The Court 
stressed that “national banks are ‘necessarily subject to the 
paramount authority of the United States.’" 396 U.S. at 134 
(emphasis added) (quoting First Nat’l Bank v. Missouri, 263 
U.S. 640, 656 (1924)). The Court explained that "while 
Congress has absolute authority over national banks, the federal 
statute has incorporated by reference the limitations which state 
law places on branch banking activities by state banks." 396 
U.S. at 131. The Court’s references to "competitive equality” 
between national and state banks referred only to the McFadden 
Act’s express provisions ensuring that “neither system ha{s] 
advantages over the other in the use of branch banking." 396 
U.S. at 131 (emphasis added); see also First Nat’l Bank v. 
Walker Bank & Trust Co., 385 U.S. 252, 261 (1966). 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

‘Far from supporting respondents, Dickinson illustrates 
our point. Absent express recognition by Congress that state 
law limits national bank powers, state laws that would bar 

national banks from exercising powers granted by Congress 
either implicitly (as in Franklin Nat'l Bank) or expressly (as 

6 

here) conflict with federal law. National banks "‘are subject to 
the control of Congress and are not to be interfered with by 
state legislative or judicial action, except so far as the 
lawmaking power of the [federal] Government may permit.’” 
Mercantile Nat'l Bank v. Langdeau, 371 U.S. 555, 559 (1963) 
(quoting Van Reed v. People’s Nat'l Bank, 198 U.S. 554 
(1905)). When Congress authorizes national banks to enter a 
line of business, "{mJanifestly this exclude[s] the power of the 
state in such case, although it might possess in a general sense 
authority to regulate such business, to use that authority to 
prohibit such business from being united by Congress with the 
banking function .. . ." First Nat’l Bank v. Fellows, 244 U.S. 
416, 425 (1917); accord, Easton v. Iowa, 188 U.S. 220, 229- 
38 (1903); Davis v. Elmira Sav. Bank, 161 U.S. 275, 283 
(1896); Farmers’ & Mechanics’ Nat’l Bank v. Dearing, 9\ U.S. 
29, 34 (1875). The only question here is whether the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act reverses the general rule and saves a 
state law that obviously conflicts with federal law. 

Il. 

INVALIDATING SECTION 626.988 WILL NOT 
DisRuPT LEGITIMATE STATE REGULATION 

In seeking to make this Court believe that the sky will 
come falling down if the Court rules against them, respondents 
and their amici grossly exaggerate the effect of invalidating 
Section 626.988. They claim such a ruling will “eradicate 
well-established state regulation of insurance agents and their 
activities” (Insurance Agents Br. 13), “undermine the 
regulatory scheme for insurance agents in Florida and other 
States” (Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures Br. 2), and “preempt 
the licensure of agents by the states” (Council of Insurance 

Agents Br. 4). 

7 

None of these cataclysmic conseque 
invalidation of Section ad mmeamaemen ~ 
Court agrees with us and the Sixth Circuit in the Owensboro 
case that a flat ban on insurance sales by banks is not a law 
enacted “for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance," such a decision will have no effect on legitimate 
and bona fide "well-established state regulation of insurance 
preci Nor will it hinder legitimate and bona fide "licensure 
of insurance agents” or any other lawful of “the regulatory 
scheme far Sesame ensete ta Pedi ont ene Pee The 
only result of such a ruling will be to prevent the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act from being used to cloak local laws enacted to 
exclude competitors at the behest of the insurance-agent, lobby. 

Indeed, such a holding will legitimate and encour 
local laws honestly aimed at preventing deception or coercion 
of insurance buyers. The Florida law presumes irrebuttably 
that banks deceive or coerce consumers and that banks must 
therefore be prevented from selling insurance. Striking down 
such a law does not affect laws prohibiting deceptive or 
coercive conduct by all insurance agents — whether or not 
employed by banks. Such laws may qualify for the shield 
granted by the McCarran-Ferguson Act to state laws enacted 
for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance." But 
that is not the kind of law Florida chose to enact. 

By the same token, invalidating Section 626.98 
because Section 92 “specifically relates to the business . 
insurance does not jeopardize a State’s legitimate system of 
regulating insurance. Such a ruling only bars the State from 
disqualifying national banks eo ipso from selling insurance 
Even-handed, across-the-board regulation continues to apply. 

The Insurance Agents’ contrary assertion rests largely 
on selective quotation from an interpretive letter of the Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency addressing issues not here 
presented. The Insurance Agents maintain (Insurance Agents 

Br. 13) that the Comptroller has opined that States may not 
require bank employees who sell insurance to be licensed. 
Their truncated quotation is misleading. The OCC letter says: 
"Regardless of the form or subject of a regulatory scheme, a 
state ‘cannot demand that a national bank or its employees be 
licensed to conduct . . . activities allowed by. . . 12 U.S.C. 
24(7).". OCC Interp. Ltr. No. 475 [1989-90 Transfer Binder] 
Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 83,012, at 71,119 (March 22, 
1989) (first emphasis in original; second emphasis added). The 
"activities allowed” by 12 U.S.C. § 24 (Seventh) are those that 
are at the core of the business of banking. The letter the 
Insurance Agents quote stands only for the unexceptional 
proposition that a national bank need not be licensed by a State 
to carry out its banking functions. The letter does not address 
whether nondiscriminatory license requirements apply to bank 
employees engaged in insurance sales authorized by Section 92. 

The vice of Section 626.988 that the respondents and 
their amici ignore is that instead of regulating pernicious 
conduct, it singles out “financial institutions” and disqualifies 
them, regardless of actual conduct, from selling insurance. A 
decision that such a legislative decision to throw out the baby 
with the bath-water will not be accepted as bona fide 
"regulation" of the business of insurance would not affect 
legitimate local regulation of that business. 

Il. 

THE CONTENT AND PREAMBLE OF SECTION 626.988 
SHOW THAT ITS TRUE PURPOSE IS TO SUPPRESS 
COMPETITION, NOT TO REGULATE INSURANCE 

The respondents and their amici have imaginatively 
conceived scenarios in which banks deceive or coerce naive and 
powerless purchasers of insurance. They have even portrayed 

et ee eee ee: 

9 

banks as such potentially influential vendors of insurance that 
y force insurance companies to endanger their own solvency. 
They ask this Court to believe that these potential harms led the 
legislature to “regulate the business of insurance” by 
automatically disqualifying virtually all “financial institutions" 
from selling insurance. 

The short answer is that if Florida’s legislature had 
indeed wanted “to avoid unfair trade ron ig and 
undue concentration of resources" — as the Florida Insurance 
Commissioner claims in his brief (pp. 16-26) — it could have 
enacted or strengthened laws directed at such conduct. Section 
626.988 is not directed at these alleged evils. Rather, it singles 
out "financial institutions” and excludes them from the ranks of 
those who may sell insurance in Florida. 

Other Florida laws are directed at the conduct that the 
respondents cite as justifying the sweeping ban of Section 
626.988. See, e.g., Fla. Stat. Ann. §§ 626.9541, 626.7451 
626.7491, 626.88, 628.801. The two Florida insurance 
officials on whose challenged testimony the respondents rely 
acknowledged that these general laws would continue to apply 
to anyone who sells insurance in Florida, including employees 
of banks, even if Section 626.988 is held invalid. See Tr. 48- 
50, 96. The blanket prohibition applicable to all banks is 
therefore, not a necessary or legitimate form of “regulation.” f 

State regulatory regimes that govern how i 

agents interact with policyholders ra by eneiad he too 
McCarran-Ferguson Act. Cf FTC v. National Casualty Co. 
357 U.S. 560, 564 (1958) (per curiam). But the Florida law at 
issue here does not address the conduct of agents in soliciting, 
ee or selling insurance. Section 626.988 does not 
. cr to musrepresentation, false advertising, unfair 

iscrimination, rebating, twisting, illegal dealings in premiums 
or any of the other practices that are catalogued in Fla. Stat. 

10 

Ann. § 626.9541 — the Florida law that defines unfair or 
deceptive practices with respect to insurance. 

Rather, as the Insurance Agents concede, Section 
626.988 controls “affiliation” between insurance agents and 
banks. See Insurance Agents Br. i. The obvious effect of 
Section 626.988 is not to control the “point of sale” of 
insurance, but to preclude banks from acquiring revenue from 
insurance sales by prohibiting them from establishing a business 
relationship with insurance agents. If anything is clear from 
this Court’s McCarran-Ferguson Act precedents it is that 
financial arrangements between insurers and third parties are 
not part of the “business of insurance" as the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act uses the term. See Union Labor Life Ins. Co. v. 
Pireno, 458 U.S. 119, 131-32 (1982); Group Life & Health 
Ins. Co. v. Royal Drug Co., 440 U.S. 205, 215-17 (1979). 

Respondents rely on an intermediate Florida appellate 
court’s statement that the legislature determined “that there is 
potential for abuse inherent in financial institutions being 
involved in the sale of insurance” (Production Credit Ass’ns v. 
Department of Ins., 356 So.2d 31, 32 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 
1978)), and on the same court’s holding that Section 626.988 
is constitutional because “rationally related to legitimate state 
goals" (Glendale Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Department of 
Ins., 587 So.2d 534, 536 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1991), review 
denied, 599 So.2d 656 (Fla. 1992)). But the finding that 
Section 626.988 is not unconstitutional does not mean that it 
regulates the business of insurance under the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act. And the court’s conclusion in Glendale that "a 
legislature could well have decided that some protection was 
required" (587 So.2d at 536; emphasis added) does not mean 
that a total ban on insurance sales by "financial institutions” is 
a permissible regulation of the business of insurance within the 
meaning of the Act. Some protection could have been provided 
in many other ways. Excluding banks altogether was patently 

11 

prompted by motives other than ion of 
wan Smen ce ee 

The first of the reasons stated in the preamble to Section 
626.988 when it was introduced in the Florida legislature 
(Brief for the Petitioner 6a): | cane 

[T]he entry of large banking institutions into the 
insurance agency business in areas where the 
banks have a large concentration of resources 
would result in the demise of small insurance 
agencies or their transformation into large 
within the insurance industry and reduce the 
opportunity for youths, veterans and women to 
gain a foothold in a business in which ultimately 
they could participate as owners or managers. 

The anti-competitive purpose of Section 626.988 could 
concerned with regulating” sellers of insurance to protect the 
insurance-buying public. It was concerned primarily with "the 
ue ae taeion tcc. 

for as insurance agents. That is not 
the kind of legislation that the McCarran-Ferguson Act protects. 

This Court’s decision in Michael M. v. Superio 
450 U.S. 464 (1981), on which the respondents and ‘heen 
rely heavily (Insurance Agents Br. 36, Stephens Br. 9, n.9: 
Nat'l Conf. of State Leg. Br. 9, n.5), does not require this 
Court to accept the after-the-fact justification for Section 
oe proffered by the respondents. The plurality in Michael 
tp = that in determining the constitutionality of a law, 
' search for the ‘actual’ or ‘primary’ purpose of a statute is 
likely to be elusive” (450 U.S. at 469-70). In exercising the 
sensitive power to invalidate state statutes, the plurality gave 
great deference” to a statutory justification offered by a State 

12 

and accepted by its highest court (450 U.S. at 470). Such 
deference is not required when the issue is a statutory one — 
whether a local law should be shielded from pre-emption 
because a federal statute protects local laws having a defined 
“purpose.” In that distinguishable context, a court has a 
statutory obligation to determine the true purpose of the local 
law and not to defer to improbable explanations that a State 
may propose in order to save its laws from pre-emption. In 
any event, Michael M. does not remotely authorize respondents’ 
request that the Court rely on post hoc testimony asserting 
hidden purposes to protect the rights of potential policyholders. 

Nor are these newly discovered “purposes” valid. 
Respondents suggest two aims of the Florida statute: First, the 
law allegedly protects insurer solvency by preventing banks 
from becoming “super agents" who would force independent 
agents out of business, gain control over the insurance industry, 
and pressure insurers to make bad underwriting decisions that 
would lead to financial ruin. Second, respondents contend that 
Section 626.988 prevents banks from unlawfully forcing bank 
customers to meet their insurance needs through bank-affiliated 
rather than independent agents. Respondents say these 
“purposes” show that Section 626.988 has the “end, intention 
or aim" of protecting policyholders. Kespondents err. 

There is no indication in the law’s history that Section 
626.988 was enacted to protect policyholders at all. The only 
"evidence” offered at trial was the testimony of the Insurance 
Department’s own lawyers about what they believed to be the 
law’s purposes. The use of such testimony has been 
"compellingly criticized,” particularly when “generated in the 
course of litigation . . . , for it may be designed to mislead, to 
put an advocate’s slant on things." Covalt v. Carey Canada, 
Inc., 860 F.2d 1434, 1438-39 (7th Cir. 1988); of Quern v. 
Mandley, 436 U.S. 725, 736 n. 10 (1978). The language and 
legislative history of Section 626.988 do not mention insurance- 

13 

company solvency, reliability of policies, or the desire 
protect policyholders. See Brief for the Petitioner Sa-10a, 

The fourth of six legislative concerns mentioned i 
preamble to Section 626.988 was the possibility that banks 
might “tie” loans to the borrower's purchase of insurance. This 
concern is not with the insurer-policyholder relationshi 
the relationship ptanistetses@dbasmmen tate 
the legislature's purported concern does not, as the Insurance 
Agents contend, reflect a determination by the Florida 
legislature that banks “will induce Florida residents to purchase 
insurance from the bank that is not needed by or suited to the 
customer." Insurance Agents Br. 39. Indeed, given the 
legislature's expressed desire to protect independent agents 
from competition, it is far more likely that the statement about 
voluntary tieing” indicates the legislature’s concern that bank 

products.” Annuity sales are not governed by Section 
and we do not understand the respondents to contend tat 1 

14 

purpose of Section 626.988 is to prevent policyholders from 
being deceived into thinking that life, fire, or other insurance 
policies, issued by a licensed insurance company, are “bank 
products.” The allegations of misconduct in the James Mitchell 
case shed no light on the purposes of Section 626.988. Indeed, 
the trial court determined that the allegations in the James 
Mitchell matter were inadmissible for just this reason. See Tr. 
at 59-62, 83-89). We are surprised that the Department has 
placed this inadmissible and irrelevant material before this 
Court. It betrays the desperation of the respondents. 

IV. 

THE FLORIDA STATUTE Is NOT A CONVENTIONAL 
LICENSING OR REGULATORY MEASURE 

The Insurance Agents contend that Section 626.988 is 
an insurance “licensing law,” and they suggest that all such 
laws fall within the scope of the McCarran-Ferguson Act. See 
Insurance Agents Br. 32-38. The Insurance Agents fail to 
designed to protect policyholders and laws like Section 626.988 
that serve other purposes. 

State licensing laws that aim to protect policyholders by 
enforcing professional standards of conduct for insurance agents 
may be protected by the McCarran-Ferguson Act. (7. 
Robertson v. California, 328 U.S. 440 (1946). But laws that 
withhold, suspend or revoke licenses for reasons unrelated to 
the reliability or performance of the contract of insurance are 
not enacted for the purpose of regulating the business of 
insurance. Of. SEC v. National Sec., Inc., 393 U.S. 453, 458- 
60 (1969). The mere fact that Section 626.988 uses the State’s 
licensing mechanism to prohibit banks selling insurance agents 
does not make it regulation of the business of insurance. 

15 

. Section 626.988 is not like any of the “licensing laws" 
cited by the Insurance Agents and their amici. “renee head 
that monitor agents’ education, competence, and 
See ae OF WES Oo OS AREER of Ge coats of 
insurance they sell, may be said to protect policyholders. 
See Insurance Agents Br. 33, n. 24; Council of Ins. Agents and 
Brokers Br. 6; Stephens Br. 21-22; see also Robertson vy. 
California, supra, 328 U.S. 449 (rejecting a Commerce Clause 
challenge to California's agent licensing system because it was 
designed appropriately to secure the public from those evils of 
uncontrolled insurance solicitation to which it is directed"). 
Florida has enacted an entire system of such regulations, 
establishing procedures and requirements for the licensing of 
agents. See Fla. Stat. Ann. §§ 626.011 - 626.726. 

; Section 626.988, by contrast, does not prevent 
uncontrolled insurance solicitation." It does not prevent banks 
from selling “worthless” policies to unsuspecting customers. 
Unlike other provisions of Florida law, it does not require 
minimal skills and education, or disqualify agents on the basis 

resemblance to the laws that this Court read in National 
Securities and Fabe as regulating the business of insurance. 

Finally, standard authorities on insurance do not include 
total disqualification of banks from selling insurance as a 
customary form of "regulation." In Keeton & Widiss, 
Insurance Law: A Guide to Fundamental Principles, Legal 
Doctrines, and Commercial Practices §§ 8.2(a), 8.2(b), at 938- 
41 (1988), the usual goals of insurance regulation are 
described, together with the forms insurance regulation 
ordinarily takes. Although the treatise — quoted extensively by 
the National Conference of State Legislatures at pp. 13-14 of 
their brief — describes “tie-in transactions" as a "troublesome 
area,” it does not suggest that exclusion of banks from selling 
insurance is a permissible form of “regulation.” See id. at 941. 

16 

Nor do the cases cited by the Insurance Agents establish that 
blanket prohibitions are “regulation” under the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act. See Insurance Agents Br. 38. Those authorities 
hold that prohibitory police-power legislation is not 
constitutionally forbidden. See, e.g., Ferguson v. Skrupa, 372 
U.S. 726 (1963). They by no suggest that such 
prohibitions are “regulation” within the meaning of the 
McCarran-Ferguson Act. Cf. Robertson, supra, 328 U.S. at 
449 (distinguishing “regulatory” from “exclusory” legislation). 

Vv. 

BECAUSE SECTION 92 EXPLICITLY REFERS TO 
INSURANCE SALES, IT "SPECIFICALLY" RELATES 
TO THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE 

The respondents and their amici acknowledge — as they 
— that Section 92 "relates" to insurance. They argue, 
however, that it does not do so specifically. “Specifically,” 
they claim, means a federal’ law must “either expressly direct 
displacement of state law or control directly some aspect of the 
‘business of insurance’ the regulation of which is otherwise 
expressly delegated to the States." Insurance Agents Br. 42. 
See also Insurance Comm’r Br. 37 ("the federal law must 
‘specifically relate’ with enough preemptive horsepower to 
displace the state law"). 

But the word “specifically” has a much clearer and 
more definite meaning. It means that the federal law must 
explicitly refer to the business of insurance, not just include 
insurance in some more general statutory term. Black's Law 
Dictionary (6th ed. 1990), for example, defines “specifically” 
as follows: “In a specific manner; explicitly, particularly, 
definitely." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 
(Unabridged) (1971) offers “explicit” as a synonym for 

17 

“specific” and defines “specific” as, inter alia, "characterized 
by precise formulation or accurate restriction (as in stating, 
describing, defining, reserving): free from such ambiguity as 
results from a careless lack of precision or from omission of 
pertinent matter." 

If Section 92 only gave small-town national banks 
general authority to engage in “commercial services” and the 
issue was whether the statute “specifically related" to insurance 
because the sale of insurance was included within the term 
“commercial services," the modifier "specifically" might dictate 
a negative answer. But if the federal law explicitly and 
definitely specifies “insurance” as its subject matter — as 
Section 92 does five times — it is plainly a law that 
“specifically relates to the business of insurance." 

Respondents’ attempts to evade the statutory language 
are inventive but vain. Citing United States Dep't of Treasury 
v. Fabe, 113 S. Ct. 2202 (1993), respondents argue that to pre- 
empt state law under the McCarran-Ferguson Act, a federal 
Statute must not merely “specifically relate" to the business of 
insurance, but must specifically state that pre-emption is 
intended. Fabe, of course, holds no such thing. The meaning 
of “specifically relates" in the McCarran-Ferguson Act was not 
even at issue in Fabe. The language on which respondents pin 
their hopes — i.e., the Court’s statement that the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act creates "what is, in effect, a clear-statement rule” 
under which there is no pre-emption “unless a federal statute 
specifically requires otherwise” (113 S. Ct. at 2211) — is 
simply a generalized description of the effect of the Act, not an 
attempt to prescribe a legal standard (let alone a legal standard 
that disregards the clear language of the Act). We do not take 
issue with the Court’s language in Fabe. We merely point out 
that under the Act, pre-emption is “specifically required" (to 
use Fabe’s terms) when a federal law "specifically relates to the 
business of insurance” (to use the terms of the Act). No 
express statement of pre-emptive intent is required. 

18 

Any other reading would do violence to the words of 
the statute, and would, in effect, revive different language that 
was proposed but ultimately not enacted. See Brief for the 
Petitioner 44-45. The Insurance Agents suggest that the statute 
be read as if the proposed language (under which state law 
would yield to a federal statute only if the federal law 
"specifically so provides") had been enacted. Insurance Agents 
Br. 42, n.33. The reason offered for this unorthodox approach 
is the speculation that the original language was rejected 
because of its awkward syntax.’ Respondents offer no support 
for the novel proposition that obvious substantive differences 
between proposed and enacted statutory language should be 
overlooked whenever the original language was "cumbersome." 
The use of awkward phrases in statutory drafting is so 
ubiquitous that respondents’ proposed canon would leave the 
meaning of few laws unaltered. 

Respondents also argue that a law may specifically 
relate to only one subject. Insurance Comm’r Br. 45. They 
therefore assert that Section 92, which they say relates to "bank 
income,” cannot relate to insurance. Respondents support their 
dubious premise with neither precedent nor logic. Statutes, like 
other writings, may specifically relate to any number of 
subjects. This Court’s own rulings demonstrate the fallacy of 
respondents’ reasoning. ERISA, which the Court described as 
a “comprehensive statute designed to promote the interests of 
employees and their beneficiaries in employment benefit plans" 
in Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 463 U.S. 85, 90 (1983), was 
also held to “specifically relate" to the business of insurance in 

> The supposed “awkwardness” the Insurance Agents believe 
Congress was striving to avoid was the placement of a phrase beginning 
with “Provided” immediately after a semicolon following the word 
“provides.” Such constructions appear elsewhere in the United States 
Code (e.g., 16 U.S.C. § 590y; 26 U.S.C. § 420(c)(3)(A)). There is no 
reason to suppose Congress would have been averse to using such 
language had it captured Congress’ intent. 

19 

John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Harris Trust & Sav. Bank, 
114 S. Ct. 517 (1993). 

In a similar vein, respondents claim Section 92 does not 
"specifically relate” to the business of insurance because it was 
enacted "for the purpose of regulating” banks, not insurance. 
No doubt Section 92 (like Section 626.988) regulates banks. 
But the second prong of the McCarran-Ferguson test, unlike the 
first, does not turn on whether a statute was “enacted for the 
purpose of regulating the business of insurance." The federal 
law’s “purpose” is not the issue. The law need only “relate” 
to the business of insurance, and do so "specifically." Section 
92 passes that test regardless of whether its purpose is said to 
be regulation of banks, regulation of insurance sales, regulation 
of insurance sales by banks, or anything else. 

Finally, respondents point out that the McCarran- 
Ferguson Act requires that the federal law specifically relate not 
just to "insurance," but to the “business of insurance." They 
correctly observe that there is a difference. And they argue 
that a federal law may mention "insurance" but still not relate 
to the “business of insurance." These truisms get respondents 
nowhere. Respondents themselves argue that Florida’s law 
preventing banks from selling insurance regulates the "business 
of insurance" because the "point of sale" is an essential part of 
that business. If respondents are wrong on this point, they lose 
the case because the Florida law is not “enacted for the purpose 
of regulating the business of insurance." If they are right, they 
lose anyway, because a federal law that explicitly authorizes 
national banks to participate at the “point of sale” of insurance 
must, by respondents’ own reasoning, relate (and relate 
specifically) not just to “insurance,” but to the “business of 
insurance." Respondents have no way out of this dilemma. 

20 

CONCLUSION 

For the foregoing reasons and those in our principal 
brief, the Court should reverse the judgment of the court of 
appeals and remand for entry of final declaratory and injunctive 
relief in favor of Barnett Bank on the question whether 12 
U.S.C. § 92 pre-empts Fla. Stat. Ann. § 626.988. 

Respectfully submitted, 

NATHAN LEWIN 

(Counsel of Record) 

Scott L. NELSON 

J. BRADLEY BENNETT 

JAMES R. HEAVNER, JR. 

MILLER, CASSIDY, 
LARROCA & LEWIN 

2555 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 293-6400 

RICHARD E. SWARTLEY 
General Counsel 
BARNETT BANKS, INC. 
50 N. Laura Street 
Jacksonville, FL 32202 
(904) 791-7505 

December 1995 Attorneys for Petitioner 


