No. 94-203 


—S cs 


IN THE ~earamemn eases a 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


FORTIS MORSE, KENNETH CURTIS BARTHOLEMEW. 
AND KIMBERLEY J. ENDERSON, 
Appellants, 


REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA AND 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE. 
Appellees. 


On Appeal From The 
United States District Court 
For The Western District Of Virginia 


BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE OF 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
IN SUPPORT OF APPELLANTS 


Dennis Courtland Hayes Ronald D. Maines 
General Counsel Counsel of Record 
Willie Abrams Maines & Harshman, Chrtd. 
Asst. General Counsel 2300 M Street, N.W. 
National Association For The Suite 900 

Advancement Of Colored People Washington, D.C. 20037 
4805 Mt. Hope Drive (202) 223-2817 


Baltimore, MD 21215 
(410) 486-919] 


March 9, 1995 


os 


BEST AVAILABLE: COPY - 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Virginia’s Change From A Primary Election System 
To A Convention At Which Voters Must Pay A Fee As 
A Condition Of Participation Is A Change “With Respect 
To Voting” Under Section 5 Of The Voting Rights Act 
Of 1965 And Requires Preclearance 


A. Unilateral Changes In A State’s Electoral 
System Demand The Most Careful Judicial 


B. The Party’s Decision To Change From 
A Primary To A Convention System 


CONCLUSION 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Page 
Allen v. State Board of Elections, 

508 U.S. SOR GHGs oes vtcvccecasesesssaanaun 3,7 
Beer v. United States, 425 U.S. 130 (1976) ............ 7 
Bunton v. Patterson, 390 U.S. 978 (1968) ............. 7 
City of Petersburg v. United States, 

400 DS. TH TE 6b eesbcceccdécccotses come 7 
City of Richmond v. United States, 

3 OB. Te Cree 00 on civcsececsadsavscedenae 7 
Ex Parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651 (1884) ............ 3,9 
Grovey v. Townsend, 295 U.S. 45 (1935) ..........45. 5 
Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347 (1915) .......... 10 
Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384 U.S. 641 (1966) ........... 6 
NAACP v. Hampton County Election Com’n, 

CTO GB. TOG 505 660 ck dhedakens 60054 te 8 
Newberry v. United States, 256 U.S. 232 (1921) ........ 4 
Nixon v. Condon, 286 U.S. 739 (1932) ............... 5 
Nixon v. Herndon, 273 U.S. 536 (1927) .............. 4 
Perkins v. Matthews, 400 U.S. 379 (1971) ............ 7 
Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944) ............. 5,9 


South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301 (1966) .. passim 
U.S. v. Board of Com’rs of Sheffield, Ala. , 

435 OS. THO ERED 6 ce visctathaes 3s ecetivewes 6,7 
Whitley v. Williams, 390 U.S. 1009 (1968) ............ 7 


Constitution, Statutes & Regulations: 


U.S. Const.: 
AGE EBS sccccecvccctcesscedelnnnne 3 
sis # « MPT TTT TS passim 
Ramen. HVE oc ccccccecvicvesééseeeee 3 


Constitution, Statutes & Regulations -- Continued 


Voting Rights Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 1973 et seq. .. passim 


rr. CEE Uae ues se cccceccccccs 6 
I ds ccc cccesoccecce passim 
Va. Code Ann. (Michie 1993): 
Is we. ot cece ccerececes 10 
cnc ccbeccacoee 10 
Eh EC Meiciab. icc sicééccoccbecvees 10 
28 C.F.R.: 
ee oes occa seccccéocses 10,11,12 
ce peecceecece 14 
Other Sources: 
H.R. Rep. No. 227, 97th Cong., Ist Sess. (1981) ...... 9 
S. Rep. No. 417, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. (1982) ......... 9 
Homer, Odyssey (S.H. Butcher trans. 3d ed. 1895)...... 2 
S. Lawson, Black Ballots: Voting Rights In The 
ele a a te 5 
- iii - 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-203 


FORTIS MORSE, KENNETH CURTIS BARTHOLEMEW, 
AND KIMBERLEY J. ENDERSON, 
Appellants, 


Vv. 


REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA AND 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE, 


Appellees. 


On Appeal From The 
United States District Court 
For The Western District Of Virginia 


BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE OF 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
IN SUPPORT OF APPELLANTS 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


Pursuant to Rule 37.3 of this Court, the National 
Association For The Advancement Of Colored People 
(NAACP) respectfully submits this brief amicus curiae in 
support of Appellants. Written consent to the filing of this 
brief has been granted by counsel for all parties. Copies of 


the letters of consent have been lodged with the Clerk of 
the Court. 


The NAACP is the oldest and largest civil rights 
organization in America. Founded in 1909, the NAACP 
was instrumental in the earliest battles for the fran- 
chisement of southern blacks through enforcement of the 
Fifteenth Amendment. The organization’s perspective on 
the issue of discrimination in voting and access to the ballot 
is for this reason unique. This case raises questions di- 
rectly bearing on the extent to which a state or one of its 
statutorily sanctioned political parties may alter unilaterally 
the form of selecting nominees for Congressional office, 
ostensibly a change “with respect to voting” under the 
Voting Rights Act of 1965 and one of the Aci’s most 
fundamental safeguards against infringement of the Fif- 
teenth Amendment. Accordingly, this case has substantial 
public interest ramifications. We believe that our perspec- 
tive will complement the brief of Appellants and assist the 
Court in the resolution of these issues. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The early history of efforts to enforce the Fifteenth 
Amendment witnessed an arrogant strategy by southern 
states to configure their electoral systems in ways which 
evaded the direct application of federal court decrees. Like 
the malevolent Proteus in Greek mythology’ -- who eluded 


t See HOMER, ODYSSEY, Book IV, lines 451-456 (S.H. Butcher 
trans. 3d. ed. 1895) (“Now behold, at the first he turned into a 
bearded lion, and thereafter into a snake, and a pard, and a huge 
boar; then he took the shape of running water, and of a tail and 
flowering tree.”) 


restraint merely by changing shape -- certain states bent 
upon perpetuating the exclusion of blacks from the polls 
reacted to judicial enforcement of the Fifteenth Amendment 
by changing their electoral systems to accomplish the same 
unlawful objective in a different, more elusive form. The 
White Primary Cases illustrate this story in its most insidi- 
ous manifestation. 


After “nearly a century of systematic resistance to the 
Fifteenth Amendment,” South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 
U.S. 301, 328 (1966), Congress passed the Voting Rights 
Act of 1965, designed “to reach any state enactment which 
altered the election law of a covered State in even a minor 
way.” Allen v. State Board of Elections, 393 U.S. 544, 566 
(1969). Under Section 5 of the Act, any change in “stan- 
dard, practice, or procedure with respect to voting” re- 
quires prior approval, or preclearance. Section 5's pre- 
clearance requirement applies whether or not the change 
suggests, in the first instance, any discriminatory purpose. 
That any change affecting voting rights has occurred is a 
sufficient predicate to activate Section 5. 


In 1990 the Republican Party of Virginia chose to 
make candidates for federal elective office subject to 
approval in a primary election of the voters. In 1994, the 
Party changed the nominating system to permit only those 
who had paid a $45 fee to participate in the selection of the 
Party’s nominee. This abridgment of voting rights consti- 
tuted a “change” within the meaning of Section 5 and thus 
required federal approval. 


ARGUMENT 


VIRGINIA’S CHANGE FROM A PRIMARY ELECTION 
SYSTEM TO A CONVENTION AT WHICH VOTERS 
MUST PAY A FEE AS A CONDITION OF PARTICIPA- 
TION IS A CHANGE “WITH RESPECT TO VOTING” 
UNDER SECTION 5 OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT OF 
1965 AND REQUIRES PRECLEARANCE. 


A. Unilateral Changes In A State’s Electoral 
System Demand The Most Careful Judicial Scrutiny. 


1. Under the Constitution, the states exercise wide 
discretion in the formulation of systems by which their 
citizens choose representatives in Congress. U.S. Const. Art. 
I, § 2; Amend. XVII; Ex Parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651, 
663 (1884). The establishment of voter qualifications is 
a crucial step in this process. In an infamous era of our 
Nation’s history, certain states structured their electoral 
systems in order to prevent blacks from having access to 
the polls. As courts began enforcing the Fifteenth 
Amendment, post hoc restructuring of electoral systems 
became the brazen strategy of states intent upon circum- 
venting the Fifteenth Amendment’s effect. Even when 
laboring under court oversight, the affected states often 
“merely switched to discriminatory devices not covered by 
the federal decrees.” South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 
U.S. at 313-314. Thus, the very flexibility accorded the 
states to fashion their own, preferred electoral systems -- and 
to change those systems when and how they pleased -- 
became the vehicle for continued oppression of blacks. 


A typical stratagem of recalcitrant states was to recast 
their activities as private and voluntary, and thus assertedly 
beyond the reach of the courts. The history of the “white 


primary” illustrates the sinister dynamic in play when a 
state bent on abridging black access to the polls abused its 
constitutional right to change its electoral structure. 
Beginning in 1889, the Jaybird Democratic Association of 
Texas (Jaybird Party) held “unofficial” primary elections to 
select candidates for county offices. These candidates 
entered the Democratic party primary, were invariably 
nominated and then ¢k»ted in a usually uncontested general 
election. White voters automatically became members; 
blacks were excluded. This “self-governing, voluntary 
club” was organized to disenfranchise blacks and circum- 
vent the Fifteenth Amendment. See S. LAWSON, BLACK 
BALLOTS: VOTING RIGHTS IN THE SOUTH, 1944-1969 23-54 
(1976). 


Initially, in Newberry v. United States, 256 U.S. 
232(1921), the Court concluded that party primary elec- 
tions were unknown to the framers and thus beyond the 
reach of the Constitution. Two years later, the Texas 
legislature enacted a statute expressly barring blacks from 
voting in a Democratic primary. In response, the Court in 
Nixon v. Herndon, 273 U.S. $36 (1927) held this measure 
invalid under the Fourteenth Amendment. The Texas 
legislature reacted with another statute that authorized the 
state party executive committee to determine membership 
qualifications, including race. That statute was held 
invalid in Nixon v. Condon, 286 U.S. 73 (1932). In re- 
sponse to Condon, the Texas legislature repealed all state 
primary election statutes, anticipating that the Democratic 
state convention would exclude blacks, a gambit the Court 
upheld in Grovey v. Townsend, 295 U.S. 45 (1935) as 
“private” discrimination beyond the Constitution. 


Not until Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944), 
when the Court overruled Grovey, did the white primary 


finally end. In a suit sponsored by the NAACP, the Court 
deemed the Texas primary system an integral part of the 
state’s election procedures, meaning citizens had the right 
under the Fifteenth Amendment to vote in primary elections 
free of racial discrimination. The discrimination was not 
merely “private.” Since state law authorized primary 
elections and regulated the party’s procedures, the party in 
convention acted as an agent of the state in excluding 
blacks. “The privilege of membership in a party may be, 
as this Court said in [Grovey], no concern of a State. But 
when, as here, that privilege is also the essential qualifica- 
tion for voting in a primary to select nominees for a gen- 
eral election, the State makes the action of the party the 
action of the State.” Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. at 664. 
The rationale of Allwright was extended in Terry v. Adams, 
345 U.S. 461 (1953) when the Court invalidated an unoffi- 
cial primary held by a private, all-white “club” despite the 
lack of state regulation of the club. 


The states’ repeated efforts to preclude blacks from 
the ballot by manipulating their electoral systems is thus 
the tragic historical context of any case challenging unilat- 
eral changes affecting voting rights. The most salient 
lesson of the White Primary Cases -- that states with a 
history of racial discrimination would effect electoral 
changes in order to perpetuate in one form what had been 
declared unlawful in another -- informed the structure of 
the Voting Rights Act of 1965. See LAWSON, supra. 


2. Congress adopted the Act in 1965 to implement 
the Fifteenth Amendment, Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384 
U.S. 641 (1966), and to “erase the blight of racial discrim- 
ination in voting.” U.S. v. Board of Com'rs of Sheffield, 
Ala., 435 U.S. 110, 117 (1978). The danger of states 
restructuring their electoral systems for discriminatory 


purposes led to the Act’s “stringent remedies aimed at areas 
where voting discrimination has been the most flagrant." 
South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. at 315. Congress 
resorted to these extraordinary measures because experi- 
ence had shown them to be necessary to eradicate the "in- 
sidious and pervasive evil of [racial discrimination in vot- 
ing] that had been perpetuated in certain parts of the coun- 
try." Id. at 309. Earlier efforts to end this discrimination 
by facilitating case-by-case litigation had proved ineffec- 
tive. 


The structure and operation of the Voting Rights Act 
are straightforward. The statute requires federal approval 
of all changes in the method of election in “covered” juris- 
dictions -- those identified as having a record of minority 
disenfranchisement by an arguably questionable formula. 
42 U.S.C. 1973b. In the past, States and the political units 
within them had responded to federal decrees outlawing 
discriminatory practices by "resort[ing] to the extraordi- 
nary stratagem of contriving new rules of various kinds for 
the sole purpose of perpetuating voting discrimination .. . 
.." South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. at 335. In 
order to ensure that covered states did not pass new legisla- 
tion to obstruct black voter registration or to dilute the 
expected emergent voting strength of blacks, the states 
were prohibited by Section 5 of the Act from enacting any 
change in “voting qualifications or prerequisites to voting, 
or standard, practice or procedure with respect to voting” 
without first obtaining clearance from the Attorney General 
or a federal district court in Washington, D.C. 42 U.S.C. 
1973c. Thus, these states -- including Virginia -- had the 
affirmative burden to secure federal permission to change 
their voting laws. To prevent any future circumvention of 
constitutional policy, a designated State or political subdi- 
vision wishing to change its voting laws must demonstrate 


that the change will be nondiscriminatory. “By freezing 
each covered jurisdiction's election procedures, Congress 
shifted the advantages of time and inertia from the perpe- 
trators of the evil to its victims.” Sheffield, 435 U.S. at 
117. 


The Court's decisions have given Section 5 the broad, 
searching scope suggested by the language of the Act. In 
Allen v. State Board of Elections, supra, the Court’s ex- 
amination of the Act's objectives and original legislative 
history yielded the conclusion that Section 5 should be 
given "the broadest possible scope," 393 U.S. at 567, and 
prior federal scrutiny should be had of “any state enact- 
ment which altered the election law in a covered State in 
even a minor way." Id. at 566. 


Thus, the Court has required federal preclearance of 
laws changing the location of polling places, see Perkins 
v. Matthews, 400 U.S. 379 (1971); laws adopting at-large 
systems of election, ibid; laws providing for the appoint- 
ment of previously elected officials, Bunton v. Patterson, 
390 U.S. 978(1968)(decided with Allen, supra); laws reg- 
ulating candidacy, Whitley v. Williams, 390 U.S. 1009 
(1968)(decided with Allen); laws changing voting proce- 
dures, Allen, supra; annexations, City of Richmond v. 
United States, 422 U.S. 358 (1975); City of Petersburg v. 
United States, 410 U.S. 962 (1973); and reapportionment 
and redistricting, Beer v. United States, 425 U.S. 130 
(1976). In each case, “federal scrutiny of the proposed 
change was required because the change had the potential 
to deny or dilute the rights conferred by” the Act. Shef- 
field, 435 U.S. at 118. 


3. Indeed, of principal concern to Congress when it 
extended the Voting Rights Act in 1982 was “the preva- 


lence of changes that were implemented without pre- 
clearance and, in some cases, were not submitted to the 
Attorney General until years later.” NAACP v. Hampton 
County Election Com’n, 470 U.S. 166, 176 (1985). 
See S.Rep. No. 417, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 12, 14 n. 43 
(1982); H.R.Rep. No. 227, 97th Cong., Ist Sess. 13 (1981), 
reprinted in 1982 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 177, 189, 
191, 192. The Senate Report stated: 


Timely submission of proposed changes before 
their implementation is the crucial threshold ele- 
ment of compliance with the law. The Supreme 
Court has recognized that enforcement of the Act 
depends upon voluntary and timely submission of 
clwanges subject to preclearance. The extent of 
non-submission documented in both the House 
hearings and those of this Committee remains sur- 
prising and deeply disturbing. There are numer- 
ous instances in which jurisdictions failed to sub- 
mit changes before implementing them and sub- 
mitted them only, if at all, many years after, when 
sued or threatened with suit. Put simply, such 
jurisdictions have flouted the law and hindered the 
protection of minority rights in voting. 


S.Rep. No. 417, supra, at 47-48, reprinted in 1982 
U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News at 225, 226 (emphasis 
added). The legislative history of the most recent exten- 
sion of the Voting Rights Act reveals Congress’ firm com- 
mitment to its continued vigorous enforcement. The Sen- 
ate Committee found “virtual unanimity among those who 
had studied the record,” S.Rep. No. 417, supra at 9, re- 
printed in 1982 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News at 186, 
that Section 5 should be extended. Further, Congress spe- 


- 10- 


cifically endorsed a broad construction of Section 5, as it 
had in previous extensions of the Act. 


Although the Fifteenth Amendment is “self-execut- 
ing,” Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347, 362-363 
(1915), the Court cautioned long ago that the right to be 
free from racial discrimination in voting “should be kept 
free and pure by congressional enactment whenever that is 
necessary.” Ex Parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. at 665. The 
intensity of the struggle for the realization of this constitu- 
tional guarantee -- and the national aspirations which hung 
in the balance if Congressional intervention, in the end, 
were anything short of extraordinary -- are values writ 
large in the 1965 Act. Further efforts by the states to cir- 
cumvent the law by recasting their electoral systems with 
impunity until they were challenged in court, would be 
precluded by an approach which shifted the burden to the 
states to demonstrate that changes in their systems were 
not discriminatory. The instant case must be resolved with 
this historical context in mind. 


B. The Party’s Decision To Change From A Primary 
To A Convention System Required Preclearance. 


1. Under the laws of Virginia a political party may 
select its senatorial nominee by a primary election or by 
other means. Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-101, 24.2-509(A) 
(Michie 1993). Section 24.2-511 of the state code accords 
the Virginia Republican Party preferential access to the 
general election ballot for its nominee. The candidate 
selection process in Smith v. Allwright, supra, included the 
same state involvement. 


Over the course of time, the Virginia Republican 
Party has used various means to select its senatorial nomi- 


ofl a 


nees, most recently by convention. In 1990, the Party 
decided to select its nominee at a primary election, but the 
election was canceled when no one challenged the Party’s 
incumbent. 


For the 1994 senatorial election, the Party decided to 
select its nominee at a convention, the delegates to which 
were identified at local “mass meetings” and required to 
pay a nonrefundable fee to the Party. The practice of 
charging the fee was not in effect on November 1, 1964. 
Nevertheless, the Party has never sought preclearance of 
the fee under Section 5 of the Act, nor sought preclearance 
to convert from the primary to the convention format. 


2. The district court concluded that the imposition of 
the fee is not subject to Section 5's preclearance require- 
ment. “The Party is not conducting primary elections. 
Instead local party members are selecting delegates to the 
state nominating convention, not through an election, but 
through local conventions, mass meetings, and party 
canvasses. This distinction is meaningful.” 853 F. Supp. 
at 216. In reaching its conclusion, the district court relied 
upon 28 C.F.R. 51.7, the Department of Justice regulation 
promulgated pursuant to Section 5. This regulation pro- 
vides (ibid., emphasis added): 


Certain activities of political parties are 
subject to the preclearance requirement of section 
5. Achange affecting voting effected by a politi- 
cal party is subject to the preclearance require- 
ment: (a) If the change relates to a public electoral 
function of the party and (b) if the party is acting 
under authority explicitly or implicitly granted by 
a covered jurisdiction or political subunit subject 
to the preclearance requirement of section 5. For 


example, changes with respect to the recruitment 
of party members, the conduct of political cam- 
paigns, and the drafting of party platforms are not 
subject to the preclearance requirement. Changes 
with respect to the conduct of primary elections at 
which party nominees, delegates to party conven- 
tions, or party officials are chosen are subject to the 
preclearance requirement of section 5. 


The district court reasoned that the acts of the Party 
are not subject to preclearance because “there is no doubt 
that the Party is not conducting a primary election, and 
there is no voting as defined.” 853 F. Supp. at 216. 


The district court’s analysis was flawed. A “change[] 
with respect to the conduct of primary elections,” 28 C.F.R. 
51.7, plainly has occurred. In 1990 the Party decided to choose 
its nominee by primary, a process open to all eligible voters. By 
1994 the process had been changed to require that a person 
desiring to have a vote in the selection of his or her party’s 
candidate pay a $45 fee to purchase the title of “delegate.” 
When the State of Virginia permitted the Party to establish a 
system of open primary elections, the party selection process 
became a state action granting the right to vote. That right was 
abridged by eliminating the primary process and replacing it 
with a process by which a voter had to pay a $45 fee to become 
a delegate. As such, the change was one subject to Section 5. 


The district court’s argument that the present dele- 
gate system is not subject to Section 5 because “voting” 
means voting in a public election, not participation in a 
party convention, is specious. First, the Voting Rights Act 
itself does not limit its scope to primary or general elec- 
tions. The Act refers not to “elections” but to “voting,” a 
more encompassing term. Second, although the Justice 


-13- 


Department’s regulations refer to “primary elections,” this 
language is by way of “example” and was not intended to 
be an exhaustive description of the Act’s scope. 28 C.F.R. 
51.7. In 1990, the right to “vote” in a party primary was 
the right of all qualified to vote. The right to “vote” in a 
party nominating convention as abridged in 1994 included 
only those who could pay to do so. 


We do not suggest nor was it alleged below that the 
Party’s restructuring of its primary system had a dis- 
criminatory purpose -- only that the procedures set forth 
in the Act were not observed. So long as “[t]he power of 
a citizen’s vote is affected,” irrespective of whether 
“[sJuch a change could be made without discriminatory 
purpose or effect,” the State must “submit such changes 
to scrutiny.” Allen v. State Board of Elections, 393 U.S. 
at 569-570. Accordingly, it is not the Court’s “prov- 
ince, nor that of the district court below, to determine 
whether the changes at issue in this case in fact resulted 
in impairment of the right to vote, or whether they were 
intended to have that effect. That task is reserved by 
statute to the Attorney General or the District Court for 
the District of Columbia.” Hampton County Election 
Com’n, 470 U.S. at 181. 


Changes made to the electoral system without pre- 
clearance are not legitimated by the passage of time. Nor 
would subsequent iterations from the 1990 primary system 
bar the present system’s being compared with the 1990 
version to determine whether there has been compliance 
with the Act. Were this a reasonable interpretation, the 
following language in Section 5 would have no meaning: 
“Neither an affirmative indication by the Attorney General 
that no objection will be made, nor the Attorney General’s 
failure to object, nor a declaratory judgment entered under 


- 14- 


this section shall bar a subsequent action to enjoin enforce- 
ment of such qualification, prerequisite, standard, practice 
or procedure.” 42 U.S.C. 1973c. The fact that one or more 
successive changes in the Party’s process for selecting 
candidates has occurred without preclearance, does not 
mean that either the current method of selecting can- 
didates, nor the method preceding it were valid. 


For the same reasons, the district court’s charac- 
terization of the Party’s process as a “convention” 
and the court’s reliance upon this “distinction” as 
“meaningful,” 853 F. Supp. at 216, is irrelevant. It 
cannot rationally be disputed that the act of replacing a 
primary election by a convention is not covered by Section 
5. The district court’s crucial premise -- that having aban- 
doned primary elections and instituted a “convention,” ap- 
pellees were free of all further preclearance obligations -- 
is belied by the history of the Voting Rights Act. No 
meaningful federal oversight would be possible if parties 
had the unilateral discretion to restructure their primaries 
as conventions, reserving the power to impose restrictions 
on participation that would not have been approved had the 
preclearance procedure been followed. The harsh lesson 
of the White Primary Cases -- memorialized by Section 5 of 
the Act -- is that amy changes affecting voting rights in state 
electoral systems must be reviewed. 

Even minor changes in voting procedures trigger the 
Act. In Hampton County Election Com’n, the election com- 
mission did not dispute that a change in the date of an 
election, if effected by statute, required preclearance. 470 
U.S. at 178. Rather, the commission argued that because 
the rescheduling was merely an administrative effort to 
comply with a statute that had already received clearance, 
it was not a change of such magnitude as to trigger the 


requirements of Section 5. The Court rejected this 
approach. “[P]lainly, the form of a change in voting pro- 
cedures cannot determine whether it is within the scope of 
Sec. 5. That section reaches informal as well as formal 
changes, .... If it were otherwise, States could evade the 
requirements of Sec. 5 merely by implementing changes in 
an informal manner.” Jd. at 185 (emphasis added). 


Analytically, the district court’s decision reduces to 
an absurdity. Under the district court’s logic, the Party 
could have conditioned participation in the state convention 
on any number of variables that would be indefensible if 
scrutinized by the Attorney General -- including a voter’s 
race. To diminish that risk, "any change affecting voting, 
... must meet the Section 5 preclearance requirement," 28 
C.F.R. 51.11(emphasis added), because “neither the 
absence of discriminatory purpose nor a good-faith imple- 
mentation of a change removes the potential for discrimi- 
natory effects.” Hampton County Election Com'n, 470 
U.S. at 181. This is so categorical a requirement that it 
applies “even though [the change] appears to be minor or 
indirect, even though it ostensibly expands voting rights, 
or even though it is designed to remove the elements that 
caused objection by the Attorney General to a prior sub- 
mitted change.” Jbid. For this reason, it should be self- 
evident that the Party’s change from a primary to a conven- 
tion system was subject to Section 5 preclearance. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court should be reversed. | 


Respectfully submitted, 


Dennis Courtland Hayes Ronald D. Maines 
General Counsel 
Willie Abrams 
Asst. General Counsel 
National Association For The 
Advancement Of Colored People 
4805 Mt. Hope Drive (202) 223-2817 
Baltimore, MD 21215 
(410) 486-9191 


March 9, 1995 


