REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA AND 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE, 


Appellees. 


JOINT APPENDIX 


VA 22903 


Charlottesville, VA 22903 
(804) 924-7015/7536 (Fax) 


DANIEL R. ORTIZ 
of Southern 
Law Center 
Los CA 90089 
(213) 740-733 1/5502 (Fax) 


Attomeys for Appellants 


E. DUNCAN GETCHELL, JR. 
Counsel of Record 

J. ROBERT BRAME, II 

ROBERT L. HODGES 

McGuire, Woods, Battle & Boothe 


901 vont ge Aare 
Richmond, VA 23219 
(804) 775-4319 


PATRICK M. MCSWEENEY 
11 South 12th Street 
Richmond, VA 23219 

(804) 783-6802 


DANIEL A. CARRELL 
951 East Byrd Street 
Richmond, VA 23219 
(804) 788-8297 


DONALD W. LEMONS 
600 E. Main Street 
Richmond, VA 23219 
(804) 780-0505 


Attorneys for Appellees 


_——$—$—$—————— EE 


JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT FILED JUNE 8, 1994 
[Current Court procedural metadata omitted] 


The following opinions, decisions, judgments and orders 
have been omitted in printing this joint appendix because they 
appear on the following pages in the appendix to the printed 
Jurisdictional Statement: 


Page 


Opinion of the United States 
District Court for the 
Western District of Virginia 
at Charlottesville 
dismissing Counts 3 and 4 
SE ee ee A-2 


Order of the United States 
District Court for the 
Western District of Virginia 
at Charlottesville 
dismissing Counts 3 and 4 
GT Gulag bb Sesh boiodedeccese A-13 


Notice of Appeal 
SEE Sr ee A-19 


Table of Contents 
Relevant Docket Entries ..........0-eeeeeeeeeeeceere I 
Complaint, 5-2-94 2.0... 0c. cece eee e ener eeeeeees 4 
Answet, 5-13-94 2... ..ccccccceccceceescccecesces 14 
Motion to Dismiss, 5-13-94 ........0-ee eee eeeeerees 21 
Affidavit of David S. Johnson, 5-18-94 ..........++-+: 22 
Notice of Dismissal, 6-8-94 .......-+0sseeeeeeeeeees 65 


se 


US. District Court 
Western District of Virginia (Charlottesville) 


CIVIL DOCKET FOR CASE #: 94-CV-25 


5/2/94 | COMPLAINT Filing Fee $120.00 Receipt # 
61169 Service due 8/30/94 for Albemarle County, for 
Republican Party of, for Oliver North For (jt) [Entry date 
05/05/94) 


5/4/94 3 Letter from Judge James H. Michael, Jr. 
requesting a three judge panel of Chief Judge Sam J. Ervin, I 
(hw) [Entry date 05/06/94] 


5/9/94 4 ORDER, Designating a Three-Judge Court, 
Honorable H. Emory Widener, Jr., Honorable James R. 
Spencer, Honorable James H. Michael, Jr. (Order signed by 
Chief Judge Sam J. Ervin, II on 5/4/94) (jt) 


S194 87 ORDER, set Memorandum deadline to 
5/16/94, set Oral Argument for 2:00 5/18/94, bankruptcy 
courtroom, 210 Church St, SW 2nd Floor of Commonwealth of 
Virginia Building, Roanoke, Virginia (signed by H. Emory 
Widener, Jr. on 5/10/94) (jt) [Edit date 05/12/94] 


5/13/9948 ANSWER to Complaint by Republican Party 
Of, Albemarle County (Attorney Daniel A. Carrell, Donald W. 
Lemons), (jt) [Edit date 05/16/94] 


5/13/94 9 MOTION to Dismiss by Republican Party 
Of, Albemarle County (jt) [Entry date 05/16/94] 


5/16/94 10 MOTION to Dismiss by Oliver North For 
U.S. Senate Committee, Inc. (Attorney Donald Wise Huffman, 
Frederick Wilson Chockley) (Ic) 


5/18/94 — COURT HEARING: (Judges Widener, 
Michael, and Spencer; OCR Jo Myer) Parties present w/by 


counsel before 3/-Judge Panel for hearing on various motions as 
reflected in the record. Pitfs.’ mtn. for Pamela S. Karlan to be 
admitted pro hac vice addressed and granted. Oral motion by 
counsel for Oliver North for admission pro hac vice of E. Mark 
Braden — granted. Order entered. Arguments as to motions. 

Ct. adjourned for panel to make decision. Ct. resumes w/panel 
tendering memorandum opinion and order to Clerk for filing. 
Ct. reads order into record. Ct. adj. (eh) [Entry date 5/19/94} 


5/18/94 17 MEMORANDUM OPINION (eh) [Entry 
date 5/19/94] 


5/18/94 19 MOTION to Dismiss by Republican Party Of 
Albemarle County (jt) [Entry date 5/20/94} 


5/18/94 20 ANSWER to Complaint by Republican 
Party, Albemarle County (jt) [Entry date 5/20/94] 


5/18/94 21 AFFIDAVIT of David S. Johnson, Executive 
Director of the Republican Party of Virginia (jt) [Entry date 
5/20/94} 


6/8/94 22 Notice of Appeal to Supreme Court (hw) 
[Entry date 06/09/94} 


6/8/94 23 NOTICE of Dismissal of Count 5 of the 
Complaint by Fortis Morse, Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew, 
Kimberly J. Enderson (hw) [Entry date 06/09/94] 


6/8/94 24 MOTION to Continue Consideration on 
Counts | and 2 by Fortis Morse, Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew, 
Kimberly J. Enderson (hw) [Entry date 06/09/94} 


6/8/94 — MEMORANDUM for Fortis Morse, Kenneth 
Curtis Bartholomew, Kimberly J. Enderson in support of [24-1] 
motion to Continue Consideration by Kimberly J. Enderson, 
Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew, Fortis Morse, [23-1] notice by 


RE Pe) SE a ae od Wee Pes 


Kimberly J. Enderson, Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew, Fortis 
Morse (hw) [Entry date 06/09/94) 


6/14/94 26 TRANSCRIPT of court hearing for dates of 
5/18/94 (jt) 


10/19/94 27 ORDER granting [24-1] motion to Continue 
Consideration (signed by Judge James H. Michael) (jt) 


[Current Court procedural metadata omitted] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


[Caption Omitted} 
COMPLAINT 


Introduction 


1. This action challenges the imposition of a $45 fee 
on registered voters who wish to participate in the nomination 
process leading to the selection of the Republican candidate for 
United States Senator from Virginia. Plaintiffs seek declaratory 
and injunctive relief prohibiting the state Republican Party and 
its local affiliates from conditioning participation in the process 
on payment of any registration fee. They also seek declaratory 
and injunctive relief prohibiting the Oliver North for U.S. 
Senate Committee, Inc. from paying or offering to pay the fees 
for any voter who wishes to participate in the senatorial 
nomination process if that voter indicates a commitment to 
support Oliver North’s nomination. 


Jurisdiction 


2. This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 1331 and 1343 and 42 U.S.C. §§ 1973h(c) and 1973)(f). 
This is an action arising under the statutes and Constitution of 
the United States and an action to enforce statutes and 
constitutional provisions that protect civil rights, including the 
right to vote. 


3. Plaintiffs seek declaratory and other appropriate 
relief pursuant to the Declaratory Judgment Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 
2201 and 2202. 


Parties 


ts 4. Plaintiff Fortis Morse is an adult citizen of the 
nited States who resides in Albemarle County, Virginia. He is 
properly registered to vote. 


od 5. Plaintiff Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew is an adult 
citizen of the United States who resides in Albemarle County, 


Virginia. He is properly registered to vote. 


6. Plaintiff Kimberly J. Enderson is an adult citizen 
of the United States and a resident of Hampton, Virginia. She is 
properly registered to vote. 


7. Defendant Oliver North for U.S. Senate 
Committee, Inc. (hereafter “North Committee”) is a corporation 
incorporated under the laws of Virginia. It serves as the official 
campaign organization for Oliver North, a candidate for the 
Republican nomination for United States Senator from Virginia. 


8. Defendant Republican Party of Virginia is an 
unincorporated association organized under the laws of 
Virginia. It is a political party within the definition of Va. Code 
§§ 24.2-101, 24.2-508, and 24.2-509 and, as such, it nominates 
candidates for United States Senator from Virginia. For this 
purpose it conducts a State Convention. 


. 9. Defendant Albemarle County Republican 
Committee is an unincorporated association organized under the 
laws of Virginia. It is responsible for collecting the registration 
fees imposed by defendant Republican Party and certifying 
individual voters as delegates and alternates to the State 
Convention. 


Background 


10. Virginia has a long history of purposeful official 
restriction of the right to vote, including, but not limited to, 
imposition of poll taxes and other economic barriers to full 
political participation. 


11. On information and belief, on November 1, 1964, 
the Republican Party of Virginia did not impose or collect any 
fee for participation in the party’s nomination process for 
United States Senator. 


Allegations of Fact | 


12. On December 16, 1993, Patrick M. McSweeney, 
Chairman of the Republican Party of Virginia, issued a Call for 
a State Convention for Friday, June 3, 1994, for the purpose of 
nominating a Republican candidate for the office of the United 
States Senator. 


13. Qualified voters may participate in this process by 
becoming delegates to the State Convention. Delegates are 
elected in county or city mass meetings, conventions, or party 
canvasses, and they cast votes at the Convention. 


14. As apractical matter, any voter who wishes to 
qualify as a delgate and participate in the State Convention can 
do so. 


15. Asa practical matter, delegates are not bound to 
support a particular candidate at the State Convention. 


16. Local political committees certify qualified voters 
as delegates upon payment of a registration fee by the voter of 
$35.00 or $45.00 depending upon the date of certification. 


17. Fortis Morse is a registered voter in Albemarle 
County, Virginia, and intends to support James Miller, a 


J "Ti aes TER a ee ree 


7 


candidate for the Republican nomination for United States 


18. Morse is chairman of the Law and Graduate 
Republicans at the University of Virginia, and has been 
politically active on behalf of numerous Republican candidates 
for national, state, and local office. . 


19. Morse is a full-time first-year student at the 
University of Virginia School of Law and on the morning of 
February 28, 1994, had $30.00 in his checking account. 


20. Paymert of a $45.00 fee to participate in the 


Republican State Convention would impose a financial hardship 
on Morse. 


21. On February 28, 1994, Morse went to Albemarle 
County Republican Headquarters to register as a delegate. 


. 22. Morse asked for a county Pre-File Form. The 
form indicated a non-refundable filing fee of $45.00. 


hae 23. Morse asked Rose Wade, a party worker, whether 
could register as a delegate without paying the fee because he 
lacked the funds. : 


24. Wade told Morse that the fee was mandatory but 
that if Morse told her for whom he was going to vote, it would 
be different because some candidates supplied money to 
Sponsor voters who supported them. 


25. Later that afternoon, Morse returned to the 
Headquarters with $50.00 he had borrowed. Wade accepted 
Morse’s form and payment. 


26. Morse then indicated that he was reluctant to owe 
the $45.00 to the friend from whom he had borrowed it and 


asked Wade whom he should see, if he supported Oliver North, 
a rival candidate for the senatorial nomination. 


27. Wade identified John Pudner, who was standing 
in the room. 


28. Pudner asked Morse to step out into the hallway, 
where he introduced Morse to a man whom Pudner identified as 
the North for Senate County Coordinator. 


29. The coordinator asked Morse whether he was 
supporting Oliver North. Morse did not reply, but simply 
smiled. 


30. The coordinator then handed Morse $50.00 and 
Morse handed him $5.00 in return. 


31. The coordinator then wrote Morse’s name on a 
list he was carrying and stated that if Morse did not come to the 
meeting “we’ll hunt you down,” indicating that this meant he 
expected Morse to be at the state convention. 


32. Morse subsequently repaid the $45.00 to the 
North Comunittee. 


33. The Committee cashed his check, which was 
memo endorsed “Repayment for Delegate fee — John Pudner.” 


34. On information and belief, volunteers and staff 
workers connected with the North Committee have offered to 
pay or reimburse the registration fees of other qualified voters 
who undertake to support North. 


35. Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew is a registered voter 
in Albemarle County, Virginia, and a supporter of James Miller, 
a candidate for the Republican nomination for United States 
Senator. 


al 


- SS —_ te Pa -_ 
FY SSS ET. a re 


ia — 2 


36. Bartholomew would have filed as a delegate to 
support Miller but for the imposition of the $45.00 filing fee. 


; 37. Enderson is a registered voter in Hampton, 
Virginia. 


38. Enderson is vice-chairman of the Law and 
Graduate Republicans at the University of Virginia. She has 
worked on Republican campaigns for state and national 
campaigns. 


39. Enderson intended to file as a delegate from 
Hampton, but was deterred from filing when she learned that 
she would have to pay a filing fee. 


fix 40. _Many qualified voters have been deterred from 
participating in the senatorial nomination process by the 
imposition of a filing fee. 


First Cause of Action 


a 41. Plaintiffs reallege the contents of paragraphs 


42. The Republican Party of Virginia’s imposition of 
a filing fee for participation at the State Convention violates the 
ore Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
tates. 


Second Cause of Action 


o 43. Plaintiffs reallege the contents of paragraphs 


44. The Republican Party of Virginia’s imposition of 
a filing fee for participation at the State Convention violates the 
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Constitution of the United States. 


10 


Third Cause of Action 


45. Plaintiffs reallege the contents of paragraphs 
1-40. 


46. The Republican Party of Virginia’s imposition of 
a filing fee for full participation in the processes leading to the 
nomination of a candidate for United States Senate involves a 
voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard, 
practice, or prodedure with respect to voting different from that 
in force or effect on November 1, 1964. 


47. Because the Republican Party of Virginia has not 
obtained preclearance of this procedure, its use violates Section 
5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 

§ 1973c. 


Fourth Cause of Action 


48. Plaintiffs reallege the contents of paragraphs 
1-40. 


49. The Republican Party of Virginia’s imposition of 
a filing fee for full participation in the processes leading to the 
nomination of a candidate for United States Senate violates 
Section 10 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 
U.S.C. § 1973h(a), in that it precludes people of limited means 
from voting or imposes unreasonable financial hardship upon 
such persons. 


Fifth Cause of Action 


50. Plaintiffs reallege the contents of paragraphs 
1-40. 


51. The North Committee’s practice of paying or 
offering to pay the registration fees for voters who wish to 
participate in the senatorial nomination process if they indicate a 


_ commitment to support candidate Oliver North violates Section 


11 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 
1973i(c). 


Relief 


WHEREFORE, plaintiffs ask that this Court set this 
matter for a speedy hearing, following which it will enter orders 
providing relief as follows: 


1. Notify the Chief Judge of the Fourth Circuit, 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2284, that a three-judge court should be 
convened, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 1973c or !973h(c), to 
determine whether an injunction should issue against defendant 
Republican Party of Virginia enjoining its imposition of a filing 
fee for full participation in the processes leading to the 
nomination of a candidate for United States Senate unless and 
until the practice receives preclearance under Section 5 of the 
Voting Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 1973c. 


2. Issue a preliminary injunction enjoining the 
Republican Party from conditioning participation in the June 3, 
1994, State Convention upon payment of any registration fee. 


3. Issue a preliminary injunction requiring the 
Republican Party to reopen the qualifying period for delegates 
to Permit voters to register as delegates without payment of any 
filing fee, up to and including June 1, 1994. 


4. Issue a preliminary injunction enjoining the North 
Committee from paying or offering to pay the registration fees 
for voters who wish to participate in the senatorial nomination 
process if they indicate a commitment to support candidate 
Oliver North. 


5. Issue a declaratory judgment declaring that the 
filing fee violates the Fourteenth and Twenty-Fourth 


12 


Amendments to the Constitution of the United States and 
Section 10 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 
U.S.C. § 1973h. 


6. Issue a declaratory judgment declaring that the 
North Committee’s practice of paying or offering to pay the 
registration fees for voters who wish to participate in the 
senatorial nomination process if they indicate a commitment to 
support candidate Oliver North violates Section 11 of the Voting 
Rights Act of 1965 as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 1973i. 


7. Permanently enjoin the Republican Party and its 
local affiliates from conditioning participation in any state 
convention upon payment of any registration fee. 


8. Permanently enjoin the North Committee from 
paying or offering to pay the registration fees for voters who 
wish to participate in the senatorial nomination process if they 
indicate a commitment to support candidate Oliver North 


9. Order the Republican Party of Virginia or the 
Albemarle County Republican Committee to refund to Fortis 
Morse the $45.00 filing fee the Party and Committee collected 
from him. 


10. Award plaintiffs their costs incurred in this case, 
together with reasonable attorney’s fees, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
§§ 1973l(e) and 1988. 


11. Grant such addition and further relief as the Court 
finds just. 


13 


Date: May 2, 1994 
Respectfully submitted, 


George A. Rutherglen 
Counsel of Record 
Virginia State Bar Identification Number 18938 
580 Massie Road 


Charlottesville, VA 22903-1789 
(804) 924-7015 


[Names and addresses of other counsel omitted] 


¥ ~ ee ee eer ee ee eS ee 


14 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


Charlottesville Division 


[Caption Omitted] 


ANSWER OF DEFENDANTS | 
REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA AND ALBEMARLE 
COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE 


Defendant, the Republican Party of Virginia and its local 
affiliate, the Albemarle County Republican Committee (together 
referred to as “RPV”), by counsel, pursuant to this Court’s 
Order of May 10, 1994, to file a responsive pleading on or 
before May 13, 1994, and subject to RPV’s Motion to Dismiss, 
filed herewith, answers the Complaint of Plaintiffs as follows: 

1. RPV admits that Plaintiffs purport to seek 
declaratory and injunctive relief by virtue of their challenge of 
the imposition of the $45 fee, as asserted in paragraph | of the 
Complaint, but RPV denies that Plaintiffs are entitled to any 
such relief from the state party or its local committees, including 
defendant Albemarle County Republican Committee (the 
“Albemarle Committee”). Insofar as the allegations of 
paragraph | relate to defendant Oliver North for U.S. Senate 
Committee, Inc. (the “North Committee”), RPV admits that 
Plaintiffs purport to seek declaratory and injunctive relief but 
otherwise is without knowledge or information sufficient to 
form a belief as to the truth of such allegations. 

2. RPV admits that this Court has subject matter 
jurisdiction over the Complaint. 

3. | RPV admits that Plaintiffs purport to seek relief 
under the Declaratory Judgment Act, but denies that any such 
relief is due. 


15 


4. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 4 
of the Complaint. 

5. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 5 
of the Complaint. 

6. RPV is without knowledge or informaticn sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 6 
of the Complaint. 

7. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 7 
of the Complaint. 

8. RPV admits the allegations of paragraph 8 of the 
Complaint except that RPV denies that the state party is 
organized under the laws of Virginia. As a political association 
it derives its existence independent of those laws. 

9. RPV admits that the Albemarle Committee is an 
unincorporated association, but denies that it is organized under 
the laws of Virginia. As a political association, it derives its 
existence independent of those laws. RPV denies the remaining 
allegations of paragraph 9. RPV further states, however, that 
the Albemarle Committee is responsible for collecting certain 
convention registration fees imposed by RPV and that the 
Albemarle Committee selects, through one of the methods 
permitted under RPV rules; certain delegates and alternates to 
the party’s State Convention. The local committee does not 
“merely certify individual voters as delegates and alternates. 

10. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 10 of the 
Complaint. RPV was not a party to the conduct alleged, and 
any “purposeful official restriction of the right to vote” by the 
Commonwealth of Virginia has long since been repealed or 
otherwise rendered invalid. 

' 11. RPV admits the precise allegations of paragraph | | 
of the Complaint, for on November 1, 1964, no nomination 
process of RPV was in progress. RPV further states, however, 
that it has traditionally and necessarily charged registration fees 


16 


for its state conventions in order to cover their substantial costs. 
It charged a registration fee, for example, for the June 1964 
State Convention, the agenda for which included the party’s 
nomination of its candidate for the United States Senate. 

12. RPV admits the allegations of paragraph 12 of the 
Complaint. 

13. RPV admits the allegations of paragraph 13. 

14. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 14. 

15. RPV admits the allegations of paragraph 15. 

16. RPV admits that the local committees ultimately 
certify their delegates to the State Convention, but otherwise 
denies the allegations of paragraph 16. As alleged in paragraph 
13 of the Complaint, delegates are selected at the city or county 
level, not merely certified upon the payment of a registration 
fee. The local party committees do collect registration fees, 
both for the State Convention and the local convention, mass 
meeting, or canvass. The Albemarle Committee collected a fee 
of $45 for delegates to the 1994 State Convention, of which $10 
was a fee imposed by the Albemarle Committee. 

17. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
17. 

18. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
18. RPV further states, however, that its records reveal that 
plaintiff Morse was a delegate to the 1993 Republican State 
Convention and has been certified as a delegate to the 1994 
State Convention. 

19. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
19. 

20. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 20. 

21. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
21. 


17 


22. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
22. 

23. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
23. 

24. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
24. 

25. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
25. 

26. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
26. 

27. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
27. : 

28. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
28. 

29. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
29. 

30. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
30. 

31. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
31. 

32. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
32. | 

33. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
33. 


18 


34. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
34. 

35. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
35. 

36. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
36. 

37. RPV is without knowledge >r information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
37. 

38. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
38. 

39. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
39. 

40. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 
40. 

41. In response to paragraph 41 of the Complaint, RPV 
repeats and incorporates its answers to paragraphs | through 40. 

42. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 42 of the 
Complaint. ' 

43. In response to paragraph 43 of the Complaint, RPV 
repeats and incorporates its answers to paragraphs | through 40. 

44. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 44 of the 
Complaint. 

45. In response to paragraph 45 of the Complaint, RPV 
repeats and incorporates its answers to paragraphs | through 40. 

46. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 46 of the 
Complaint. 

47. RPV admits that it has not obtained preclearance of 
its registration fee, for it is not required to do so. RPV 


otherwise denies the allegations of paragraph 47 of the 
Complaint. 

48. In response to paragraph 48 of the Complaint, RPV 
repeats and incorporates its answers to paragraphs 1 through 40. 

49. RPV denies the allegations of paragraph 49 of the 
Complaint. 

50. In response to paragraph 50 of the Compiaint, RPV 
repeats and incorporates its answers to paragraphs | through 40. 


51. RPV is without knowledge or information sufficient 
to form a belief as to the truth of the allegations of paragraph 51 
of the Complaint. 


52. In response to the requests for relief numbered | 


_ through 11, on pages 6 and 7 of the Complaint, RPV denies that 


Plaintiffs are entitled to the relief requested or anyrelief 
whatsoever. 


First Affirmative Defense 


53. The Complaint fails in whole and in part to state a 
claim upon which relief can be granted. 


Second Affirmative Defense 


54. Ifthe Complaint states such a claim statutorily, 
granting the relief requested would be in violation of the First 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, including a 
prior restraint on the freedom of association. 


Third Affirmative Defense 
_ 55. Plaintiffs lack standing to bring their Complaint, for 
they have pled no actionable injury. 
Fourth Affirmative Defense 


20 


56. To the extent they seek preliminary injunctive 
relief, Plaintiffs are barred by the doctrine of laches. 


WHEREFORE, RPV requests this Court to dismiss the 
Complaint with prejudice, or, in the alternative, to enter 
judgment in its behalf; and to award reasonable attorneys’ fees 


and costs to RPV and grant it such other relief as may be proper. 


Dated: May 13, 1994 


REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE 


By: 
General Counsel 

Republican Party of Virginia 
J. Robert Brame, Il 

(Virginia State Bar No. 05276) 
James Center 

901 E. Cary Street 

Richmond, VA 23219 


[Names and addresses of other counsel omitted in printing] 


[CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE OMITTED IN PRINTING] 


a. i a ee 


2 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOP THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


Charlottesville Division 


MOTION TO DISMISS 
OF DEFENDANTS REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA 
AND 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE 


Defendants, the Republican Party of Virginia and its local 
affiliate, the Albemarle County Republican Committee (together 
referred to as “RPV”), by counsel, pursuant te Rule 12(b)(6) of 
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, move this Court to dismiss 
the Complaint as to RPV on the ground that it fails to state a 
claim upon which relief can be granted against RPV. 

In support of this motion, RPV relies on the Complaint 
and the memorandum to be submitted in support hereof. 


C.ted: May 13, 1994 
REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE 


By: 


Republican Party of Virginia 
J. Robert Brame, III 

(Virginia State Bar No. 05276) 
James Center 

901 E. Cary Street 

Richmond, VA 23219 


[Names and addresses of other counsel omitted in printing] 
{CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE OMITTED IN FRINTING] 


22 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA, 
AT CHARLOTTESVILLE 


[Caption Omitted] 
AFFIDAVIT 


COMES NOW David S. Johnson, and after being sworn, 
deposes and says: 

1. Iam Executive Director of the Republican Party of 
Virginia, an unincorporated voluntary association which 
Operates pursuant to a Plan of Organization (“Plan”), a copy of 
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A. 

| 2. ‘I make this affidavit on the basis of my own 
personal knowledge and by researching files of the Republican 
Party of Virginia maintained in the ordinary course of its 
business. 

3. Pursuant to its practice and the Plan, the Republican 
Party of Virginia chooses and has chosen its representatives to 
Federal elections by primary, convention, caucus or by vote of 
the governing committee of the appropriate unit (e.g., State 
Central Committee for state-wide offices; Congressional District 
Committee for Representatives). 

4. The basic unit of organization of the Republican 
Party of Virginia is the mass meeting, which is open to qualified 
participants: 


All legal and qualified voters under the laws of 
he Commonwealth of Virginia, regardless of 
race, religion, national origin, or sex, who are in 
accord with the principles of the Republican 
Party, and who, if requested express in open 
meeting either orally or in a as may be 
required their intent to support all of its 
nominees for public office in the ensuing 
election may participate as members of the 
Republican Party of Virginia in its mass 
meetings, party canvasses, conventions, or 


primaries encompassing their respective election 


(Exhibit A, Article 1, Section A[1}). 

5. Participants at mass meetings elect chairmen and 
members of the local committees (e.g., county or city), 
delegates to state, Congressional district and legislative district 
conventions and conduct other Party business. Alternatively, 
local committees may elect to use canvass or unit conventions to 
perform these same functions. 

6. Pursuant to the Plan, the time, location, participant 
qualifications and other essential facts must be voted by the 
respective committees and published in a newspaper of general 
circulation at least seven days prior to a mass meeting. This 
statement of the times and conditions of a meeting is termed the 
“Call.” 

7. Delegates to the State Convention elect the Party 
Chairman and National Committee persons, adopt resolutions 
and a platform outlining the philosophy of the Republican Party 
of Virginia, and adopt or revise the rules under which the 
Republican Party of Virginia and its subsidiary unit committees 
must operate. 

8. Payment of the filing fee does not in and of itself 
make one a delegate to the State Convention. Under the State 
Party Plan of Organization, delegates to the State Convention 
must be elected by their unit’s mass meeting, canvass or 
convention. The unit mass meeting, canvass or convention also 
has the authority to “slate” applicants out of election to the 
District or State conventions or instruct the entire delegation to 
these conventiors to vote for a particular candidate or position, 
regardless of the individual delegates’ personal preferences. See 
Exhibit A, State Party Plan of Organization, Art. VIII, Section 
H4. In addition, persons wishing to be delegates can be 
required to take a written oath to support all Republican 
candidates for office in the ensuing general election. 


24 


9. The rules actually governing the State Convention 
are those formally adopted by the delegates participating in the 
Convention after it is called to order. 

10. In addition to the nomination of candidates for 
office, the Republican Party of Virginia conducts other business 
at its conventions, such as, but not limited to, a) the election of a 
State Party Chairman, b) adoption of resolutions or platforms 
outlining the philosophy of the grassroots members of the 
Republican Party of Virginia, and c) the adoption and/or 
revision of the rules under which the Republican Party of 
Virginia and its subsidiary district and unit committees must 
operate. 

11. The expenses of the 1993 Party Convention were 
approximately $373,373. The Party finances the convention 
expenses with delegate filing fees. With respect to the state 
conventions, state filing fees have been required for as far back 
as our records go, including 1964, and the amounts have 
gradually increased over the years to $35. 

12. During the past 30 years, participation in Virginia 
Republican state conventions has increased dramatically, going 
from approximately 550 certified as delegates in 1964 to 14,614 
in 1994. 

13. The State Central Committee of the Republican 
Party of Virginia selected the convention process to select its 
United States Senate nominee in 1964 (meeting at the John 
Marshall Hotel in Richmond); 1966 (Hotel Roanoke); 1970 
(John Marshall, Richmond); 1972 (Roanoke Civic Center); 

1976 (Scope, Norfolk); 1978 (Richmond Coliseum); 1982 
(Richmond Coliseum); 1984 (Hampton Coliseum); 1988 
(Roanoke Civic Center). 

14. In 1990, the State Central Committee voted to 
choose its U.S. Senate candidate by primary, but the primary 
was canceled when the incumbent was not challenged for 
nomination. 

15. In 1964 and 1978, the Party chose its U.S. Senate 
candidate by a vote of its State Central Committee. It scheduled 


POD ee ae CPM RO Re hg mere ees 
; ' pe hee ae ee 


25 


selection of its U.S. Senatorial candidate at its 1964 convention, 
but the delegates were unwilling *> choose a nominee to 
challenge Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr. 

16. On December 4, 1993, the State Central Committee 
of the Party approved the Call for the 1994 State Convention. 
Pursuant to the Plan, Patrick McSweeney, Republican Party of 
Virginia Chairman, distributed the Call to local committees in 
December, 1993, and published the Call in the approved 
newspaper on or about May 2, 1994 (“State Call”). A true copy 
of the State Call is attached as Exhibit B. 

17.The Call for the Mass Meeting of the Republican Party 
of Virginia, County of Albemarle, was published on or about 
February 17, 1994, scheduling the mass meeting for March 5, 

1994. It recited the requirement, inter alia, of a non-refundable 
$45 filing fee for delegates to the State Convention, a $10 filing 
fee for delegates to the Fifth Congressional District, and a $10 
filing fee for delegates to the Seventh District. The Call further 
provided, “There shall be no registration fee charged at the 
Mass Meeting of the Republican Party of Albemarle County.” 
At the Mass Meeting of the Republican Party for Albemarle 
County, the attendees elected delegates to the State and 
Congressional Conventions. 

18. To my knowledge, none of the plaintiffs to this 
action have inquired of the Republican Party of Virginia 
concerning the status of fees, if any, for convention delegates in 
1994, nor have they protested the fees charged for the 1994 
State Convention. 

19. In fact, I am aware of only one inquiry in recent 
years from persons who wanted to participate as delegates but 
could not pay the fee. In March 1994, I was advised that a 
student at VPI and the student’s spouse wanted to participate as 
delegates to the State Convention but could not afford the filing 
fees. Without knowing or inquiring as to their candidate 
preference, we arranged for their fees to be paid by private 
contributions. I am unaware of any other persons who notified 


26 


the Republican Party of Virginia that they might be excluded 
from participation as delegates because of fees. : 

20. As participation in the Party has increased, the 
number of places were the Party’s convention could be held has 
decreased. Both the convention’s size and closing of facilities 
have necessitated regular changes in locations, in addition to the 
traditional practice of rotating conventions between the Eastern 
and Central parts of the state. 

/s/ 
David S. Johnson 


[JURAT OMITTED IN PRINTING] 


Patrick McSweeney, Chairman 
J. Robert Brame, III, General Counsel 


David Johnson, Executive Director 
Plan of Organization 
115 East Grace Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 
804/780-0111 
FAX 804/343/1060 
Table of Contents 
ARTICLE I Qualifications for Participation in Party 
Actions 
ARTICLE 01 Definitions 
ARTICLE Il State Central Committee 
ARTICLE IV District Committee 
ARTICLE V Legislative District Committee 
ARTICLE V1 County and City Committee 
ARTICLE VII Official Committee — General 
ARTICLE VIII Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, 


Conventions and Primaries 


28 
ARTICLE IX Change in Boundaries 
ARTICLE X 
Rulings and Appeals 
ARTICLE XI Amendments 


ADOPTED _ February 12, 1972 
AMENDED March 23, 1972 
February 24, 1973 

April 26, 1975 

March 27, 1976 

June 29, 1979 

September 15, 1979 
September 27, 1980 
RESTATED June 1, 1985 
AMENDED June 14, 1986 
April 28, 1990 

July 28, 1990 

June 8, 1991 

May 20, 1992 


ARTICLE I 
Participation in Party Actions 


SECTION A. Qualifications 

1. __ All legal and qualified voters under the laws of the 
Commonwealth of Virginia, regardless of race, religion, 
national origin or sex, who are in accord with the principles of 
the Republican Party, and who, if requested, express in open 
meeting either orally or in writing as may be required their 
intent to support all of its nominees for public office in the 
ensuing election may participate as members of the Republican 
Party of Virginia in its mass meetings, party canvasses, 
conventions, or primaries encompassing their respective 
election districts. 


2. | A person who has made application for registration and 
meets all other requirements of Section A, but whose name 
does not appear on the local registration books solely because of 
the books having been closed in connection with a local 
election, will nevertheless be deemed a legal and qualified voter. 


SECTION B. Participation 

All Chairmen and members of Official Committees, delegates to 
Conventions, and voters in Mass Meetings or Party Canvasses 
provided for in the State Party Plan shall be members of the 
Republican Party of Virginia as stated in this Article and must 
be legally qualified voters of the respective Units or election 
Districts which they represent as Chairmen, members, delegates 
or voters. 

ARTICLE II 

Definitions 

1. “State Party” or “Party” means Republican Party of 
Virginia. 


2. “State Party Plan” means Plan of Organization of the 
Republican Party of Virginia. 


30 


3. “State Central Committee” means State Central 
Committee of the Republican Party of Virginia. 


4. “Election District” means the City, County, ward of a 
City, magisterial district of a County, precinct or portions or 
combinations of such political subdivisions which comprise the 
area defined by law in which an election is to be held. 


5. | “Congressional District” means the Election District for a 
member of the House of Representatives of the United States 
Congress. 


6. “District” means Congressional District unless otherwise 
designated. 


7. “Legislative District” means the Election District for a 
member of the House of Delegates or the State Senate of the 
Virginia General Assembly. 


8. “District Committee” means Republican Congressional 
District Committee for each Congressional District. 

9. “Legislative District Committee” means Republican 
District Committee for each State Senatorial District and each 
House of Delegates District as the context may require. 


10. “County Committee” means County Committee for the 
Republican Party for each county. 


11. “City Committee” means City Committee for the 
Republican Party for each city. 


12. “Unit” means County or City. 


13. “Unit Committee” means County Committee or City 
Committee. 


EP Oe ee 


31 


14. “Republican Party Voting Strength” means a uniform 
ratio of the votes cast in a political subdivision for the 


Republican candidates for Governor and President to the total 
votes cast in the entire Election District for the Republican 
candidates for Governor and President in the last preceding 
Gubernatorial and Presidential elections. 


15. “Quadrennial State Conventions” means the State 
Convention held in Presidential election years for the purposes 
of nominating electors-at-large to the Electoral College and 
electing delegates-at-large and alternates-at-large to the 
Quadrennial national Republican Convention. 


16. “Quadrennial District Conventions” means the District 
Convention held in Presidential election years for the purposes 
of nominating an elector to the Electoral College and electing 
Delegates and Alternates to the Quadrennial National 
Republican Convention. 


17. “Biennial District Convention” means the District 
Convention held in Congressional election years and is the same 
as the Quadrennial District Convention in Presidential election 
years. 


18. “Official Committees” are the State Central Committee, 
each District Committee, each Legislative District Committee, 
and each Unit Committee. 


19. “Chairman”,“Chairmen”, “he”, and “his”, shall not be 
construed to denote gender. 


20. “Ex-Officio” means the person holding the office and 
shall not be construed to mean with or without a vote. 


21. “Mass Meeting” is as defined in the then current edition 
of Robert’s Rules of Order subject to the provisions of the State 


Party Plan. 


32 


22. “Party Canvass” is a method of electing chairmen and 
members of Official Committees, delegates to Conventions, or 
Party nominees which shall include prefiling candidacies, then 
secret balloting by Party members at convenient polling places 
and hours after proper notice. 


23. “Convention” is as defined in the then current edition of 
Robert’s Rules of Order subject to the provisions of the State 
Party Plan. . 


24. “Primary” is as defined in and subject to the Election 
Laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 


Definitions not set forth above, to the extent found therein and 
where not otherwise inconsistent with Article VII, Section H 
and Article VIII, Section 1.3 of the State Party Plan, shall be 
those set forth in the then current edition of Robert’s Rules of 
Order. 


ARTICLE Ill 
State Central Committee 


Section A. Membership 
The membership of the State Central Committee shall consist of 
the following: 


1. State Chairman 


2. First Vice Chairman 


3. | Two (2) Vice Chairmen from the Eastern part of the State. 


4. | Two (2) Vice Chairmen from the Western part of the 


5. | Two (2) National Committee members. 


33 


6. President, ex officio, and two (2) elected representatives 
of the Virginia Federation of Republican Women. 


7. President, ex officio, and two (2) elected representatives 
of the Young Republican Federation of Virginia. 


8. President, ex officio, and two (2) elected representatives 
of the College Republican Federation of Virginia. 


9. District Chairman of each District, ex officio. 
10. Three members from each District. 


11. One (1) additional member from each District that cast its 
plurality vote for the Republican Presidential nominee in the last 
preceding Presidential election. 


12. One (1) additional member for each District represented 
by a Republican member of Congress. 
13. Four (4) Republican members of the General Assembly. 


14. State Treasurer and Finance Chairman. 


15. State Secretary, Budget Director, and General Counsel, 
but they shall not be entitled to vote. 


16. All publicly elected present and former Republican 
statewide office-holders, but they shall not be entitled to vote. 


SECTION B. Election and Term 

1. The State Chairman shall be elected by the Quadrennial 
State Convention for a term of four (4) years or until his 
successor is elected. 


2. The Vice Chairman shall be elected by the State Central 
Committee at the first meeting following the Quadrennial State 
Convention for a term of four (4) years or until their successors 


34 


are elected. The Eastern portion of the State shall include the 
Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 8th, 10th, and 11th Congressional Districts, and 
the Western portion of ihe State shall include the 4th, 5th, 6th, 
7th, and 9th Congressional Districts.. 


3. The National Committee Members shall be nominated by 
the Quadrennial State Convention. 


4. District Members. . 

a. The regular members representing a District shall 
be elected by the Quadrennial District Convention for a term of 
four (4) years or until their successors are elected. 


b. The additional member for each District that cast its 
plurality vote for the Republican Presidential nominee in the last 
preceding Presidentia! election shall be elected by the District 
Committee at the first meeting following the Presidential 
election and shall serve concurrently with the Presidential term. 


c. The additional member for each District 
represented by a Republican member of Congress shall be 
elected by the District Committee at the first meeting following 
the Congressman’s election and shall serve concurrently with 
the Congressman’s term. 


5. | The members representing the General Assembly shall be 
elected by the Republican Members of the General Assembly at 
the beginning of each even year session of the General 
Assembly, for a term of two (2) years or until their successors 
are elected. 


6. The State Secretary and State Treasurer shall be elected 
by the State Central Committee at the first meeting following 
the Quadrennial State Convention to serve at the pleasure of the 
Committee. 


35 


7. The State Finance Chairman, Budget Director, and 
General Counsel shall be appointed by the State Chairman to 
serve at the pleasure of the Chairman. 


8. | A person shall occupy only one voting membership on 
the State Central Committee at any one time. 


SECTION C. Vacancies 

1. A vacancy in the office of State Chairman shall be filled 
by the State Central Committee until the next regular State 
Convention, which shall then elect a State Chairman to fill the 


remaining unexpired portion of the term of the vacating State 
Chairman. 


2. | A-vacancy in the office of Vice Chairman, State Secretary 
or State Treasurer shall be filled by the State Central 
Committee. 


3. A vacancy in the office of a National Committee member 
shall be filled by the State Central Committee until the next 
regular State Convention which shall then elect a successor 
National Committee member to fill the remaining unexpired 
portion of the vacating member’s term. 


4. Vacancies in the District memberships of the State Central 
Committee shall be filled by the applicable District Committee; 
however, any vacancy not so filled within ninety (90) days may 
be filled by the State Central Committee. 


5. Vacancies shall be filled after notice of such intent, has 
been included in the call of the meeting at which the vacancy is 
to be filled. 


SECTION D. Duties 
1. State Central Committee 

a. The State Central Committee shall formulate and 
provide for the execution of such policies, plans, and measures 


36 


as it may deem conducive to the best interest of the Party and in 
conformity with the State Party Plan. 


b. —_ It shall determine whether candidates for statewide 
public office shall be nominated by Convention or 


Primary. 


c. It shall call all regular and special State 
Conventiv..s and make arrangements therefor, including the 
basis of representation, the time, and the place. 


d. _ It shall have general supervision of all statewide 
campaigns. Neither the State Party nor the State Central 
Committee, however, shall be responsible for the financing of, 
or any financial obligations resulting from, such campaign, 
except to the extent that any such obligations may be approved 
and assumed in writing, in advance, by the State Central 
Committee. 


e. It shall prescribe such additional duties of the State 
officers and shall appoint special State Central subcommittees as 


it deems appropriate. 


f. Whenever the State Central Committee shall 
determine that a District or a Legislative District Chairman has 
failed to function as such, then the State Chairman shall appoint 
a new Chairman to perform the duties provided in the State 
Party Plan until a successor is duly elected by the applicable 
Committee. 


2. State Chairman 
a. The State Chairman shall be Chairman of the State 
Central Committee ard of its Executive Committee. 


b. See Article III, Section E, Paragraph 1, Executive 
Committee. 


c. He shall issue calls for State Conventions and shall 
preside until a temporary organization is effected. 


d. He shall convene the State Central Committee 
when the needs of the Party so demand, but in no event less than 
once during each four (4) month period and he shall preside at 
the meetings of the committee. He shall be responsible for 
sending written notice of the call for a State Central Committee 
meeting to all members of the Committee and to Unit Chairmen, 
which shall include the agenda for the meeting. 


€. He shall issue, upon request, to Unit Chairmen and 
Unit Committeemen a commission signed by him and 
countersigned by the State Secretary, after notification of their 


elections as such. 


f. He shall be responsible for the operation of State 
Headquarters, including hiring such personnel as he may deem 
necessary. He may appoint any personnel as my be required 
from time to time with such duties as he may prescribe. In no 
case shall the total salaries of the employed personnel exceed 
the total amount for the salaries as set out in the budget adopted 
by the State Central Committee. 


8. He shall, acting in the name of the Party not less 
than ninety days prior to the end of the fiscal year, engage a firm 
of certified public accountants to perform an annual independent 
audit of the Party’s financial records and affairs as of the end of 
the fiscal year and to report the results of such audit to the 
Executive Committee and to the State Central Committee. 


3. First Vice Chairman 

The First Vice Chairman’s primary duty, until action is 
taken under the provisions of Article II, Section C, Paragraph l, 
is to act as State Chairman when the office has been vacated by 
the State Chairman or during disability. 


_——- 


38 


4. Vice Chairmen 

The Vice Chairmen’s primary duties shall be to give 
organizational assistance to the Official Committees in their 
respective portions of the State and to discharge such other 
duties as may be assigned by the State Chairman. 


5. District Members 

It shall be the affirmative duty of the District Members of 
the State Central Committee to cooperate with the District 
Chairmen and District Committees in coordinating Party == 
activities at every level of the State organization. Membership 
on the State Central Committee is not an honorary, but rather a 
working position and each member assumes an obligation to 
assist in building the Party at every level and particularly within 
his area. 


6. State Secretary 

a. The State Secretary shall keep the minutes and 
records of the State Central Committee meetings, which shall be 
the property of the Committee, and he shall mail a copy of the 
minutes of the preceding meeting, including attendance, to all 
members of the State Central Committee and all Unit Chairmen 
within ten (10) days after the adjournment of the meeting. 


b. He shall serve as the secretary of all State 
Conventions until a temporary organization is effected. He 
shall be the custodian of the record of the proceedings of each 
State Convention. . | 


c.  Heshall keep a roster of the names and addresses 
of all State Central Committee members and District, 
Legislative District and Unit Chairmen and shall perform such 
other duties as the State Central Committee prescribes. 


7. State Treasurer 
The State Treasurer shall be the custodian of Party funds. 


- el 


39 


8. Finance Chairman 
See Article III, Section E, Paragraph 2, Finance 


9. Budget Director 
See Article III, Section E, Paragraph 3, Budget 
Committee. ; 


10. General Counsel 

The General Counsel shall be a lawyer who shall advise 
the State Chairman and the State Central Committee on legal 
matters relating to Party business. He shall serve as 
Parliamentarian of all meetings of the State Central Committee. 


SECTION E. Subcommittees 
1. Executive Committee 

a. There shall be an Executive Committee of the State 
Central Committee comprised of the State Chairman and all 
District Chairmen, plus the following, but they shall not be 
entitled to vote: The First Vice Chairman, National Committee 
members, President of the Virginia Federation of Republican 
Women, President of the Young Republican Federation of 
Virginia, President of the College Republican Federation of 
Virginia, State Treasurer, State Secretary, Finance Chairman, 
Budget Director, and one member of the State Senate and one 
member of the House of Delegates selected by the Republican 


C. Meetings of the Executive Committee shall be 
called at the pleasure of the Chairman and shall be held not less 
than once every three months. 


2. Finance Committee 

a. There shall be a State Finance Committee 
comprised of the State Finance Chairman, who shall be the 
Chairman, and one (1) member from each District, who shall be 
appointed by the District Chairman; however, if the District 
Chairman does not appoint a member, then the State Chairman 
with the approval of the Executive Committee shall appoint a 
member from that District. In addition, the State Chairman is 
authorized to appoint additional members to the State Finance 
Committee, subject to confirmation by the Executive 
Committee. 


b. | The Finance Committee shall be responsible for 
fund raising activities of the Party which shall be 
developed in coordination with the Budget Committee. Its 
procedures, budges, and quotas shall be subject to approval of 
the State Central Committee. 


c. The State Finance Chairman may appoint other 
officers of the Finance Committee. 


3. Budget Committee 

a. There shall be a Budget Committee comprised of 
the Budget Director, who shall be the Chairman, Executive 
Director of the State Party, Finance Chairman, State Treasurer 
and three (3) persons to be appointed by the State Chairman. 


b. The Budget Committee under the direction of the 
State Chairman shall prepare an annual budget for approval of 
the State Central committee and shall establish controls to 
assure compliance with the budget as adopted. 


c. The annual budget shall include a provision for 
such funds as shall be required to comply with the requirements 
of Article Il, Section D.2.g. 


4. Audit Committee 


41 


a. There shall be an Audit committee comprised of 
not less than five persons, at least three of whom shall be 
experienced in business and financial matters to be appointed by 
the state Chairman. 


b. The Audit Committee shall be responsible for the 
establishment and supervision of the implementation of 
accounting and financial systems, procedures and policies and 
other internal financial controls. It shall also, in cooperation 
with the Chairman, select a firm to conduct the annual 
independent audit of the Party’s financial records and supervise 
the conduct of this audit. 


ARTICLE IV 


SECTION A. Memberships 
The memberships of each District Committee shall consist of 
the following: — 


1. District Chairman 

2. Unit Chairman, ex officio, of each Unit wholly or 
partially within the District, subject to the provisions of Article 
VI, Section E. 


$. District Representative of the Virginia Federation of 
Republican Women, ex officio. 


4. Young Republican Federation District Committeeman, ex 
Officio. 


5. - College Republican Federation District Committeeman, 
ex Officio. 


42 


6. District members of the state Central Committee, ex 
officio, but their right to vote shall be determined by Article IV, 
Section E. 


7. Vice Chairmen, a Secretary and a Treasurer may be 
elected by the District Committee. They may be elected 
members of the District Committee, but they shall not otherwise 
be entitled to vote solely by virtue of holding any of such 
offices. 


SECTION B. Election and Term 

1. The District Chairman shall be elected by the Biennial 
District Convention for a term of two (2) years or until his 
successor is elected. 


2. The Vice Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer shall be 
elected by the voting members of the District Committee for a 
term of two (2) years at the first meeting following the Biennial 
District Convention. 


SECTION C. Vacancies 

1. A vacancy in the office of District Chairman shall be 
filled by the District Committee for the remaining unexpired 
portion of the term. — 


2. Vacancies in the offices of Vice Chairmen, Secretary and 
Treasurer shall be filled by the District Committee. 


3. Vacancies shall be filled after notice of such intent has 
been included in the call of the meeting. 


SECTION D. Duties 
1. District Committee 

a. The District committee shall determine whether 
candidates for District public office shall be nominated by 
Convention or Primary. 


b. It shall calll all regular and special District 
Conventions and make arrangements therefor, including the 
basis of representation, the time and the place. 


c It shall have general supervision over all District 
Campaigns and shall cooperate with the State Central 


Committee in conducting statewide campaigns. 


d. It shall assist in the raising funds within the District 
for National and State causes and otherwise assist the State 
Central Committee in other Party endeavors wherever practical ‘ 


€. | Whenever the District Committee shall determine 
that a Unit Committee, or its Chairman, has failed to function as 
such, the District Committee shall appoint a new Committee, or 
a new Chairman, as the case may be. A Committee thus created 
shall perform their duties provided in the State Party Plan until 
their successors are elected at a Mass Meeting or Convention 
called for that purpose. 


2. District Chairman 
a. The District Chairman shall be the Chairman of the 
District Committee. 


b. He shall issue calls for District Convention and 
shall preside until a temporary organization is effected. See 
Article VIII, Section A. 


c. He shall convene the District Committee when the 
needs of the Party so demand, but in no event less than once 
during each three (3) month period, and shall preside at the 
meetings of the Committee. He shall be responsible for sending 
written notice of the call for a Committee meeting to all 
members of the Committee, which shall include the agenda for 
the meeting. 


at 


d. He shall be responsible for the operation of the 
District Headquarters, hiring such personnel as he shall deem 
necessary and for which funds are budgeted and shall be 
accountable therefor to the District Committee. 


e. | He shall be responsible for providing a prescribed 
time and place, which shall be supervised by the District 
Chairman, or a designated representative, for filing such 
declaration of candidacy and petitions as may be required by 
state law of a candidate in any primary election. 


SECTION E. Voting Rights 

Each Biennial District Convention may determine whether its 
members on the State Central Committee shall have a vote on 
its District Committee. Such voting privileges, once extended, 
shall continue until rescinded by a subsequent Biennial District 
Convention. 


ARTICLE V 
Legislative District Committee © 


SECTION A. Membership 

1. | The membership of each Legislative District Committee 
shall consist of the Unit Chairman of eacff Unit wholly or 
partially in the Legislative District, subject to the provisions of 
Article VI, Section E. 


2. Each Unit Chairman’s vote within the Committee shall be 
weighted in proportion to the Republican Party Voting Strength 
of his Unit within the Legislative District. 


SECTION B. Election and Term 

The Legislative District Chairman shall be elected by the 
Legislative District Committee at the meeting called to 
determine the method of nominating candidates for Legislative 
District office. The Chairman of a State Senate District Shall 
serve for four (4) years, and the Chairman of a House of 


45 


Delegates District shall serve for two (2) years, or until their 

respective successors are elected. He may be one of the Unit 
Chairmen, but shall not be otherwise be entitled to vote solely 
by virtue of holding said office. 


SECTION C. Vacancies 


a. The Legislative District Committee shall determine 
whether candidates for Legislative District public office shall be 
nominated by Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention or 
Primary, where permitted to do so under Virginia Law. 


b. It shall call all regular and special Mass . 
Party Costvasnen snd Conventions and make arangemens = 
therefor, including the time and the place and, if a Convention, 
the basis of representation. 


2. Legislative District Chairman 
a. § The Legislative District Chairman shall be the 
Chairman of the Legislative District Committee. 


b. He shall issue Calls for Legislative District Mass 
Meetings, Party Canvasses, or Conventions and shall preside 


until a temporary organization is effected. See Article VIII, 
Section A. 


c. He shall convene the Legislative District 
Committee when required and shall preside the meeting of the 
Committee. He shall be responsible for sending written notice 
of the Call for a Consmittee Meeting to all members of the 
Committee, which shall include the agenda for the meeting. 


46 


d. He shall be responsible for providing a prescribed time 
and place, which shall be supervised by the Legislative District 
Chairman, or a designated representative, for filing such 
declaration of candidacy and petitions as may be required by 
state law of a candidate in any primary election. 
ARTICLE VI 

County and City Committee 

SECTION A. Membership 


The membership of each County and City Committee shall 
consist of the following: 


1. Unit Chairman 


2. Precinct Members — the number from each Precinct shall 
be determined by the Unit Committee on the basis of 
Republican candidates’ votes in a recent past election or 
elections, but not less than one (1) member from each Precinct. 


3. At-Large Members — additional At-Large Memberships 
may be created which shall not exceed in number 30 percent of 
the members of the Committee. 


4. Elected Public Officials - All publicly elected Republican 
officials shall be additional members of the Committee, if the 
Unit Committee’s Bylaws so provide. They shall not be 
Classified as At-Large Members. 


5. Vice Chairmen, a Secretary and a Treasurer may be 
elected by the Unit Committee. They may be elected members 
of the Unit Committee, but they shall not otherwise be entitled 
to vote solely by virtue of holding any such offices. 


SECTION B. Election and Term 
1. | The Chairman and other members of the Committee shall 
be elected by the Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention or 


47 


Primary called for the purpose electing delegates to the Biennial 
District Convention for a term of two (2) years or until their 
successors are elected. 


2. The Vice Chairmen, Secretary and Treasurer shall be 
elected by such procedure and for such terms as shall be fixed 
by the Unit Party Plan, should there be one, and otherwise as 
shall be determined by the Unit Committee. 


SECTION C. Vacancies 

L A vacancy in tne office of Unit Chairman shall be filled 
by the Unit Committee for the remaining unexpired portion of 
the term. 


2. Vacancies in the office of Vice Chairman, Secretary and 
Treasurer shall be filled by the Unit Committee. 


3. Amy vacancies among other elected members of the 
Committee shall be filled by the Unit Committee for the 


remaining unexpired portion of the term. 


4. Vacancies shall be filled after notice of such intent has 
been included in the call of the meeting. 


SECTION D. Duties 
1. Unit Committee 

a. § The Unit Committee shall determine whether 
candidates for local and constitutional public offices shall be 
nominated by Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention, or 
Primary and whether Unit Chairman and Committee members 
shall be elected by Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention, 
or Primary. 


b. It shall call all regular and all special Mass 
Meetings, Party Canvasses, Conventions and make all 
arrangements therefor and, if a Convention, determine the basis 
of representation. Authority to make such arrangements (other 


48 


than the date, time and whether there shall be, and the 
requirements for, any prefiling) may, at the discretion of the 
Unit Committee, be delegated to the Unit Chairman. 


c. It shall cooperate with the State Central Committee, 
its District Committee, and the Legislative District Committees 
within its boundaries in conducting all elections and fund 
raising activities. 


2. ; Unit Chairman 
a. The Unit Chairman shall be the Chairman of the 
Unit Committee. 


b. He shall issue calls for Unit Mass Meetings, Party 
Canvasses, or Conventions and shall preside until a temporary 
organization is effected. See Article VIII, Section A. 


c. He shall convene the Unit Committee when 
required, but in no event less than once during each three (3) 
month period, and shall preside at the meetings of the 
Committee. He shall be responsible for sending written notice 
of the call for a Committee meeting to all members of the 
Committee, which shall include the agenda for the meeting. 


d. He shall be responsible for providing a prescribed 
time and place, which shall be supervised by the Unit Chairman, 
or a designated representative, for filing such declaration of 
candidacy and petitions as may be required by state law of a 
candidate in any primary election. 


SECTION E. District Units 

Whenever a Unit is divided between two (2) or more 
Congressional or Legislative Districts the Chairman of such 
Unit Committee shall serve as the Unit representative on the 
Congressional or Legislative District Committee encompassing 
his residence. Such Unit Chairman shall designate a person 
residing in that part of the unit located in each of.the other 


involved Congressional or Legislative Districts to serve at the 
Pleasure of the Unit Chairman as the Unit’s representative on 


(Page omitted from copy of Exhibit A served on appellants’ 
counsel] 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand 
and affixed my seal, this day of [MONTH], [YEAR]. 


(Seal) 
WITNESS: 
(Seal) 


(*)Inclusion of the power of substitution is discretionary 
with the member. Its omission shall preclude substitution. 


SECTION B. Notice and Quorum 


provided by a District’s or Unit’s Plan or Bylaws, a majority of 
the voting members of a Committee shall constitute a quorum 
for the transaction of business. 


SECTION C. Removal 

Any Chairman, except the State Chairman, or any other member 
of an Official Committee may be removed from office by total 
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the other members of the Committee, 
after being furnished with notice that such removal will be 
sought, with the charges, in writing, signed by not less than 
one-third (1/3) of the members of the Committee; and allowing 


50 


him thirty (30) days within which to appear and defend himself. 
The State Chairman may be removed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote 
of a State Convention or by the three-fourths (3/4) vote of the 
State Central Committee, the action of said Convention or 
Committee being subject to the foregoing as to notice and 
opportunity for defense. 


SECTION D. Absences 

A member of an Official Committee other than an ex-officio 
member automatically loses his committee position if he is 
absent three (3) consecutive meetings without representation by 
a person holding a proxy; provided, however, that a State 
Central Committee member automatically loses and is deemed 
to have resigned his Committee position if he fails to attend in 
person at least fifty (SO) percent of the regular meetings in any 
calendar year. A vacancy created by such resignation shall be 
filled in accordance with the State Partv Plan. 


SECTION E. Nominations by Committee 

Whenever an Election District fails to nominate a candidate or 
candidate for public office, in the absence of an instruction to 
the contrary by the Convention or Mass Meeting, the official 
Committee of that Election District is authorized to nominate 
such candidate or candidates by two-thirds (2/3) vote of those 
present in a Committee meeting after notice of such intent has 
been included in the call of the meeting, and the nominations 
shall have the same force and effect as if the person or persons 
were nominated by a Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention 


or Primary. 


SECTION F. Filling Vacancies 

Whenever candidates, electors, delegates or alternates have been 
duly elected by a Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention, or 
Primary and a vacancy occurs, the applicable Official 
Committee is authorized to fill such vacancy in formal meeting 
by majority vote after due notice of such intent has been 


51 


included in the call of the meeting. such a meeting shall require 
at least twenty-four (24) hours notice, either written or verbal. 


SECTION G. Public 
All Official Committee meeting shall be held in a building 
appropriate for public use and shall be open to the public. 


SECTION H. Rules 

All Official Committee meetings shall, to the extent applicable, 
be governed by and conducted in accordance with, giving 
precedence as listed to, the following: the State Party Plan: 
District or Unit Plan or Bylaws; and otherwise in accordance 
with the then current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order. 


ARTICLE VIII 
Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, Conventions and Primaries 


SECTION A. Call Requirements 
1.All calls for State, District and Legislative District 
Conventions, shall be issued by the appropriate Chairman to the 
included Unit Chairman not less than thirty (30) days, except 
those calls for special elections, prior to the Convention date. 
Each call shall include: 

a. The qualifications for membership in the 
Republican Party of Virginia as stated in Article L 


b. The time, place and purposes to the Convention. 
c. The basis of representation to the Convention. 


d. The number of Delegate votes to which all 
participating Election Districts are entitled. 

€. The amount of the registration fee, if any. 
2. All calls for Mass Meetings or Party Canvasses shall be 


published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Election 
District not less than seven (7) days, except those calls for 


52 


special elections, prior to the Mass Meeting or Party Canvass. 
Each call shall include: 

a. The qualifications for membership in the 
Republican Party of Virginia as Stated in Article I. 


b. The time, place and purposes of the Mass Meeting 
or Party Canvass. 


c. In the event a purpose is to elect Delegates to a 
Convention, the time, place, purpose of, and the basis of 
representation to the Convention. 


d. The amount of registration fee, if any. 


3. In order to be a requirement for any election by a Mass 
Meeting, Party Canvass, or Convention, prefiling shall be 
approved by the appropriate Official Committee and the 
prefiling requirement included in the call. The call, including the 
prefiling requirement, must then be published in a newspaper of 
general circulation in the Election District at least seven (7) days 
prior to the prefiling deadline. This publication requirement 
shall take precedence over the publication requirement of 
Article VIII, Section A.2. Each person desiring to prefile must 
file a statement prior to the deadline for prefiling. The Official 
Committee or its Chairman, if authorized, may prescribe the use 
of a particular filing form for the required statement 


4. — Itis the responsibility of the applicable Chairman to use 
the most effective means available, including news media, to 
adequately publicize Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, or 
Conventions with the purpose of encouraging maximum citizen 
involvement. This publicity shall include the method of 
Delegate selection. 


5. In the event that a published call for any Mass Meeting, 
Party Canvass or Convention shall differ in any respect from the 
call authorized by the Official Committee, the requirements of 


53 


the published call, unless contested prior to adjournment or 
conclusion, shall upon adjournment or conclusion of the Mass 
Meeting, Party Canvass, or Convention be conclusive and not 
thereafter subject to contest. Participation in a Mass Meeting, 
Party Canvass, or Convention shall not prejudice the rights of 
any person signing a petition protesting the validity of such 
Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, or Convention. 


6. | A Mass Meeting or Convention may by unanimous 
consent dispense with the reading of the call. 


SECTION B. State Conventions 

A State Convention, which may be the Quadrennial State 
Convention, or Primary shall be held in each year in which there 
is to be an election for Governor or United States Senator for 
nominating candidates for the applicable offices, and for other 


proper purposes. 


SECTION C. District Conventions 

A District Convention, which may be the Quadrennial or 
Biennial District Convention, or Primary shall be held in each 
year in which there is to be an election for Congressman for 
nominating a candidate and for other proper purposes. 


SECTION D. Legislative Convention 

A Legislative District Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, 
Convention, or Primary shall be held in each year in which there 
is to be an election for members of the General Assembly from 
the Legislative District for nominating a candidate(s) and for 
other proper purposes. 


SECTION E. Unit Conventions 

A Unit Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, Convention, or Primary 
shall be held in each year in which there is to be an election for 
local or constitutional offices for nominating candidates for the 
applicable offices, and for other party purposes. 


54 


SECTION F. Unit Representation 

Representation in all State and District Conventions shall be by 
Units based upon the Republican Party Voting Strength, but 
each unit shall be entitled to at least one delegate vote. 


SECTION G. Uniform Ratio 

Representation in Legislative District and Unit Conventions 
shall be by either Units, Wards, Magisterial Districts, Precincts, 
or the like, on a uniform ratio established by the appropriate 
Official Committee, but each such political subdivision shall be 
entitled to at least one delegate vote. 


SECTION H. Delegates 


1. Certification , 

a. Delegates and alternates to a Convention shall be 
certified to that Convention by the permanent Chairman, and 
Secretary of the Mass Meeting, or Convention which selected, 
or by the Chairman of the Official Committee which may have 
conducted a party canvass to select, the delegates and alternates. 
The certifications shall be delivered to the Chairman of the 
official Committee which called the Convention prior to the 
convening of the Convention. Except in the case of the State 
Central Committee, 1 copy of the certification shall also be 
delivered to the secretary of the official committee. Such 
Chairman shall be responsible for the preparation of a roll of all 
such certifications which roll shall thereafter govern the 
procedures of the Convention, unless and until changed by the 
Convention. 


b. —_ In the case of a State Convention a copy of unit 
certifications shall also be delivered to its District Chairman. 


c. In the case of a District Convention, said 
certifications must be delivered to the appropriate District 
Chairman and Secretary seven (7) days prior to the convening 
of said Convention. In the case of a State Convention, said 


55 


certifications must be postmarked sixteen (16) days prior to the 
convening of the Convention or delivered in person fourteen 
(14) days prior to the convening of said Convention. After the 
filing deadline of the certifications, no change may be made 
except a certified alternate may be made a delegate. A copy of 
the published official call of the Convention, Mass Meeting, or 
Party Canvass called for the purpose of selecting delegates and 
alternates to convention mus: accompany the certification with 
the date of the publication included. 


d. A delegate or alternate who is not certified in 
accordance with the above requirements shall be seated only by 
a majority vote of the Credentials Committee, or in the event of 
the failure of the Credentials Committee to seat, by a vote of the 
Convention. 


2. Adelegation to a Convention may not have more than 
five (5) delegates and five (5) alternates per delegate vote. No 
delegate may have less than 0.20 votes. 


3. The certification of delegates may state how the delegates 
shall vote whether by those present voting full vote, or non-full 
vote, and if an how an allocation of votes is fractionalized. A 
delegation shall vote full vote unless otherwise designated by 
the electing body. 


a. Full vote means the delegates present and voting at 
the Convention may cast the full vote of the delegation with 
proportionate weight given to majority and minority vote. 
Example: If a County has ten votes to a Convention but only six 
delegates are present at the Convention and four desire to 
support one candidate and two desire to support another 
candidate, the four delegates would cast 6.67 votes for their 
candidate and the two delegates would cast 3.33 votes for their 
candidate. 


56 


b. _Non-full vote shall mean that each delegate will 
only be entitled to the vote to which he is certified. Example: if 
a County has ten votes to a Convention and elects fifty delegates 
non-full vote, each delegate present at the Convention would 
have 0.20 vote. 


c. The vote of a delegation shall be reported to the 
nearest hundredth. Example: If a 37-vote delegation has 85 
delegates present with 22 voting for A and 63 voting for B, A’s 
vote would be 22/85 x 37 =9.58; B’s vote would be 63/85 x 37 
= 27.42. 


4. No delegation shall vote under a unit rule at any 
Convention; however, the Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, or 
Convention electing the delegates may instruct its delegates on 
candidates or specific issues. Unless otherwise provided in the 
instruction, an instruction shall be deemed to be limited to the 
first Convention ballot in respect of the election or other matters 
covered by the instruction. 


5. The delegates present in a given delegation shall 
designate which alternate shall vote in the place of an absent 
delegate, except where the body electing the delegates has 
determined that another method of alternate selection shall he 
used. 


SECTION I. Rules 

1. The Official Committee shall prepare the rules and order 
of business for the conduct of a Convention in advance thereof. 
Said rules and order of business shall then be submitted to the 
Committee on Rules of such Convention for its consideration 
and report to the Convention. 


2. The official Committee shall prepare the rules for the conduct 
of a Party Canvass subject to the provisions of the State Party 
Plan. 


57 


3. All Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, Conventions, and 
Primaries shall, to the extent applicable, by governed by and 
conducted in accordance with, giving precedence as listed to, 
the following: The State Party Plan, District or Unit Plan or By- 
Laws; rules adopted by a designated Rules Committee; and 
otherwise in accordance with the then current edition of 
Robert’s Rules of Order. 


SECTION J. Primaries 

When an Official Committee has declared for a Primary for 
nominating candidates fer public offices, the State Central 
Committee shall establish consistent with State Law the 
necessary rules and regulations for the conduct of such 
Primaries and assist in every practical manner. 


SECTION K. National Convention Delegates 

Procedures concerning Conventions at which delegates and 
alternates to National Conventions are elected shall comply with 
the applicable Rules of the National Republican Party. 


SECTION L. Public Meetings 

Every Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, or Convention shall be 
held in a building appropriate for public use and shall be open to 
the public. If after a call for a Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, or 
Convention, it shall be determined that the size of the building 
designated in the call shall be inadequate relative to the 
anticipated attendance or the building designated in the call, the 
location may be changed by the Chairman issuing the call to a 
more adequate, but equally accessible, building provided that 
written notice of the new location be posted at the location 
originally selected for the meeting, and further provided that 
those attending are allowed sufficient time to be present at the 
alternate location and to participate in the Mass Meeting, Party 
Canvass, or convention. 


SECTION M. Special elections 


58 


Special Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, and Conventions shall 
be held to nominate candidates in special elections and for other 
proper purposes. 


SECTION N. Divided Units 

1. | No member of a Unit Mass Meeting, Party Canvass, or 
Convention shall vote for delegates to a Convention of a District 
of which he is not a resident. 


2. | When a Mass Meeting or Convention has divided in order 
to choose delegates to different Election District Conventions, 
each resulting division may, by majority vote, elected to adopt 
its own rules and it shall otherwise be conducted in accordance 
with Article VIII, Section 1.3 of the State Party Plan. 


ARTICLE Ix 
Change in Boundaries 


In the event the boundaries of a Unit are changed between the 
time of the last preceding Gubernatorial or Presidential elections 
and the time set for a State or District Convention, the 
Republican Party voting strength shall be transferred between 
the Units affected on the basis of the percentage of registered 
voters by Precincts which have been transferred. 


In the event the boundaries of a Legislative District, Ward, 
Magisterial District or Precinct are changed, then a method 
equal or similar to that aforementioned shall be used for 
determining the Republican votes transferred between the 
affected political subdivisions and therefore the revised 
Delegate allotments of Committee memberships. 


ARTICLE X 
Rulings and Appeals 


SECTION A. Rulings 


59 


1. Any Chairman of an Official Committee or twenty (20) 
percent of the members of an official Committee may request a 
ruling or interpretation of the State Party Plan from the General 
Counsel. The General Counsel's determination shall be binding 
unless and until overturned upon appeal, either to the Appeals 
Committee or directly to the State Central Committee. 


2. | The Appeals Committee shall consist of the State 
Chairman, all of the State Vice Chairmen and a General 
Assembly Committee Member appointed by the Joint 
Republican Legislative Caucus. The State Chairman shall 
promptly convene this Committee when necessary, either in 
person or by telephone, and shall participate in its deliberations 
and decisions. 


3. In the event of an appeal to the Appeals Committee and a 
concurrence by a majority of that Committee with the Ruling or 
interpretation of the General Counsel, it may be further 
appealed to the State Central Committee, whose decision shall 
be binding in accordance with Article X, Section C. 


SECTION B. Contests 


1. Each Unit Committee shall decide all controversies and 
contests arising within its jurisdiction, but those persons deemed 
adversely affected by any such decision shall have the right of 
appeal to the appropriate District Committee. In the case of a 
split Unit, if the controversy or contest specifically relates to the 
operations or affairs of a particular Congressional or Legislative 
District, an appeal shall be taken to that District Committee; if 
not, an appeal shall be taken to the District Committee of the 
District wherein the person appealing resides. 


2. Each District Committee shall decide all controversies 
and contests arising within its jurisdiction. It shall also hear and 
decide all timely appeals taken from units within the District. 
Persons deemed adversely affected by a decision of the District 


60 


Committee shall have the right of appeal to the State Central 
Committee. 


3. All appeals, under sub-sections 1 and 2 of this section 
must be made in writing within thirty (30) days after the 
decision appealed from and the appeal must be accompanied by 
a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25) Party members of 
the Unit or District affected. 


SECTION C. Finality 

The State Central Committee shall make the final decision, upon 
timely appeal, on all Party controversies and contests in any 
Election District of the State, rulings of the General Counsel and 
on all other matters deemed to affect the efficiency of the Party 
organization or the success of the Party. 


ARTICLE XI 
Amendments 


The State Party Plan may be amended by any State Convention 
by three-fourths (3/4) roll call vote; or by the State Central 
Committee by three-fourths (3/4) of its members present, but 
not less than a majority of the total members, after notice of 
such intent and general text of such amendment has been 
included in the call of the meeting. 


61 


Exhibit B 


CALL FOR THE STATE CONVENTION OF THE 
REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA FOR FRIDAY, JUNE 
3, 1994, AT TWO O’CLOCK P.M. 

AND SATURDAY JUNE 4, 1994 AT TEN O’CLOCK A.M., 
RICHMOND COLISEUM, RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 


As Chairman of the Republican Party of Virginia and pursuant 
to the Party Plan and as recommended and directed by the State 
Central Committee, I, Patrick M. McSweeney, do hereby issue 
this Cail for a State Convention to be held at the Richmond 
Coliseum, Richmond, Virginia, starting at two 0’ clock (2:00) 
p.m. local time on Friday, June 3, 1994, for the purpose of 
nominating a Republican candidate for the office of United 
States Senator and for the transaction of such other business as 
may properly come before the Convention; and I further direct 
the Executive Director of the Republican Party of Virginia to 
publish this Call in a daily newspaper of general circulation in 
the Commonwealth at least thirty (30) days prior to the 
convening date of the State Convention, as required by the Party 
Plan. 


QUALIFICATION FOR PARTICIPATION 


All legal and qualified voters under the laws of the 
Commonwealth of Virginia, regardless of race, religion, 
national origin, or sex, who are in accord with the principles of 
the Republican Party of Virginia and who, if requested, express 
in open meeting, either orally or in writing as may be required, 
their intent to support all of its nominees for public office in the 
ensuing election, may participate as members of the Republican 
Party of Virginia in its Mass Meetings, Party Canvasses, 
Conventions or Primaries encompassing their respective 
Election Districts. 


COMPOSITION OF CONVENTION 


62 


The State Convention shall be composed of delegates and 


alternates of the respective units they represent. Representation 
shall be based on the total number of Republican votes cast in 


each county and city in the last preceding presidential and 
gubernatorial elections. Each unit is allowed one delegate vote 
and one alternate vote for each 250 Republican votes cast or 
major portion thereof. Each county or city shall be entitled to at 
least one delegate and one alternate.The delegates and alternates 
shall be elected in county and city Mass Meetings, Conventions 
or Party Canvasses that shall be held between March 1, 1994 
and April 1, 1994 (except for the City of Alexandria which shall 
be between February 26, 1994 and April 1, 1994). If Units 
require pre-filing of delegates the deadline may not be before 
February 26, 1994 (except for the City of Alexandria which 
may not be before February 23, 1994). These shali be called for 
this purpose in conformity with the Party Plan of the Republican 
Party of Virginia by each unit committee in the state. 


CERTIFICATION OF DELEGATES 


The delegates present in a given delegation shall designate 
which alternates shall vote in the place of an absent delegate, 
except where the electing body that elected the delegates has 
determined another method of alternate selection. (Note: Full 
vote means that the delegates present and voting at the 
Convention may cast the full vote of the delegation with 
proportionate weight given to majority and minority vote. Non- 
full vote shall mean each delegate will only be entitled to vote 
the vote to which he is certified.) The said delegates and 
alternates to the State Convention so elected shall be certified in 
writing with their respective names and addresses (including zip 
codes) over the signatures of the permanent chairman and 
permanent secretary of the county or city Mass Meeting, 
Convention, or Party Canvass, as well as the signature of the 
current unit chairman. If the Certification and registralion fee is 
postmarked or delivered in pers>n no later than fourteen (14) 
calendar days following the local Mass Meeting, Conveation or 


63 


Party Canvass, then the registration fee shall be $35.00 for each 
delegate and alternate certified. If the Certification and 
registration fee is postmarked or delivered in person more than 
fourteen (14) calendar days following the local Mass Meeting, 
Convention or Party Canvass, then the registration fee shall be 
$45.00 for each delegate and alternate certified. 


ALL CERTIFICATIONS AND FEES, REGARDLESS OF 
DATE OF LOCAL MASS MEETING, CONVENTION OR 
PARTY CANVASS, MUST BE POSTMARKED NO LATER 
THAN SIXTEEN (16) DAYS PRIOR TO THE CONVENING 
OF THE SAID CONVENTION (MAY 18, 1994), OR 
DELIVERED IN PERSON FOURTEEN (14) DAYS PRIOR 
be ion CONVENING OF THE SAID CONVENTION (MAY 
, l ). 


After a Certification is received, or the May 20 deadline is 
reached or has passed, no changes, additions or deletions may 
be made, except a certified alternate may be made a delegate. 


Payments for registration fees are not deductible as chazitable 
contributions for income tax purposes. Fees will be used for 
Federal and State election purposes. No refunds will be issued 
after May 20. A copy of the published Call of the Convention, 
Mass Meeting, or Party Canvass, called for the purpose of 
selecting delegates and alternates to said Convention, must 
accompany the certification, with the date of publication 
included. Certification should be mailed or delivered as follows: 


* ORIGINAL: PAGE ONE OF THREE 
Mr. Patrick McSweeney, Chairman 
Republican Party of Virginia 
115 East Grace Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 


* SECOND COPY: PAGE TWO OF THREE 
The respective District chairman 


64 


* THIRD COPY: PAGE THREE OF THREE 
For the Unit’s records 


NOTE: A delegate or alternate is not certified until his name, 
address and phone number has been provided on the 
Certification and all his fees have been paid. 


Authorized by the Republican Party of Virginia 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


[Caption omitted] 
NOTICE OF DISMISSAL 


Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 41(a)(1){i), 
plaintiffs in the above named case hereby voluntarily dismiss 
Count 5 of the Complaint against Oliver North for U.S. Senate 
Committee, Inc. 


George A. Rutherglen 

Counsel of Record 

Virginia State Bar No. 18938 
580 Massie Road 
Charlottesville, VA 22903-1789 
(804) 924-7015 


[Names and addresses of other counsel omitted in printing] 


Date: June 8, 1994 


