No. 94-203 

in The J | OGRE OF THE CLERK | 
Supreme Court of the United States 

October Term, 1994 F 
+ 

FORTIS MORSE, KENNETH CURTIS BARTHOLOMEW 
AND KIMBERLY J. ENDERSON, 

Appellants, 

REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA AND 
ALBEMARLE COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE, 

Appellees. 

+ 

On Appeal From The United States 
District Court For The Western District Of Virginia 
¢ 

BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE 
OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA 
IN SUPPORT OF APPELLEES 
o 

*James S. Gitmore, III 
Attorney General 

Davip E. ANDERSON 
Chief Deputy Attorney General 

JOHN Paut Woon ey, Jr. 
Deputy Attorney General 

Wituiam H. Hurp 
Deputy Attorney General 

Maureen Ritey MaArTsen 
Assistant Attorney General 

Office of the Attorney General 
900 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 
(804) 786-2071 

* Counsel of Record 

COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 

QUESTION PRESENTED 

Whether Virginia’s Constitution or statutes “grant 
authority” to political parties to nominate candidates by 
convention so as to implicate § 5 of the Voting Rights Act. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 
Question Presented ......sccscscscsacsceuspeneneeee i 
Table of. Asthorities .....scccssscccsceesseueenenene iii 
Interest of Ansions Curiae .....sssecccccsssuncuseeeee 1 
Summary of Argument........ Boscceesbeeeenaweee 2 
ASBUMONE ... 220s ee scccccinccesccecsscespereneenenn 5 

I. The authority of the Republican Party of Virginia to 
nominate candidates for public office by convention 
does not find its source in state law but in the 
inherent rights of the people.................... 8 

Il. The decisions of this Court do not support the 
proposition that action taken by a political party 
pursuant to Va. Code §§ 24.2-509 to -511 consti- 
tutes state action for the purpose of application 
of the Voting Rights Act...............0.eeeees 19 

Comciusiom ....ccccvccecccceceese seen 25 

ili 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

CASES: 
Board of Educ. v. White, 439 U.S. 32 (1978)........... 22 

Democratic Party v. Wisconsin, 450 U.S. 107 (1981) .... 22 
Eu v. County Democratic Comm., 489 U.S. 214 (1989) 21, 23 
Fortune v. Democratic Comm., 598 F. Supp. 761 

EEE IEE CT EE 23 
Libertarian Party v. Davis, 766 F.2d 865 (4th Cir. 

[CONTROL: procedural paragraph omitted.]

Comm., 227 Va. 330, 315 S.E.2d 829 (1984)...... 11, 13 
MacGuire v. Amos, 343 F. Supp. 119 (M.D. Ala. 

CPCS EAMES CG esoessescecenvecccccseccs 23 
NAACP v. Election Comm'n, 470 U.S. 166 (1985)...... 22 
Staples v. Gilmer, 183 Va. 613, 33 S.E.2d 49 (1945)..... 9 
Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944)........ 19, 20, 21 
Tashjian v. Republican Party, 479 U.S. 208 (1986) 

DUUEMEMMEEEMEMEWER RW UsNeecccceosccccccc: 13, 21, 23, 24 
Terry v. Adams, 345 U.S. 461 (1953)............ 7, 19, 21 

United States v. Classic, 313 U.S. 299 (1941)...19, 20, 21 

CONSTITUTIONS, STATUTES AND REGULATIONS: 

Voting Rights Act 42 U.S.C. § 1973c (1988)......... 5, 6 
ee . 6, 8, 17, 18, 22 
EEE 3, 8 

cea c ca censseseccccsccses 3, 9, 10 

iv 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 

Page 
. Se FF SST ee ee 
-.* © 6 8 MP te 3, 11 
Wp, Co eR Be Fi in on inc nes ecnsteiedsitedeen 10 
ee FOO OS ree er re 11, 12 
Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-101 (Michie’s 1993) ........... 14 
Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-500 to -504 (Michie’s 1993 

and Cum. Supp. BPG). «22 ccvecccccssesccsccecs 12 
Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-500 to -543 (Michie’s 1993 & 

Dam. TOTO oo ccc cc cevcctecccvnncdveseenescecnceees 4 
Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-504 (Michie’s 1993) ............ 4 
Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-508 (Michie’s 1993) ..... 4, 14, 17 
Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-508 to -511 (Michie’s 1993) 

POINT ee cc wc ccc ccccccestssuecwostoceseses 4, 12, 19 
Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-509(B) (Michie’s 1993) 

PO EOE ee ee er EMT ee 7, 13 
Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-512 to -558 (Michie’s 1993 & 

Sep. WE) onc nce ccccncagsescsccnvesvcetecseucs 4, 12 
Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-520 (Michie’s 1993) ........... 16 
1986-1987 Op. Att’y Gen. Va. 204..............0045. 14 
MISCELLANEOUS: 

Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary of the English 

Language 1157 (Ist ed. 1989)..................005. 12 

No. 94-203 
+ 

In The 

Supreme Court of the United States 

October Term, 1994 
r 

Fortis Morse, Kenneth Curtis Bartholomew 
and Kimberly J. Enderson, 

Appellants, 

Republican Party of Virginia and 
Albemarle County Republican Committee, 

Appellees. 
+ 

On Appeal From The United States 
District Court For The Western District Of Virginia 
¢ 

BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE 
OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA 
IN SUPPORT OF APPELLEES 
e 

INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 

The Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia respectfully submits this brief amicus curiae, on 
behalf of the Commonwealth of Virginia and its citizens, 
and in support of Appellees. 

The Appellants and their amici purport to examine 
Virginia law and reach conclusions regarding the relative 
power and authority of the Commonwealth and its citi- 
zens. Appellants’ characterization of state law is so 
flawed as to strike at the very foundation upon which 

government in Virginia rests. A question as significant as 
the relationship between a state government and the citi- 
zenry must not be entrusied to the representations of the 
parties to a cause, each with their own purposes and 
interests, which are independent of the interests of the 
citizens of the state whose laws are implicated by their 
dispute. The interests of the citizens of the Common- 
wealth must be represented in this action because the 
legal issues raised thereby put their power and authority 
as citizens at risk. It is the duty of the Attorney General of 
Virginia to correct the interpretation of Virginia law 
offered by the Appellants. In so doing, it is his privilege 
to stand in defense of the traditional liberties and inher- 
ent rights of each and every citizen of the Commonwealth 
to participate in political activity and to gather together 
in political associations upon their own terms, with a 
minimum of interference from their governments. It is 
their natural and constitutional right to do so; it does not 
require any permission or grant of authority from the 
state. 

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

The position of the Appellants is poised precariously 
upon the premise that Virginia’s election laws grant 
authority to political parties, including the Republican 
Party of Virginia (hereinafter “RPV”), to select their can- 
didates for public office at conventions.' Appellants’ Br., 

! This supposed grart of authority is also relied upon by 
Appellants for satisfaction of the two part test which is pro- 
vided by § 51.7 of the regulations governing application of the 

at 11. What the government grants, the government may 
take away. Thus, Appellants’ interpretation of state law is 
the very antithesis of the principles upon which the gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth was formed and upon 
which it is daily maintained. 

All power in the Commonwealth is vested in and 
derived from the people. Va. Const. art. I, § 2.2 The 
individual citizens of the Commonwealth retain their 
inherent authority to organize into groups which select 
from among themselves a candidate to promote for a 
public office. Va. Const. art. I, §§ 2, 3, 6 and 12.5 To say 
that they are granted that authority by the state would be 
to say that the state has the power to deny them that 
authority. This is not the law of Virginia. The fundamen- 
tal rights of all Virginians, to political association, expres- 
sion and action, are neither obtained nor exercised by the 

Voting Rights Act and which attempts to define the activities of 
political parties that are subject to the Act’s preclearance 
requirements. 

2 “That all power is vested in, and consequently derived 
from, the people, that magistrates are their trustees and ser- 
vants, and at all times amenable to them.” Va. Const. art. 1, § 2. 

3 The protections and limitations established by article I of 
the Virginia Constitution are echoed by the Bill of Rights of the 
U.S. Constitution and the position taken herein on the basis of 
the former finds equal strength in the latter. However, it is the 
unique role of the Attorney General of Virginia to guard and 
defend the rights of Virginians as they are secured by provisions 
of the Virginia Constitution and as they are reflected in the laws 
of the Commonwealth. The constitutional protections afforded 
Virginians by their state constitution pre-date federal constitu- 
tional limitations on state action by more than a century. 

grace of government. They reside independently of gov- 
ernment in each and every citizen and they are expressly 
acknowledged and accommodated by Virginia’s election 
laws. 

Political parties in Virginia are not creatures of state 
government but voluntary associations of people who 
band together to advance their common views concerning 
the conduct of their government. Central to their task is 
the election of individuals who share their views to pub- 
lic office, an objective that typically leads political parties 
to choose individuals, who will seek election by the pub- 
lic at large, as representatives of the party and its views. 
Parties do not undertake these activities as the result of 
any license or grant of authority from state government. 
The authority to conduct these activities is an inherent 
right of the people. Like other exercises of free speech 
and assembly, the selection of candidates in Virginia may 
be subject to some limited degree of regulaticn by the 
state. However, it nonetheless remains an inherent right, 
not a matter of authority bestowed by the government. 

Virginia’s election law establishes procedures 
whereby political parties, groups and individuals, includ- 
ing “minor” parties, may have access to the ballot so as to 
place their candidates’ names before the electorate. See 
Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-508 to -511, -500 to -504. Virginia 
law also lowers the threshold for inclusion on the general 
election ballot for the candidates of those groups meeting 
the statutory definition of “political party”; and it offers 
such groups access to the public electoral machinery if 
the group desires to delegate its power to nominate to a 
state-run primary. See Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2-512 to -558. 
However, the reasonable functions of that lowered 

threshold are (i) to require groups to demonstrate some 
minimal level of support from the electorate before they 
are permitted to require the expenditure of public 
resources through a state-sponsored primary and (ii) to 
protect the integrity of the political process from frivo- 
lous or fraudulent candidates. Libertarian Party v. Davis, 
766 F.2d 865, 868 (4th Cir. 1985). These provisions of 
Virginia law, individually or in concert, do not and can- 
not transform the free exercise of inherent rights of Vir- 
ginians into acts taken pursuant to a delegation of state 
authority. 

Therefore, neither the RPV nor any other political 
party or group can be subjected to the preclearance 
requirements of § 5 of the Voting Rights Act when they 
conduct a convention to nominate candidates. The Justice 
Department's regulations do not allow it and the pre- 
vious decisions of this Court do not support it. 

¢ 

ARGUMENT 

Appellants seek to subject the decisions of political 
parties in Virginia, regarding what method they will 
employ to select a candidate to represent them in a gen- 
eral election, to the preclearance requirements of § 5 of 
the 1965 Voting Rights Act. Section 5 itself makes no 
mention of political parties. 42 U.S.C. § 1973(c) (1988). 
However, the Justice Department, in reliance on its inter- 
pretation of Congressional intent, has explained by regu- 
lation when the provisions of the preclearance provisions 

of the Act are imposed on political parties. 28 C.FR. 
§ 51.7 (1993). Its regulations provide that 

Certain activities of political parties are sub- 
ject to the preclearance requirement of section 5. 
A change affecting voting effected by a political 
party is subject to the preclearance requirement: 
(a) If the change relates to a public electoral 
function of the party and (b) if the party is 
acting under authority explicitly or implicitly 
granted by a covered jurisdiction or political 
subunit subject to the preclearance requirement 
of section 5. For example, changes with respect 
to the recruitment of party members, the con- 
duct of political campaigns, and the drafting of 
party platforms are not subject to the pre- 
clearance requirement. Changes with respect to 
the conduct of primary elections at which party 
nominees, delegates to party conventions, or 
party officials are chosen are subject to the pre- 
clearance requirement of section 5. 

28 C.F.R. § 51.7 (1993). Under this regulation, two distinct 
conditions must be met in order for an activity by a 
political party to be subject to the preclearance require- 
ment of § 5.4 First the change must relate to a “public 
electoral function” of the party. Second, the party must be 
acting under “authority granted by the state.” Among 

4 A third requirement reflected in the regulation is that 
there must be a change affecting voting. “Voting” is a carefully 
defined term that includes “all action necessary to make a vote 
effective in primary, special or general election. .. . ” 42 U.S.C. 
§1973(c)(1). The definition makes no mention of convention 
votes. This deliberate omission supports the view that Congress 
did not seek to make political activity subject to preclearance 
where it does not occur pursuant to a grant of state authority. 

Appellants’ errors is that they fail to acknowledge these 
as two separate criteria, but instead treat them as only 
one: state action. The distinction between the two is illus- 
trated in the example used by the regulation. The exam- 
ple refers to “primary elections at which . . . delegates to 
party conventions . . . are chosen... . ” Id. It does not 
refer to any other method for choosing delegates to party 
conventions, nor does it refer to the actual conventions 
themselves. Even if a party’s decision to nominate its 
candidate at a party convention were, by some authority, 
deemed to be a “public electoral function,”> it does not 
necessarily follow that the second prong of the test is 
satisfied, i.e. that the party’s authority to hold a conven- 
tion was granted to it by the state. In arguing that the 
RPV violated the Voting Rights Act, Appellants and the 
Solicitor General take the position that the RPV, when it 
decided to nominate its candidate for the 1994 race for 
the United States Senate by party convention and when it 
decided to charge a fee to delegates to that convention, 
“act[ed] under authority explicitly or implicitly granted 
by” the state of Virginia. Appellants’ Br. at 27; Brief of the 
United States, at 13. Appellants purport to locate the 
express delegation of authority which supports their 
position in §§ 24.2-509 to -511 of the Code of Virginia. 
Appellants’ Br., at 27. This position depends upon a com- 
plete misapprehension of the source of political power in 
Virginia. Appellants also misapply the decisions of this 
Court in which actions of political parties have been 

> Only the most heinous of affronts to consiitutional rights 
have justified to this Court so extreme an intrusion into the 
activities of political parties as Appellants seek. See Terry v. 
Adams, 345 U.S. 461 (1953). 

treated as state action for purposes of applying constitu- 
tional restraints. 

The Voting Rights Act is not applicable to the facts of 
this case because the RPV, in deciding how it would select 
its candidate for the United States Senate, did not act 
pursuant to a legislative grant of authority from the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia, as required by § 51.7 of the regu- 
lations if preclearance requirements are to apply. The 
Party acted pursuant to the constitutionally guaranteed 
rights of association, free speech and political action of its 
members. Under § 51.7, primary elections — events neces- 
sarily dependent on state resources — are subject to the 
preclearance requirements of the Voting Rights Act. Func- 
tions which arise from the party’s inherent power — such 
as the right to assemble in convention - are not. This 
distinction follows necessarily from the Court’s analysis 
of the obvious tension that exists between the inherent 
functions of the political party, which are constitutionally 
protected, and those which are arguably subject to state 
regulation in certain carefully prescribed instances. The 
regulation identifies primaries at which parties select 
candidates as activities within the reach of the Voting 
Rights Act. Notably, it does not so identify party conven. 
tions. 

I. THE AUTHORITY OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY 
OF VIRGINIA TO NOMINATE CANDIDATES FOR 
PUBLIC OFFICE BY WHATEVER METHOD IT 
SELECTS DOES NOT FIND ITS SOURCE IN STATE 
LAW BUT IN THE INHERENT RIGHTS OF THE 
PEOPLE. 

“[A]ll power is vested in, and consequently derived 
from, the people ....” Va. Const. art. I, § 2. Virginia’s 

Constitution is the embodiment of the delegation of 
authority, by the citizens of the Commonwealth, to their 
state government. See Staples v. Gilmer, 183 Va. 613, 
622-25, 33 S.E.2d 49, 53 (1945). The provisions of Vir- 
ginia’s constitution, and the statutes enacted pursuant to 
the authority granted thereby, can be read only in the 
context of the reservation of rights set forth by the first 
article of that document. 

Article I of Virginia’s constitution explicitly reserves 
to the citizens of the Commonwealth the right to free 
elections. Va. Const. art. I, § 6.° Inherent in this right is 
the right of the people to associate together for the pur- 
pose of putting forward candidates for inclusion on the 
general glection ballot; i.e. to nominate candidates. As sig- 
nificant, article I also explicitly reserves to the people the 
authority to reform, alter or abolish their government. Va. 
Const. art. I, § 3.7 In addition to explicitly reserving 

© That all elections ought to be free; and that all men, 
having sufficient evidence of permanent common 
interest with, and attachment to, the community, have 
the right of suffrage, and cannot be taxed, or deprived 
of, or darnmaged in, their property for public uses, 
without their own consent, or that of their representa- 
tives duly elected, or bound by any law to which they 
have not, in like manner, assented for the public good. 
Va. Const. art. I, § 6. 

? That government is, or ought to be, instituted for the 
common benefit, protection, and security of the 
people, nation, or community; of all the various 
modes and forms of government, that is best which is 
capable of producing the greatest degree of happiness 
and safety, and is most effectually secured against the 
danger of maladministration; and, whenever any 

10 

certain rights to the citizens of the Commonwealth, Vir- 
ginia’s constitution reminds those who would understand 
our system of laws which is constructed thereby that all 
citizens of the Commonwealth have certain inherent 
rights which they cannot deprive themselves of by dele- 
gation, and that the enumeration of certain of those rights 
in article I is not intended to imply any limitation of 
them. Va. Const. art. I, § 17.8 Read together, the foregoing 
constitutional provisions establish a framework for the 
operation of a state government that receives its limited 
power by delegation from the people and which has no 
power to usurp the inherent rights or authority of its 
citizens. Nowhere in the Virginia Constitution do the 
people surrender their right to organize themselves in 
support of particular political ideas, and to select and 
support candidates for public office whom they believe 
will promote those commonly held ideas. In fact, that 
authority is explicitly protected by the Virginia Constitu- 
tion’s guarantee of free elections and its express prohibi- 
tion of any law which abridges the right of the people to 
assemble peaceably or to petition the government for the 

government shal! be found inadequate or contrary to 
these purposes, a majority of the community hath an 
indubitable, inalienable, and indefeasible right to 
reform, alter, or abolish it, in such manner as shall be 
judged most conducive to the public weal. 
Va. Const. art. 1, § 3. 
8 “The rights enumerated in this Bill of Rights shall not be 
construed to limit other rights of the people not therein 
expressed.” Va. Const. art. I, § 17. 

11 

redress of grievances. Va. Const. art. I, § 129; See Mahan v. 
National Conservative Political Action Comm., 227 Va. 330, 
152 S.E.2d 829 (1984). 

Article II of Virginia’s constitution provides for the 
protection and exercise of the people’s right to vote. 
Section 4 of article II directs Virginia’s state legislature to 
“provide for the nomination of candidates.”!° Va. Const. 
art. II, § 4. Contrary to Appellants’ urging, this constitu- 
tional direction does not make nominations by political 
parties acts pursuant to a delegation of authority. It does 
not cede to the legislature the inherent power of the 
people to organize and offer candidates of the organiza- 
tion’s choosing for inclusion on a general election ballot. 
When read in conjunction with the guarantee of free 
elections, this provision simply requires the government 

*That the freedoms of speech and of the press are 
among the great bulwarks of liberty, and can never be 
restrained except by despotic governments; that any 
citizen may freely speak, write, and publish his senti- 
ments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse 
of that right; that the General Assembly shall not pass 
any law abridging the freedom of speech or of the 
press, nor the right of the people peaceably to assem- 
ble and to petition the government for the redress of 
grievances. 

Va. Const. art. I, § 12. 

10 “The General Assembly shall provide for the nomination 
of candidates, shall regulate the time, place, manner, conduct, 
and administration of primary, general, and special elections, 
and shall have power to make any other law regulating elections 
not inconsistent with this Constitution.” Va. Const. art. II, § 4. 

12 

to acknowledge and to facilitate the exercise of that inher- 
ent right.'! It requires the government to provide terms 
upon which the citizens’ exercise of their inherent rights 
will be recognized and incorporated by the government 
in its conduct of general elections.!? 

Sections 24.2-509 through 24.2-511 of the Virginia 
Code, the provisions of Virginia law mistakenly relied 
upon by Appellants to characterize the RPV as a state 
actor, merely provide order, method and predictability to 
the government's exercise of its duty to conduct free 
elections. They inform citizens of the conditions upon 
which their candidacies, or the candidates of any organi- 
zation they may form, will be recognized by the public 
electoral process. The statutes achieve their purpose with 
minimum intrusion on the power of the individuals and 
any political parties they may form. They do not “dele- 
gate authority” to nominate candidates for public office. 
That authority does not reside in the legislature and, 
therefore, is not the legislature’s to grant or deny. Con- 
trary to the Appellants’ allegation, Virginia law does not 
presume to “delegate” or grant authority to political par- 
ties, either explicitly or implicitly, to nominate candi- 
dates. It does not substantially regulate the performance 

1! The ordinary meaning of the term “provide,” as it was 
used by the drafters of Virginia’s constitution, is to furnish, 
supply or equip; to take measures with due foresight; to arrange 
for; or to supply means of support. Webster’s Unabridged Dic- 
tionary of the English Language 1157 (1st ed. 1989). 

'2 Virginia Code sections 24.2-509 to -511, as well as 
§§ 24.2-500 to -504, §§ 24.2-505 to -507 and §§ 24.2-512 to -538, 
comprise the legislature’s acts pursuant to the constitutional 
mandate of article II, § 4. 

13 

of the nomination function but leaves that power in the 
private hands of political organizations and their individ- 
ual members. 

The fact that political parties do not nominate their 
candidates under a grant of state authority is not changed 
by Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-509(B), as cited by Appellants. 
Appellants’ Br., at 4 and 27. This statute, which allows an 
incumbent previously nominated by primary to demand 
a primary when he seeks re-nomination, does not grant 
authority to the party. It permits an incumbent to require 
something of his party if he chooses and it is a restriction 
on the First Amendment rights of the citizens who com- 
prise the party. First Amendment analysis provides that 
the statute can survive strict scrutiny only if it is found to 
serve a “compelling state interest” and is “narrowly tai- 
lored to achieve its objective.” See Tashjian v. Republican 
Party, 479 U.S. 208 (1986). Assuming arguendo that the 
statute passes these tests, it is, at best, a reasonable 
restriction on the inherent right of political parties to 
select their candidates freely. It does not grant political 
parties anything.'* 

A political party is generally defined as a body of 
persons voluntarily associated to promote certain views 
or principles with respect to government. Political parties 
have certain inherent functions, among which is the nom- 
ination of candidates for election to public office. Any 
regulation of that power is subject to strict constitutional 
limitations. Tashjian, 479 U.S. at 213 -14. See Mahan, 227 

13 Section 24.2-509(B) of the Code of Virginia has not, at this 
writing, been put to the test of a constitutional challenge. 

14 

Va. 330, 152 S.E.2d 829; 1986-1987 Va. Att’y Gen. Ann. 
Rep. 204, 205. For certain limited purposes under Vir- 
ginia’s election laws, the term “political party” is given a 
more narrow and precise definition. Va. Code Ann. 
§ 24.2-101. The use of the term is a limited reference to 
those organizations, comprised of citizens of the Com- 
monwealth, “which, at either of the two preceding state- 
wide general elections, received at least ten percent of the 
total vote cast for any statewide office filled in that elec- 
tion” and which have a state central committee and an 
office of elected state chairman both of which have been 
continually in existence for at least six months. Va. Code 
Ann. § 24.2-101. However, lest there be any argument that 
the statutory definition of the term somehow alters the 
inherent rights of political parties which meet that defini- 
tion, Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-508 states that a political party, 
as defined by statute, retains those powers which are 
inherent in all political organizations, including the 
power to nominate candidates: 

Each political party shall have the power to (i) 
make its own rules and regulations, (ii) call 
conventions to proclaim a platform, ratify a 
nomination, or for any other purpose, (iii) pro- 
vide for the nomination of its candidates, 
including the nomination of its candidates for 
office in case of any vacancy, (iv) provide for the 
nomination and election of its state, county, city, 
and district committees, and (v) perform all 
other functions inherent in political party orga- 
nizations. 

Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-508. If, as argued by Appellants, the 
protection offered by this provision is a delegation — rather 

——- —- - 

15 

than an acknowledgment — of authority to nominate candi- 
dates, then the legislature would not have used the 
phrase “functions inherent in political party organiza- 
tions” (emphasis added). Moreover, if the statute were a 
delegation and not an acknowledgement, it would neces- 
sarily follow that only those organizations which meet the 
statutory definition of “party” have the power to nomi- 
nate or to exercise any of the other rights listed in the 
statute. Such a limitation would violate the rights secured 
to the people by the Virginia Constitution and would be 
an anathema to the political process in the Common- 
wealth. 

[CONTROL: procedural paragraph omitted.]

14 Primary elections which make use of the state apparatus, 
organization and officials, and which are conducted at public 
expense, as well as being open to all voters (as primaries in 
Virginia are), may transform the candidate selection process 

16 

The notion that a “party” has some implicit public 
authority to “winnow” the field of potential candidates is 
at the crux of Appellants’ justification for requiring the 
RPV to comply with the preclearance requirements of 
section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. Appellants’ Br., at 20. 
However, there is nothing in the election laws of the 
Commonwealth that allows organizations which meet the 
statutory definition of “party” to narrow the field of 
potential candidates for the general election ballot. Vir- 
ginia’s general election ballot is not closed to those who 
fail to get the nomination they seek, where that nomina- 
tion takes place at a convention.!> It is a candidate's 
choice whether he or she will offer him or herself to 
Virginia voters at large, without seeking the support of a 
statutorily defined “party.”'® It is reserved to political 
parties to determine which of those individuals seeking 
their endorsement, and the benefit of their organization, 
they will support, but no political organization in the 
Commonwealth of Virginia, party or not, has the power 

into state action for purposes of federal regulation. However, 
the reasoning which supports that transformation does not sup- 
port, in a similar way, the reach of federal law to activities of 
political parties, such as conventions, which are not adminis- 
tered by the state pursuant to express statutory authority. 

15 By contrast, the general election ballot is closed to those 
who fail to win a primary nomination. Va. Code Ann. § 24.2-520. 
This point further exhibits a distinction between state action as 
represented by the state’s conduct of a primary and the lack of 
state action represented by a party’s conduct of a convention. 

16 The independent candidacies of Marshall Coleman, a 
former Republican candidate for state-wide office, and of for- 
mer Democratic Governor Douglas Wilder, in the 1994 race for 
the United States Senate, speak directly to the openness of 
Virginia’s system in this regard. 

17 

to limit or narrow the general election field by virtue of 
holding a convention. 

The Solicitor General admits that a political party has 
the power to determine the political positions it will 
advocate, its rules, and its day-to-day operations and that 
it has that power independent of its “state-delegated 
authority to place a candidate on the ballot.” Br. of the 
United States, at 21. However, he fails to provide any 
meaningful distinction between the functions he concedes 
and a party’s selection of a candidate at a convention. 
Indeed, to allege any distinction between a party’s right 
to advocate positions and its right to nominate candidates 
is to misperceive the fundamental nature of American 
democracy. It is only through their right to 
nominate candidates that political parties can transform 
their ideas into action. A party that could adopt platforms 
but not nominate candidates would be a mere debating 
society. Under the Virginia Constitution, both of those 
rights are guaranteed to the citizens of all political par- 
ties. Section 24.2-508 repeats that protection for those 
parties that meet the statutory definition, so that no one 
can mistakenly believe that meeting the definition some- 
how transforms an association of private citizens into a 
creature of the state. 

There is a critical distinction between a nomination 
that takes place by convention and one that takes place 
by primary. In a primary, the party uses state resources to 
make its selection, including the state’s voting machines, 
polling places, officers of election and rules of procedure. 
The party has no inherent right to these resources. It may 
use them only because the state has granted them the 
authority to do so. Thus, for purposes of § 51.7 of the 

18 

Justice Department’s regulations, party primaries are 
subject to the preclearance provisions of the Voting 
Rights Act. On the other hand, no group of citizens need 
await state permission to hold a convention or to decide 
among themselves who they will put forward as a candi- 
date for election. All Virginians — indeed, all Americans - 
have this right, whether they are Republicans, Democrats, 
Socialist Workers, followers of Ross Perot or members of 
a local civic league. Because no grant of state authority is 
involved, the second prong of regulation § 51.7 is not met 
and preclearance is not required. 

When the RPV decided to nominate its candidate for 
the United States Senate at a state convention, and when 
it determined that it would require payment of a delegate 
fee, it exercised the inherent authority of its members as 
citizens of the Commonwealth. The RPV did not 
“operat[e] under a grant of authority from the state.” 
Where there is no explicit or implicit grant of authority 
by the state, the actions of a political party are not within 
the reach of the preclearance requirement of § 5 of the 
Voting Rights Act, even pursuant to the broad application 
given that law by the Justice Department's regulations. 
Therefore, the decision of the District Court, dismissing 
Appellants’ action, must be affirmed. 

19 

Il. THE DECISIONS OF THIS COURT DO NOT SUP- 
PORT THE PROPOSITION THAT ACTION 
TAKEN BY A POLITICAL PARTY PURSUANT TO 
VA. CODE §§ 24.2-509 TO -511 CONSTITUTES 
STATE ACTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF APPLI- 
CATION OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT. 

Appellants turn to this Court’s early 15th Amend- 
ment jurisprudence to bolster their conclusion that Vir- 
ginia law provides the necessary delegation of authority 
to render a political party a state actor for purposes of the 
preclearance requirements of the Voting Rights Act. 
Appellants’ Br., at 11. "hey quote broad dicta, out of its 
factual context, from Terry v. Adams, 345 U.S. 461 (1963), 
Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944), and United States v. 
Classic, 313 U.S. 299 (1941), to persuade this Court that 
the party nomination activities conducted by “private 
organizations, like RPV,” become state action by virtue of 
their function of narrowing the field of potential candi- 
dates. Appellants’ Br., at 20. From that premise they 
argue that the preclearance provisions of the Voting 
Rights Act, which were enacted subsequent to the Court's 
decisions in those cases, were intended to reach decisions 
regarding conventions conducted by political parties. 
Appellants’ Br., at 20. However, neither the facts nor the 
state laws which were at issue in Classic, Smith and Terry 
bear any similarities to the facts presented to the Court in 
this case. Without any remote resemblance between the 
facts of those cases and this one, Appellants’ attempt to 
lend the force of 15th Amendment jurisprudence to their 
position must fail. 

The Court’s decision in Classic stands for the proposi- 
tion that the Constitution authorizes Congress to regulate 

20 

primaries as well as general elections. Smith, 321 U.S. at 
659. The Court explained in Smith that their determina- 
tion in Classic, that the actions of the Democratic Party in 
Louisiana with regard to the conduct of primary elections 
were subject to federal regulation, was a conclusion 
drawn from their finding that the laws of Louisiana set 
up an electoral process in which the Democratic primary 
was an integral step in the general election process. Id., at 
660. The Court in Smith went on to find that the laws of 
Texas, like the laws of Louisiana, so controlled the activ- 
ities of political parties that the challenged action by a 
political party in that state was the equivalent of action 
by the state. Id., at 663. In both Classic and Smith, unlike 
this case, state law required political parties to nominate 
their candidates by means of a primary. Classic, 313 U.S. 
at 311; Smith, 321 U.S. at 662. However, the determinative 
fact common to both those cases was that the candidate selec- 
tion process at issue was found to predetermine the outcome of 
the general election. Classic, 313 U.S. at 318; Smith, 321 U.S. 
at 664. The same cannot be said of the public electoral 
process in Virginia today, where voters enjoy a healthy, 
vigorous, competitive and open electoral process.” In 

17 This competitiveness is amply demonstrated by the 
party affiliation of Virginia’s major office-holders. Over the past 
30 years, Virginia has elected 4 Republican Governors and 4 
Democratic ones. The current Governor and Attorney General 
are Republicans; the Lt. Governor is a Democrat. One U.S. Sena- 
tor is a Republican; the other is a Democrat. There are 5 Republi- 
can Congressmen and 6 Democratic ones, a change from 
previous years when Republicans held a majority of the state’s 
Congressional seats. In the Virginia House of Delegates, there 
are 47 Republicans, 52 Democrats and one independent. In the 
State Senate, there are 18 Republicans and 22 Democrats. 

21 

Terry v. Adams, this Court reached beyond the state- 
required Democratic primary and found state action in 
the activities of a county political organization which 
held its own primary to determine who would run in the 
Democratic primary. Terry, at 475. However, the identi- 
fication of state action in order to subject the Jaybird 
Party to constitutional limitation was the single element 
of the decision upon which a majority of the Court could 
not agree. Four separate opinions were published in 
Terry. Each of three opinions expressed a different view 
as to the factual premises which allowed the Court to 
ascribe public authority to private action so that they 
might subject activities of the Jaybird Party to the 15th 
Amendment. There can be no doubt that the Court's 
willingness to do so sprang from the fact that those 
activities were so fundamentally repugnant to the values 
embodied by, and the rights protected by, the United 
States Constitution. 

In comparison to the state laws examined in Classic, 
Smith and Terry, Virginia’s minimal procedural regula- 
tions governing the public electoral process do not 
approach the closed and state-controlled, single-party 
systems which this Court confronted in those cases. There 
is not, in this case, any activity which, like that in Terry, 
necessitates the Court’s intrusion into what otherwise is 
protected as private political activity. See Eu v. County 
Democratic Comm., 489 U.S. 214 (1989) (state law ban on 
primary endorsements by political parties and laws gov- 
erning composition and governance of parties overturned 
as in violation of First and Fourteenth Amendments); 
Tashjian v. Republican Party of Conn., 479 U.S. 208 (1986) 
(holding unconstitutional a state statute that sought to 

22 

limit the body of registered voters which a party by its 
rules could permit to vote in its primaries); Democratic 
Party v. Wisconsin, 450 U.S. 107 (1981) (upholding a 
party’s right to refuse to seat delegates to its national 
convention who were selected pursuant to state law but 
in violation of party rules). Even if the authorities cited 
by Appellants could be construed to support a finding of 
“state action” in the RPV’s decisions to hold a convention 
and charge a delegate fee, only the “public electoral 
function” prong of the two-prong test of § 51.7 of the 
regulations would be satisfied. Appellants would still 
have to establish that the party’s actions were taken 
pursuant to a “grant of authority” from the Common- 
wealth. As explained by Part I of this Brief, this is a 
hurdle they cannot get over. 

Appellants chose not to rely on the Voting Rights Act 
decisions of this Court as primary support for their posi- 
tion. This is so because, in thirty years, the Court has 
never held that the preclearance requirements of the Act 
apply to a political party conducting a convention to 
nominate a candidate for public office. The Voting Rights 
Act decisions of this Court, which are cited by amici in 
support of Appellants’ position, without exception, 
extend the requirements of the Act where the actions 
complained of were taken by public officials executing 
their public duties. See, e.g., NAACP v. Election Comm'n, 
470 U.S. 166 (1985) (actions of a county setting an election 
date deemed subject to the preclearance requirements of 
§ 5 as alterations in voting procedures by state officials); 
Board of Educ. v. White, 439 U.S. 32 (1978) (county school 
board deemed a political subdivision for purposes of 
preclearance under the Voting Rights Act and required to 

ete he 

23 

submit personnel policy, regarding leave taken by 
employees to run for public office, to the Attorney Gen- 
eral in compliance with § 5 of the Act). 

In District Court cases which have extended the 
reach of § 5 of the Voting Rights Act to activities of 
political parties, the courts have done so on the basis of 
state laws and electoral processes quite different from 
that which exists in Virginia. Fortune v. Democratic Com- 
mittee, 598 F. Supp. 761 (E.D.N.Y. 1984); MacGuire v. Amos, 
343 F. Supp. 119 (M.D. Ala. 1972). In Fortune, action by a 
Democratic Party committee to change its rules regarding 
selection of its Executive Committee was subjected to the 
requirements of § 5. The Party was deemed to perform a 
“public electoral function” because New York law dele- 
gated to the Executive Committee of the Party the power 
to fill vacancies in nominations and to authorize non- 
party members to run as Democrats. Fortune, 598 F. Supp. 
at 765. However, these statutes were integrally related to 
an underlying requirement of New York Election Law 
§ 6-110 that parties nominate their candidates by state- 
sponsored primary; a requirement that Virginia law does 
not adopt and that is constitutionally suspect in light of 
Tashjian and Eu. In MacGuire, the court extended the 
requirements of § 5 of the Voting Rights Act to a change 
in party rules which governed the election of delegates to 
national conventions. However, those delegates were 
elected by means of a primary. In fact, the court in Mac- 
Guire specifically distinguished the case where a primary 
election is involved, from the case where a party selects 
delegates by convention, and noted, “[T]he Act does not 
protect one’s right to participate in local convention.” 
MacGuire, 343 F. Supp. at 121 n.3. There is no precedent 

24 

for the application of the provisions of the Voting Rights 
Act to the activities of a political party in choosing a 
nominee by convention. 

Political parties in Virginia are not creatures of the 
state, created by statute. The freedoms of association and 
speech are firmly rooted in the foundations of Virginia 
government and carefully guarded by its constitution and 
statutes. They include partisan political activity as they 
do the decisions of political organizations regarding the 
selection of candidates for public office. The selection and 
support of those candidates is a party’s most critical 
function. It is the very essence of political expression or, 
as the Court stated in Tashjian, the “crucial juncture at 
which the appeal to common principles may be translated 
into concerted action, and hence to political power in the 
community.” Tashjian, 479 U.S. at 215. The right to nomi- 
nate candidates for public office at a convention can no 
more be said to be exercised by the RPV pursuant to a 
grant of authority from the Commonwealth of Virginia 
than can a citizen’s right to freedom of speech and asso- 
ciation be described as being delegated by Congress. All 
are rights retained by the citizens of the Commonwealth 
pursuant to the terms of their constitution and are very 
carefully protected thereby and by the election laws of 
the Commonwealth. Id. 

25 

CONCLUSION 

Appellants urge this Court to adopt a radical new 
expansion of the Voting Rights Act, based on a deeply 
flawed misunderstanding of Virginia law. The people of 
Virginia have never been forced to obtain permission from 
any government — whether their state government or the 
Department of Justice —- before associating together at 
political conventions and choosing candidates for public 
office. There is no reason and no law which supports the 
imposition of so draconian a requirement now. For the 
foregoing reasons, the decision of the District Court, to 
dismiss Appellants’ action, must be affirmed. 

Respectfully submitted, 
The Commonwealth of Virginia 

By Counsel 
*James S. Gitmore, III 
Attorney General 

Davip E. ANDERSON 
Chief Deputy Attorney General 

JoHN Paut Woon ey, Jr. 
Deputy Attorney General 

WituiaM H. Hurp 
Deputy Attorney General 

MaurEEN Ritey MATSEN 
Assistant Attorney General 

Office of the Attorney General 
900 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 
(804) 786-2071 

*Counsel of Record 

