Supreme Court, U,s. 
FILED 


JUL 28 1995 


COX 


No. 94-8769 
CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


+ 


TOMMY L. RUTLEDGE, 


Petitioner, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 


¢ 


JOINT APPENDIX 


e 


Jerotp S. SoLovy Drew S. Days, III 
JENNER & BLOock Solicitor General 
One IBM Plaza Department of Justice 
Chicago, Illinois 60611 Washington, D.C. 20530 
(312) 222-9350 (202) 514-2217 

Counsel for Petitioner Counsel for Respondent 


Petition For Certiorari Filed April 3, 1995 
[Current Court procedural metadata omitted] 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO,, 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342- 


% \ 


s-*Fn 89 
io . is) ao ae 
eee gee 
Dee ne oe 
oe Se 
Bs. ss ef 
ce se fe 
8 oS ae Bae 
on ha +: § 
$2 ss 6:35 

N , oO 
se me mae 
Ro = meee. ~ 
“oe oe wee | 

= £822 ©: 
, > c 22:6 
e) @ 2 f& > > oe 
awrszns 

a eee: 7 
ioe) o fw gVU: & 
< ~ §& ~~ 
a + SO: F 
a al ; DP 

a Se 

om » WW 

bs . 6 iT?) 

—Y —O\ we 

Sag 5s o~ © 

c = wl? on 

c —E o> @ 
E8e-: Lad 
5S 3&5 5 


—— we 


er Eee 


CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE 


FILINGS - PROCEEDINGS 


12/04/91 


06/25/92 
12/29/92 


11/10/94 


01/03/95 


Second Superseding Indictment filed against 
Tommy L. Rutledge 


Jury Verdicts delivercd and filed 


Judgment filed by the United States District 
Court for the Central District of Illinois 


Opinion and Judgment filed by the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Cir- 
cuit 


Rehearing and Rehearing En Banc denied by 
the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Seventh Circuit 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE CENTRAL DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS 
AT ROCK ISLAND 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ) 
sacred ) Criminal No. 
Plaintiff, ) 91 
V. ) 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, ) VIO: Title 18, United 
SHELLY HENSON, ) States Code, Sections 


RICHARD HAGEMASTER, ) 2, 922(g) and 924(c); 
STAN WINTERS, and ) Title 21, United 


DONALD TAYLOR, ) States Code, 
) Sections 841(a)(1), 
Defendants. ) 846 and 848 


SECOND SUPERSEDING INDICTMENT 


The Grand Jury charges: 


COUNT 1 


Beginning in or about early 1988 and continuing at 
least until in or about late 1990, in Warren County, IIli- 
nois, within the Central District of Illinois, and elsewhere, 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, 


the defendant herein, knowingly and intentionally did 
engage in a continuing criminal enterprise, namely a 
series of violations of Title 21, United States Code, Sec- 
tions 841(a)(1) and 846 by repeatedly distributing and 
possessing with intent to distribute quantities of cocaine, 
which continuing series of violations were undertaken by 


me a 


3 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE 


in concert with at least five (5) other persons with respect 
to whom 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE 


occupied positions of organizer, supervisor, and other 
positions of management, and from which continuing 
series of violations 

TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE 
obtained substantial income and resources. 


2. As part of this continuing criminal enterprise, the 
defendant, 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, 


committed and caused to be committed numerous acts, 
including but not limited to the acts set forth hereinafter 
in Counts 3, 4 and 5, which counts are incorporated by 
reference as if fully set forth here. 


In violation of Title 21, United States Code, Section 
848. 


COUNT 2 


1. Beginning in or about early 1988, and continuing 
until in or about late 1990, in Warren County, within the 
Central District of Illinois and elsewhere, 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, 
SHELLY HENSON, 
RICHARD HAGEMASTER, 
STAN WINTERS, and 
DONALD TAYLOR, 


the defendants herein, did knowingly combine, conspire 
and agree with each other and both with persons known 
and with persons unknown to the grand jury to commit 
certain acts in violation of the laws of the United States, 
to-wit: (a) to knowingly possess with intent to distribute 
cocaine, a Schedule II controlled substance; and (b) to 
knowingly distribute cocaine, a Schedule II controlled 
substance, both in violation of Title 21, United States 
Code, Section 841(a)(1). 


2. Over the course of the conspiracy that the defen- 
dants distributed and caused to be distributed in excess 
of 5 kilograms of cocaine. 


OVERT ACTS 


3. In furtherance of the conspiracy and to accom- 
plish its objects of possessing with intent to distribute 
and distributing cocaine, the defendants and other per- 
sons both known and unknown to the grand jury did 
commit overt acts, including but not limited to the fol- 
lowing: 


1. In late 1988, Richard Hagemaster deliv- 
ered cocaine to an individual for Tommy Lee 
Rutledge; 


2. In early 1989, Tommy Lee Rutledge and 
Donald Taylor travelled to lowa to purchase 
cocaine; 


3. In January, 1989, Tommy Lee Rutledge 
and Shelly Henson distributed cocaine to an 
individual; 


5 


4. In mid-1990, Stan Winters delivered 


cocaine to an individual for Tommy Lee 
Rutledge. 


All in violation of Title 21, United States Code, Sec- 
tion 846. 


COUNT 3 


In or about January, 1989, in Warren County, within 
the Central District of Illinois, 


TOMMY L. RUTLEDGE, and 
SHELLY HENSON, 


the defendants herein, did knowingly distribute cocaine, 
a Schedule II controlled substance. 


In violation of Title 21, United States Code, Section 
841(a)(1) and Title 18, United States Code, Section 2. 


COUNT 4 


On or about July 14, 1989, in Warren County, within 
the Central District of Illinois, 


TOMMY L. RUTLEDGE, 
the defendant herein, did knowingly possess a firearm 
which had previously travelled in interstate or foreign 
commerce, to-wit: numerous shotguns, rifles and pistols, 
the defendant having been previously convicted under 
the laws of the State of Illinois of a crime punishable by 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year. 


In violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 
922(g). 


COUNT 5 


In or about July, 1989, in Warren County, within the 
Central District of Illinois, 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, 


the defendant herein, did knowingly use and carry a 
firearm during and in relation to a drug trafficking crime 
for which he may be prosecuted in a court of the United 
States, that is the distribution of cocaine, in violation of 
Title 21, United States Code, Section 841. 


In violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 
924(c). 


COUNT 6 


On or about July 14, 1989, in Warren County, within 
the Central District of Illinois, 


TOMMY LEE RUTLEDGE, 


the defendant herein, did knowingly use and carry a 
firearm during and in relation to a drug trafficking crime 
for which he may be prosecuted in a court of the United 
States, that is, the distribution of controlled substances 
and the possession of controlled substances with intent to 
distribute, in violation of Title 21, United States Code, 
Section 841. 


In violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 
924(c). 


A True Bill, 
/s/ Mlegible 
oreperson 
/s/ : William Roberts bY Byron Illegible 


UNITED STATES ATTORNEY 


United States District Court 
CENTRAL District of ILLINOIS 


JUDGMENT IN A 
CRIMINAL CASE 
(For Offenses Committed 
" On or After 
TOMMY L. RUTLEDGE November 1, 1987) 


Case Number: 91-40009-01 
(Filed Dec. 29, 1992) 


UNITED STATES 
OF AMERICA 


Howard Vincent Thomas 
Defendant’s Attorney 


THE DEFENDANT: Tommy L. Rutledge 


(Name of Defendant) 


pleaded guilty to count(s) 


XX was found guilty on count(s) 1-6 of the second 
superseding indictment after a plea of not guilty. 


Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such 
count(s), which involve the following offenses: 


Date 
Title & Nature of Offense Count 
Section Offense Concluded Number(s) 


21:848 Continuing Criminal 

Enterprise 12/1/90 1 
21:846 Conspiracy to 

possess with intent 

to distribute & to 

distribute concaine, a 

schedule II 

controlled substance 12/1/90 2 
21:841(a)(1) Distribution of 

& 18:2 cocaine, a schedule II 
controlled substance 12/1/90 3 


~errn""==aLe, 


9 


18:922(g) Felon in possession 


of a firearm 12/1/90 4 
18:9249(c) Armed drug 
trafficker 12/1/90 5&6 


The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 
through 12 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed 
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 


The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s) 
and is discharged as to such 


count(s). 


XX Count(s) original cts. 1.-3 & 1st superseding counts 
1-3) f#sare) dismissed on the motion of the United 
tates. 


XX It is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special 
assessment of $300.00, for count(s) 1-6 of second 
superseding indictment which shall be due X imme- 
diately __ as follows: 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall 
notify the United States attorney for this district within 
30 days of any change of name, residence, or mailing 
address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special 
assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 


10 


December 23, 1992 
Date of Imposition of 
Sentence 


/s/ Michael M. Mihm 
Signature of Judicial 


Defendant’s Soc. Sec. 
No.: 361-38-1590 


Defendant’s Date of 
Birth: 06-11-47 


Defendant’s Mailing ‘ 

Address: Ofticer 

; d MICHAEL M. MIHM- 

ao’ CHIEF, U.S. DISTRICT _ 
JUDGE 


; ' Name & Title of Judicial 
Defendant’s Residence Officer 


Address: 

December 29, 1992 

in custody Date 
IMPRISONMENT 


The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of 
the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for 
a term of life on Count 1 of 2nd Superseding Indictment: 
life without possible release to run concurrent to Count 1 
on Count 2 of the 2nd superseding indictment; life with- 
out possible release to run concurrent to Counts 1 & 2 on 
Count 3 of the 2nd superseding indictment; ten (10) years 
on Count 4 of the 2nd superseding indictmnet [sic] to run 
concurrent with counts 1, 2 & 3; sixty (60) months on 
Count 5 of the 2nd superseding indictment to run consec- 
utive to counts 1, 2, 3, 4 & 6; one hundred twenty (120) 
months on Count 6 of the 2nd superseding indictment to 
run consecutive to Counts 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5. 


The court makes the following recommendations to 
the Bureau of Prisons: 


XX The defendant is remanded to the custody of the 
United States marshal. 


=, ee 


POO ee OFS Fe > 


11 


The defendant shall surrender to the United States 
marshal for this district. 


a.m. 
at p-m. on 


as notifed by the United States marshal. 


The defendant shall surrender for service of sen- 
tence at the institution designated by the Bureau of 
Prisons. 


before 2 p.m. on 
as notified by the United States marshal. 
as notified by the probation office. 


RETURN 


I have exeucted this judgment as follows: 


Defendant delivered on to 
at , with a cer- 
tified copy of this judgment. 


United States Marshal 
By 


‘Deputy Marshal 


FINE 


The defendant shall pay a fine of $ . The 
fine includes any costs of incarceration and/or supervi- 
sion. 


12 


___This amount is the total of the fines imposed on 
individual counts, as follows: 


NO FINE, COSTS OF INCARCERATION OR RESTITU- 
TION ARE APPROPRIATE. 


The court has determined that the defendant does not 
have the ability to pay interest. It is ordered that: 


The interest requirement is waived. 
The interest requirement is modified as follows: 


This fine plus any interest required shall be paid: 

in full immediately. 

in full not later than ; 

in equal monthly installments over a period of 
months. The first payment is due on 

the date of this judgment. Subsequent payments 

are due monthly thereafter. 

in installments according to the following sched- 

ule of payments: 


If the fine is not paid, the court may sentence the defen- 
dant to any sentence which might have been originally 
imposed. See 18 U.S.C. § 3614. 


STATEMENT OF REASONS 


( ) The Court adopts the factual findings and guideline 
application in the Presentence Report. 


OR 


(X) The Court adopts the factual findings and guide- 
lines application in the Presentence Report except 
(see attachment, if necessary): 


13 


Guideline Range Determined by the Court: 
Total Offense Level: 40 


Criminal History Category: VI 


Imprisonment Range: Counts 1-4: te life menths 
Count 5: 5 years & Count 6: 10 
years 


Count 1:20 years 

Counts 2 & 3: life 

Count 5: 5 years 
Mandatory Min: Count 6: 10 years 


Supervised Release Range: 3 to 5 years 
Count 1: 3-5 years; Counts 2 & 3: N/A; Counts 4, 5 & 6: 
2-3 years 


Fine: $25,000 to $8,000,000.00 


(XX) Fine is waived or is below the guideline 
range because of the defendant's inability to 


pay. 
Restitution: $N/A 


( ) Full restitution is not ordered for the follow- 
ing reason(s): 


( ) The sentence is within the guideline range, that 
range does not exceed 24 months, and the Court 
finds no reason to depart from the sentence called 
for by application of the guidelines. 


OR 


(XX) The sentence is within the guideline range, that 
range exceeds 24 months, and the sentence is 
imposed for the following reasons: pursuant to the 
statutory enhancements of life imprisonment 


14 


OR 
The sentence departs from the guideline range 


( ) upon motion of the Government, as a result 
of defendant’s substantial assistance. 


( ) for the following reasons: 


* * * 


SOP Or wee 


15 


RE: RUTLEDGE, Tommy Lee 


ADDENDUM II TO THE PRESENTENCE REPORT 
DATED 09/23/92 AND REVISED 10/29/92 


NAME: RUTLEDGE, Tommy Lee 
DOCKET NO. 91-40009-01 


The following objections were raised by the Government 
and defendant and ruled on by the Court at the Decem- 
ber 23, 1992, Sentencing Hearing. 


OBJECTIONS 
By the Government 


I. Reference page 26, paragraph 146 


A. The Government objects to paragraph 146 as 
a consecutive term of imprisonment of 60 
months must be on Count 5, and a 
consecutive term of imprisonment of 120 
months must be imposed on Count 6. 


B. The defendant neither objects nor concurs 
with the Government. 


Court’s Findings. 
__, Court adopts probation officer's position. 
X Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


> » N 


IL. 


|>< 


Il. 


16 


By the Defendant 
Reference page 19, paragraph 105 


A. The defendant objects to paragraph 105 as 
the conviction in this paragraph was 
reversed and overturned by the State of Illi- 
nois Appellate Court. Therefore, the three 
criminal history points documented in this 
paragraph should be deleted. 


B. The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office concurs with that of the defen- 
dant. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


Reference page 19, paragraph 109 


A. The defendant objects to paragraph 109 as 
the conviction contained in this paragraph 
was reversed and overturned by the State of 
Illinois Appellate Court. Therefore, the two 
criminal history points contained in this 
paragraph should be deleted. 


B. The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office concurs with that of the defen- 
dant. 


=" 


> ? f 


> - PS 


17 


Court’s Findings 


_. Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Ill. 


Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


Reference page 21, paragraph 113 


A. The defendant objects to paragraph 113 as 


the conviction contained in this paragraph 
was in regards to his son, Thomas L. 
Rutledge Jr., and not the defendant. There- 
fore, the one criminal history point contained 
in this paragraph should be deleted. 


The position of the Government and the pro- 


bation office concurs with that of the defen- 
dant. 


Court’s Findings 


_ Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


- w N 


18 


IV. Reference page 21, paragraphs 114 and 115 


lx |x 


|>< 


A. The Defendant objects to the additional crim- 


inal history points contained in these para- 
graphs. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
toin office remains as stated in paragraphs 
114 and 115. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant’s position. 
Other: 


Reference page 23, paragraph 131 


A. The defendant objects to paragraph 131 as 


the arrest contained in this paragraph 
involved the defendant’s son, Thomas L. 
Rutledge Jr., and not the defendant. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office concurs with that of the defen- 
dant. 


Court's Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 


PF FP PF 


19 


VI. Reference pages 13, 14, and 17, paragraphs 85, 86, 
87, and 98 


A. The defendant objects to these paragraphs as 


he never made death threats against any wit- 
nesses, codefendants, or U.S. Attorneys. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraphs 
85, 86, 87, and 98. 


Court's Findings 


_ Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 


X Other: The Court found the defendant did 
threaten witnesses and codefendants. However, 


the Court 


was unable to determine if the letter 


(poem entitled “Satan Letter”) prepared by the 


defendant was intended to be threatening. 


VII. Reference Offense Conduct 


A. The defendant objects to all statements by all 


the codefendants concerning the quantities 
of cocaine, arson, and trade of weapons as all 
of these statements are untrue and based 
upon mere heresay [sic]. 


The position of the Govenrment [sic] and 
probation office remains as stated in the 


[>< |x 


> ? §& 


VII. 


Pr FP PP 
I< |x 


20 


Offense Conduct section of the Presentence 
Report. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 


Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


Reference page 3, paragraph 14 


A. 


The defendant objects to paragraph 14 as 
Richard Hagemaster never delivered cocaine 
for the defendant, Tom Rutledge and Don 
Taylor never traveled to lowa to purchase 
cocaine, Tom Rutledge and Shelly Henson 
never distributed cocaine, and Stan Winters 
never delivered cocaine for Tom Rutledge. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraph 14. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 


Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


>? PP 


21 


IX. Reference page 3, paragraph 16 


I< |x 


A. The defendant objects to paragraph 16 as he 


did not possess numerous firearms at any 
time. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraph 16. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
Court adopts Government's position. 


_ Court adopts defendant's position. 


lx |x 


Other: 


Reference page 3, paragraph 17 


A. The defendant did not carry a firearm or 


carry a firearm during and in relation to any 
drug trafficking crime. Further, the U.S. Gov- 
ernment dismissed the charges against Tom 
Rutledge for possessing firearms on or about 
July 14, 1989. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraph 17. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
Court adopts Government's position. 
Court adopts defendant's position. 


XI. 


| >< 


|>< 


XII. 


22 


Other: 


Reference page 5, paragraphs 29, 30, and 31 


A. 


The defendant objects to these paragraphs as 
Rick Bolen did not testify during the trial 
and cannot be considered a credible witness. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraphs 
29, 30, and 31. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 


Court adopts defendant's position. 


Other: 


Reference Offense Conduct 


A. 


The defendant objects to the offense conduct 
as he did not possess, sell, or distribute or 
conspire to do any drug transactions. 


The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in the Offense 
Conduct section of the Presentence Report. 


I>< |X 


PrP Se PP 


XIII. 


Pr FPF YP 
|>< 


XIV. 


23 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 


Court adopts defendant's position. 
Other: 


Reference page 5, paragraph 33 


A. 


The defendant objects to paragraph 33 as he 
did not visit Mustread in Galesburg, Illinois, 
and he did not pruchase 4 ounces of cocaine. 


The position of the Governemnt and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraph 33. 


Court’s Findings 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 


Court adopts Government's position. 


Court adopts defendant's position. 


Other: The Court found that defendant Rutledge 
did not visit Mustread in Galesburg, Illinois. 


However, the Court did find that the defendant 


purchased 4 ounces of cocaine while with Mus- 


tread. 


Reference page 6, paragraph 35 


A. 


The defendant objects to paragraph 35 as 
John Wilson was called as a defense witness 
at trial and testified that he did not trade 
defendant Rutledge a Ruger rifle for cocaine. 


24 


B. The position of the Government and proba- 
tion office remains as stated in paragraph 35. 


Court’s Findings 


ne 
| >< 


Court adopts probation officer’s position. 
2. X Court adopts Government's position. 
3. Court adopts defendant’s position. 


4. Other: 


CERTIFIED BY 


/s/ Wade B. Maddox 
WADE B. MADDOX 
U.S. Probation Officer 


Reviewed and Approved: 


/s/ Roger C. Ahrens 
ROGER C. AHRENS 
Deputy Chief U.S. Probation Officer 
Date: 12/23/92 


The Court adopts the above-listed findings on December 
23, 1992. 


/s/ Michael M. Mihm 
HONORABLE MICHAEL M. MIHM 
Chief U.S. District Judge 


a 


— 


“= 


25 


In the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Seventh Circuit 


Nos. 93-1122, 93-2652, & 93-2653 
Unrrep STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 


Tommy L. RuTLEDGE, SHELLY HENSON, 
and RICHARD HAGEMASTER 


Defendants-Appellants. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Central District of Illinois. 
No. 91 CR 40009 - Michael M. Mihm, Chief Judge. 


ARGUED SEPTEMBER 9, 1994 — Dectpep Novemser 10, 1994 


Before Bauer, and Fiaum, Circuit Judges, and Fore- 
MAN,* District Judge. 


Bauer, Circuit Judge. A jury convicted Tommy Lee 
Rutledge, Shelly Henson, Richard Hagemaster, and Stan 
Winters of conspiring to distribute cocaine in violation of 
21 U.S.C. § 848. Additionally, the jury convicted Rutledge 


* The Honorable James L. Foreman, of the United States 
District Court for the Southern District of Illinois, is sitting by 
designation. 


26 


of conducting a continuing criminal enterprise in viola- 
tion of 21 U.S.C. § 848, distribution of cocaine in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), possession of a firearm by a felon 
in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(g), and using or carrying a 
firearm during the commission of a drug felony in viola- 
tion of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). Rutledge, Henson, and Hage- 


master appealed citing a surfeit of defects in their’ 


collective prosecution. Because we find no merit to their 
arguments, we affirm. 


I. Facts 


In November 1986, after his release from prison, 
Rutledge began dealing cocaine, a formative step that 
would soon develop into an extensive drug distribution 
network. From his base in Chicago, Rutledge would 
travel every two weeks to Astoria, Illinois to deliver up to 
two ounces of cocaine to Roger Malott. Soon thereafter, 
Rutledge moved to Youngstown, Illinois and put Malott 
to work for him, delivering cocaine and collecting debts 
resulting from drug sales. Rutledge’s initial source of 
cocaine was Juan Gonzalez of Burlington, lowa, an 
acquaintance of Rutledge’s from prison and a member of 
the Latin Kings street gang based in Chicago. 


Over the next several months, Rutledge, convinced 
several people to join his enterprise, including Shelly 
Henson, Richard Hagemaster, Rick Bolen, Randy Mus- 
tread, Kim Mummert, Tom Crowe, and Stan Winters. At 
one point, to demonstrate to Bolen that he was a major 
drug dealer and to convince him to join his outfit, 
Rutledge showed Bolen fifty pounds of marijuana and 


27 


one-eighth of a pound of cocaine stored in the trunk of 
his car. 


Rutledge’s methods of doing business were in many 
ways similar to those of his peers in the drug business. 
Firearms figured prominently in Rutledge’s enterprise. 
Not only did he maintain a cache of weaponry to protect 
himself, his employees, and his inventory of drugs, 
Rutledge also trafficked in firearms. He was more than 
happy to trade firearms for cocaine and receive firearms 
in payment for cocaine shipments. 


As if the constant presence of firearms was not 
enough, Rutledge used his connections with the Latin 
Kings (presumably forged during one of his stints in 
prison) to maintain control over his operation. He fre- 
quently invoked the name of the Latin Kings to intimi- 
date employees and customers alike. Rutledge, however, 
reserved his most ominous invocation of the Latin Kings 
for his employees to ensure that no employee would 
implicate him in this drug enterprise. We will expand on 
Rutledge’s use of this tactic shortly. 


At some point during the course of his cocaine con- 
spiracy, Rutledge changed the source of his cocaine; he 
began to buy cocaine from Roberto Laurel, a member of 
the Latin Kings in Chicago. Consistent with his modus 
operandi, Rutledge also traded arms with Laurel. To exe- 
cute his transactions with Laurel, Rutledge would travel 
with, or send to Chicago in varying combinations, Malott, 
Mustread, Henson, and Mummert. 


From November 1988 through July 1989, Rutledge’s 
base of operations was a trailer he shared with Mummert, 


28 


Henson, and Hagemaster in Youngstown. Rutledge sup- 
ported these three and provided them with cocaine. At 
this time, Rutledge employed Malott and Crowe in addi- 
tion to his roommates. Henson, however, moved out of 
the trailer in July 1989 and terminated her association 
with Rutledge. 


Henson’s departure was likely hastened when 
Rutledge was arrested in the trailer in July 1989 by the 
Illinois State Police on the basis of statements made by 
Malott that Rutledge was involved with drugs and guns. 
The arresting officers discovered Rutledge’s cache of 
weapons, but apparently found no drugs. When he 
learned of Malott’s statement to the police, Rutledge 
threatened Malott with serious harm if Malott testified 
against him in court. Rutledge made similar threats to 
Mummert. Rutledge’s intimidation succeeded; both Mal- 
ott and Mummert testified before a state grand jury that 
Rutledge was not involved with drugs or guns. Rutledge 
was subsequently released. 


Rutledge continued his drug operation until he was 
arrested by federal authorities in December 1990. 
Rutledge, Henson, Hagemaster, and Winters were 
indicted in February 1991. Malott, Mummert, Mustread, 
and a frequent customer of Rutledge’s, Michael Wright, 
cooperated with the government and testified as to their 
experiences with Rutledge and his drug ring. 


29 


II. Analysis 
A. Tommy Lee Rutledge 


Rutledge’s first argument is that he was denied a fair 
trial because two or three jurors encountered Rutledge in 
handcuffs outside the courtroom during the course of the 
trial. He contends that the trial court should have voir 
dire’'d those jurors to determine whether Rutledge was 
prejudiced by this incident. As we shall explain, Rutledge 
received a trial as fair as possible given his own conduct, 
and the trial court handled the situation perfectly. 


~ On the first afternoon of the trial, Rutledge made a 
statement to the Deputy United States Marshals to the 
effect of “what if I take off now?”! While the deputies 
believed that Rutledge was not serious in his threat, they 
discussed the situation and decided that Rutledge must 
be handcuffed going to and from the courtroom. On the 
morning of the second day of the trial, the prosecutor 
brought this incident to the attention of the trial judge, 
who approved handcuffing Rutledge. 


To ensure that no jurors saw Rutledge being taken 
out of the courtroom in handcuffs, the deputies adopted 
certain procedures for bringing Rutledge in and out of 
the courtroom. Prior to taking Rutledge out of the court- 
room, one deputy would check the outer hallway to 
ascertain whether any jurors were present. If the hallway 
was clear, the deputies would then lead Rutledge out of 


1 Deputy Kevin Jackson reported that he did not recall 
exactly what Rutledge had said but that it was a statement 
similar to “what if I take off now?” or “what if I flee?” 


30 


the courtroom into that outer hallway. Unfortunately, 
these measures were not foolproof. 


At one point during the trial, two or three jurors 
briefly saw Rutledge in handcuffs. The deputies followed 
the procedures they had adopted for Rutledge, but the 
jurors entered the hallway just after it was checked. It is 
unclear whether at first glance the jurors necessarily 
knew that Rutledge was handcuffed; just to make sure 
that none of the jurors missed it, Rutledge raised his 
handcuffed hands in an exaggerated manner to show the 
jurors his handcuffs. Rutledge was immediately led away 
so the: no additional jurors were treated to a similar 
demonstration. 


The parties immediately brought this incident to the 
attention of the trial judge. The trial judge then offered to 
give the jury a cautioning instruction regarding the inci- 
dent. He continued: 


What I would suggest is that I simply make a 
statement to the jury that it has come to my 
attention that some of the jurors may have 
become aware of the fact that he is in custody 
and that’s a reality in this case and I will caution 
them that the fact that he is in custody should 
not in any way be considered by them as any 
evidence or suggestion of guilt. Is that how you 
want to handle it or would you suggest some- 
thing else? 


After conferring with his client, Rutledge’s counsel 
stated: “We would like to just skip it, your Honor.” 


Rutledge claims that such a sighting by jurors of a 
defendant in handcuffs is inherently prejudiciai. There- 
fore, he argues that a curative instruction from the trial 


31 


judge is obviously insufficient and that, in this case, the 
trial judge, sua sponte, should have voir dire’d the jurors in 
question. Rutledge did not request such a voir dire from 
the judge at the time it happened. We believe this omis- 
sion combined with Rutledge’s failure to present any 
evidence from which we might find that he suffered 
actual prejudice resulting from this incident demonstrates 
that this argument lacks merit. 


While we believe that this may be the first time that 
we have been squarely presented with this issue, we 
recently noted that “[cjourts have generally found inad- 
vertent sightings of shackles by the jury to be insufficient 
to demonstrate prejudice.” Woods v. Thieret, 5 F.3d 244, 
248 n.5 (7th Cir. 1993) (citing Harrell v. Israel, 672 F.2d 632, 
637 (7th Cir. 1982) (citations omitted)). We therefore cate- 
gorically reject Rutledge’s argument that prejudice auto- 
matically inheres in a trial when a juror inadvertently 
sees a defendant in handcuffs. Our position is in accord 
with other circuits that have addressed this issue. See e.g., 
United States v. Ware, 897 F.2d 1538, 1542 (10th Cir.), cert. 
denied, 496 U.S. 930 (1990); United States v. Garcia-Rosa, 
876 F.2d 209, 236 (1st Cir. 1989); United States v. Hallibur- 
ton, 870 F.2d 557, 561 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 492 U.S. 910 
(1989). In situations such as this one, we hold that the 
defendant bears the burden of proving that he has suf- 
fered actual prejudice. See, e.g., Garcia-Rosa, 876 F.2d at 
236. Here, neither Rutledge nor the record indicate that 
Rutledge has suffered actual prejudice. 


The trial judge, in the best position to evaluate such 
things, stated on the record that he believed that 
Rutledge suffered no prejudice. In addition, the trial 


32 


judge not only offered a curative instruction, but speci- 
fically asked Rutledge’s counsel what she wanted done. 
In a decision that was likely well-informed by her trial 
experience and reached after consultation with her client, 
Rutledge’s counsel decided that dwelling on the incident 
was unwise. Her failure to request the voir dire at this 
time supports our belief that Rutledge’s encounter with 
the jurors had no effect on his trial and that this encoun- 
ter could only have prejudiced him if the jurors had been 
browbeaten about it. 


The task of trying cases is one of dizzying pace and 
fraught with unexpected twists and turns. All parties to 
this trial (save Rutledge himself) surely sought to prevent 
the very incident that happened in this case, but it hap- 
pened nevertheless. The trial judge acted swiftly and 
offered Rutledge the remedy of his choice. If Rutledge’s 
counsel had been hell-bent on voir dire’ing the jurors, she 
had ample opportunity to request that of the trial judge. 
Rutledge and his counsel thought it best to put the inci- 
dent behind them and move on; the trial judge agreed. 
We believe Rutledge suffered no prejudice, that the trial 
judge and Rutledge’s counsel recognized that there was 
no prejudice and that the trial judge handled this incident 


properly.? 


2 Because Rutledge suffered no prejudice from the jurors’ 
inadvertent sighting of him in handcuffs, we refrain from dis- 
cussing Rutledge’s role in creating whatever effect there may 
have been on his trial. Suffice it to say that defendants are well- 
advised to act as diligently as the court personnel in avoiding 
this type of incident. 


33 


Rutledge next complains of the admission of certain 
testimony by Malott linking Rutledge with the Latin 
Kings. He claims that this testimony was offered to 
inflame the jury, that its prejudicial effect greatly out- 
weighed its probative value, and that it should have been 
excluded, apparently pursuant to Federal Rule of Evi- 
dence 403. We disagree. 


Malott testified that after Rutledge was arrested in 
July 1989, he cooperated with agents from the Illinois 
State Police by giving them a statement concerning 
Rutledge’s drug operation. Later, Malott discovered that 
Rutledge had obtained a copy of Malott’s statement upon 
his release from prison. Rutledge then contacted Malott 
by telephone to inform Malott that Rutledge had a bullet 
with Malott’s name on it. The two men met, and Rutledge 
showed Malott his copy of Malott’s statement. Rutledge 
then waived a handgun at Malott and said: 


We're going to have to get this straightened out. 
You know, I can have the Latin Kings down here 
in two hours to take care of this. I’m not going 
to jail for twenty years over your lying, making 
these kind of statements. 


One week after Rutledge threatened Malott, Malott 
discovered a copy of his statement affixed to the side 
window of his truck; the letters “LK” were spray-painted 
in red on the statement. Two days later, three hispanic 
men, believed by Malott to be members of the Latin 
Kings, drove their care into the driveway of Malott’s 
home. Malott scared them off by brandishing a shotgun. 


Rutledge’s threats were enough to cause Malott to 
perjure himself before the state grand jury by denying 


34 


that Rutledge operated a drug ring. At trial, the govern- 
ment offered Malott as one of its principal witnesses 
against Rutledge and the others. The government offered 
Malott’s testimony describing Rutledge’s threats, which 
necessarily invoked Rutledge’s gang affiliation, to meet 
what it expected to be vigorous attempts to impeach 
Malott on the basis of his prior inconsistent statements 
before the state grand jury. Over objections, the trial 
judge allowed Malott to testify to Rutledge’s threats. As 
expected, counsel for each defendant extensively cross- 
examined Malott about his previous perjury. 


Rule 403 operates to exclude otherwise relevant evi- 
dence only if its probative value is substantially out- 
weighed by its potential to create unfair prejudice to the 
defendant. In this instance, the trial court determined 
that Malott’s testimony regarding Rutledge’s threats 
should not be excluded. We review the trial court’s deci- 
sion to admit evidence for an abuse of that court’s discre- 
tion. See, e.g., United States v. Williams, 31 F.3d 522, 527 
(7th Cir. 1994). It is clear to us that the district court did 
not abuse its discretion in admitting this aspect of Mal- 
ott’s testimony. 


Naturally, the vast majority of the government's evi- 
dence against a defendant is prejudicial to him. That’s the 
idea. But in order to find that a particular piece of evi- 
dence must be excluded pursuant to Rule 403, its proba- 
tive value must be insignificant compared to its 
inflammatory nature so that the evidence unfairly preju- 
dices the defendant. That is not the case here. The gov- 
ernment had a right to rehabilitate Malott as a witness by 
explaining his prior perjury; to do so, Malott was 
required to recount the reasons that he had perjured 


35 


himself. Rutledge does not deny that Malott’s testimony 
is true, he simply claims that his testimony is too prejudi- 
cial. 


Rutledge seems to argue that simply connecting a 
defendant with a gang constitutes unfair prejudice that 
substantially outweighs any probative value. We have 
approved, however, the admissibility of evidence of gang 
affiliation in a number of cases for a number of purposes. 
See, e.g., United States v. Rodriguez, 925 F.2d 1049, 1053 (7th 
Cir. 1991); United States v. Lewis, 910 F.2d 1367, 1372 (7th 
Cir. 1990) (collecting cases). More specifically, we have 
permitted its admissibility to explain a witness’s prior 
inconsistent statement made out of fear of gang retalia- 
tion. United States ex rel. Garcia v. Lane, 698 F.2d 900, 902 
(7th Cir. 1983). Malott’s testimony regarding Rutledge’s 
threats was highly probative evidence explaining Mal- 
ott’s prior inconsistent statement, and the trial court did 
not abuse its discretion in admitting it. 


Rutledge’s third argument is that because Rick Bolen 
did not testify at trial or at the sentencing hearing all 
statements attributed to him in the presentence report 
should have been omitted. He claims that because he was 
unable to cross-examine Bolen, Bolen’s statements do not 
have the requisite indicia of reliability. Rutledge misper- 
ceives the reliability requirement. 


At the sentencing hearing, Rutledge objected to the 
district court’s consideration of Bolen’s statements in the 
presentence report. Bolen’s statements told of the inci- 
dent in which Rutledge showed Bolen the marijuana and 
cocaine in the trunk of Rutledge’s car and of other occa- 
sions on which Bolen accompanied Rutledge to Iowa to 


36 


deliver or obtain cocaine. To establish Bolen’s reliability, 
the government called the case agent, Bruce Harmening. 
Harmening testified that he had compared the statements 
in the presentence report given by Bolen with the state- 
ments and trial testimony of other witnesses and with the 
physical evidence and found no significant inconsisten- 
cies. He testified that there were some minor inconsisten- 
cies, such as a variance of a few days with respect to 
dates of excursions to obtain drugs and slight differences 
in estimations as to the amount of cocaine Rutledge sold 
weekly. The district court found Harmening’s testimony 
sufficient to support the probation officer’s position in 
the presentence report. 


The court then informed Rutledge that in order to 
challenge Bolen’s statements, he must present evidence in 
addition to a simply denial demonstrating that Bolen’s 
statements were not true. Rutledge discussed with his 
counsel whether to present any such evidence during a 
brief recess. They then informed the court that they 
would not present any evidence. 


The district court conducted this aspect of Rutledge’s 
sentencing hearing precisely in accordance with the con- 
trolling case in this circuit, United States v. Coonce, 961 
F.2d 1268 (7th Cir. 1992). In Coonce, we articulated the 
proper procedure for contesting facts upon which a dis- 
trict court relies to sentence a defendant. We stated: 


First, the defendant must challenge the facts in 
the presentence report . . . as being unreliable or 
incorrect. Having done so, and assuming the 
facts as presented bear sufficient indicia of 
reliability, the defendant must carry the burden 
of presenting some evidence beyond a mere 


37 


denial calling the reliability or correctness of the 
alleged facts into question. If the defendant 
meets this burden of production, the burden of 
persuasion then shifts back to the prosecution, 
who in turn must convince the court that the 
facts presented by the government are actually 
true. 


Id. at 1280. Rutledge contends that the facts he has called 
into question, Bolen’s statements, do not bear an indicia 
of reliability sufficient to trigger his burden of production 
under Coonce. He claims that Bolen’s statements are sim- 
ply naked assertions; as a result, he asserts that Coonce 
permits a mere denial to render them inapplicable in 
sentencing. 


As an initial matter, Bolen’s statements are not sim- 
ply naked assertions. Plenty of other witnesses intimately 
involved in Rutledge’s operation testified about his drugs 
and guns; that Bolen’s statements are consistent with 
these other accounts indicates that they are based in fact. 
See United States v. Westbrook, 986 F.2d 180 (7th Cir. 1993). 
In addition, this consistency coupled with Harmening’s 
testimony adequately support the district court’s finding 
that Bolen’s statements bear a sufficient indicia of 
reliability. Rutledge’s challenge to these statements, 
therefore, fails. 


Rutledge’s fourth and final argument is that his Fifth 
Amendment rights have been violated because he was 
convicted and sentenced for operating a continuing crim- 
inal enterprise and for conspiracy to distribute cocaine. 
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment 
protects defendants from being tried and punished for 
the same offense twice. While the conspiracy charge is a 


38 


lesser included offense of the CCE charge, double jeop- 
ardy is not implicated as long as district court does not 
impose cumulative sentences for the crimes. United States 
v. Bond, 847 F.2d 1233, 1238 (7th Cir. 1988); see also United 
States v. Jeffers, 432 U.S. 137, 157-58 (1977). This is 
because: 


[O]ne can both conspire (agree to run a drug 
business) and run a continuing criminal enter- 
prise (strike the agreement and succeed)... . 
The statutes reach the same group of persons. It 
is not illogical to convict a person of both agree- 
ing to do something (§ 846) and succeeding on a 
grand scale (§ 848). 


Bond, 847 F.2d at 1238. Concurrent sentences may be 
imposed for conspiracy and CCE provided the cumula- 
tive punishment does not exceed the maximum under the 
CCE act. United States v. Bafia, 949 F.2d 1465, 1473 (7th Cir. 
1991); Bond, 847 F.2d at 1239. 


In this case, the district court sentenced Rutledge to 
life imprisonment on his CCE conviction and life 
imprisonment on the conspiracy conviction to run con- 
currently with the CCE sentence. The maximum penalty 
under the CCE act at the time of Rutledge’s sentencing 
was life imprisonment. Thus, by imposing concurrent 
sentences, the district court did not impose a cumulative 
penalty, and Rutledge’s sentence is proper. 


B. Shelly Henson 


Henson’s first argument is that the government's evi- 
dence against her is insufficient to support her convic- 
tion. In her brief, she went so far as to say: “Clearly, there 


39 


was no specific evidence as to Shelly Henson’s role in 
regard to said conspiracy.” We disagree; the government 
presented evidence that overwhelmingly supports Hen- 
son’s conviction. 


In reviewing Henson’s claim, we must review the 
evidence in a light most favorable to the government, 
drawing all reasonable inferences. Then, we must ascer- 
tain whether any rational trier of fact could have found 
the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 


The government's evidence featured testimony from 
several witnesses intimately involved in Rutledge’s drug 
conspiracy. Kim Mummert testified that Henson obtained 
cocaine for Rutledge, sold drugs that she received from 
Rutledge while living with him in the trailer, and helped 
pay the bills with money she earned selling Rutledge’s 
drugs. Randy Mustread testified that Henson sold 
cocaine for Rutledge, delivered cocaine for him, and col- 
lected payment. Roger Malott testified that Henson cut 
cocaine for Rutledge, delivered cocaine for him, and col- 
lected payment. Malott also testified that Henson kept 
Rutledge’s accounts regarding drug transactions. Michael 
Wright testified that Henson arranged cocaine sales for 
Rutledge and collected payments. The government's evi- 
dence easily supports Henson’s conviction. 


Henson next argues that the district court abused its 
discretion by admitting evidence of a pistol she had in 
her possession. Although the district court provided the 
jury with several instructions regarding the limited pur- 
poses for which they could consider this evidence, Hen- 
son maintains that the jury was unable to follow these 


40 


instructions. The district court properly admitted this 
evidence. 


The gun was obtained by authorities from Henson 
when she and Wright were arrested in early 1989 in 
possession of one ounce of cocaine. The .25 caliber semi- 
automatic handgun and ammunition were found in Hen- 
son’s purse. The police also found in Henson’s purse 
Western Union money transfers which represented pay- 
ment for drugs that Rutledge purchased from Randy 
Mustread. 


The gun was introduced by Illinois State Police Spe- 
cial Agent Bruce Kettlekamp, who testified that he had 
discovered the gun in Henson’s purse during the course 
of her arrest. Henson’s counsel objected to the gun’s 
relevancy, and district court overruled the objection and 
admitted the testimony for the limited purposes of show- 
ing a connection between Rutledge and Henson and for 
supporting the weapons charges against Rutledge. An 
ATF agent then testified as to the chain of custody of the 
gun, at which time the district court again reminded the 
jury of the limited purposes of the testimony regarding 
the gun. In addition, Wright, Mustread, and Malott all 
testified that Henson carried the gun, which was given to 
her by Rutledge ostensibly for her protection. During the 
testimony of each of these witnesses, the district court 
again admonished to consider the testimony for Henson's 
connection to Rutledge and with respect to Rutledge’s 
gun charge. 


It is clear that the district court addressed this situa- 


tion perfectly. The government properly presented this 
evidence to demonstrate Henson’s role in Rutledge’s 


41 


drug enterprise and to connect Rutledge to the gun. Any 
potential for prejudice to Henson was snuffed out by the 
district court’s repeated warnings to the jury. And, of 
course, we presume that jurors do what they are told. See, 
e.g., United States v. Scott, 19 F.3d 1238, 1244 (7th Cir. 1994) 
(citations omitted). The district court therefore properly 
admitted the evidence of the gun. 


Henson next argument centers on a statement made 
by a prosecutor during closing argument. At that time, 
one of the prosecutors commented on the credibility of a 
defense witness. The prosecutor commented that this wit- 
ness claimed that she saw Roger Malott near her home 
during the time in which Malott was in custody. The 
prosecutor then stated that “[t]he defense should have 
been embarrassed to hear her say that.” Henson’s counsel 
immediately objected, and the district court sustained the 
objection. The prosecutor went on to state that the wit- 
ness’ testimony was a physical impossibility, to which 
Henson’s counsel did not object. Henson argues that the 
prosecutor’s statement was so prejudicial to her that she 
requires a new trial. 


We evaluate the prosecutor’s comments to determine 
whether they were improper. United States v. Neely, 980 
F.2d 1074, 1084-85 (7th Cir. 1993). If so, a new trial is 
warranted only if “the prosecutor’s comments infected 
the trial with unfairness as to make the resulting convic- 
tion a denial of due process.” Darden v. Wainwright, 477 
U.S. 168, 181 (1986) (citation omitted). The prosecutor’s 
comments in this case, while improper, do not remotely 
rise to the level of a due process violation. They were 
directed at a witness for another defendant and did not 
bear at all on the evidence presented against Henson. 


42 


Also, the judge quickly granted Henson’s counsel's objec- 
tion, and Henson’s counsel had ample opportunity to 
counter the prosecutor’s comments during the course of 
her argument. Finally, the evidence was so over- 
whelmingly against Henson on the conspiracy charge on 
which she was convicted that this minor transgression 
did not affect her guilty verdict at all. 


Henson’s last argument, also advanced by Richard 
Hagemaster, is that the district court erred in giving the 
government's multiple conspiracy instruction rather than 
one she preferred. Henson claimed that she was not 
involved in Rutledge’s cocaine conspiracy, but in differ- 
ent conspiracies for which she was not prosecuted; she 
preferred a detailed instruction that she believed was 
necessary to present her defense. Notwithstanding the 
overwhelming evidence of her participation in Rutledge’s 
cocaine operation, the district court, who admitted doubt 
of its necessity, gave the government’s multiple conspir- 
acy instruction. Again, the district court made the proper 
decision. 


In reviewing the fitness of jury instructions to which 
objections were properly raised in the proceedings below, 
“we must determine from looking at the charge as a 
whole, ‘whether the jury was misled in any way and 
whether it had understanding of the issues and its duty 
to determine those issues.’” United States v. Boykins, 9 
F.3d 1278, 1285 (quoting Trustees of Indiana Univ. v. Aetna 
Casualty and Sur. Co., 920 F.2d 429, 437 (7th Cir. 1990)). A 
defendant is not entitled to have a particular instruction 
presented to the jury, but only to have her theory of the 
defense presented. United States v. Boucher, 796 F.2d 972, 
976 (7th Cir. 1986). In these matters, the district court is 


43 


given substantial discretion with respect to the specific 
wording of the instruction. United States v. Penson, 896 
F.2d 1087, 1090 (7th Cir. 1990). 


The instruction tendered by the government and 
given by the district court informed the jury that if it 
should find that a particular defendant did not join the 
conspiracy that was charged in the indictment, it must 
find the defendant not guilty of conspiracy. This is the 
very instruction of which we approved in similar circum- 
stances in Penson, 896 F.2d at 1091. Since we are not sure 
that a multiple conspiracy instruction is even warranted 
in this case, we agree with the district court that govern- 
ment’s tendered instruction “is all any defendant could 
legitimately ask for in relation to this type of instruction.” 
Henson and Hagemaster were not prejudiced by the dis- 
trict court’s failure to give their preferred multiple con- 
spiracy instruction. 


C. Richard Hagemaster 


Hagemaster’s principal argument is that the district 
court erred in admitting Michael Wright's in-court identi- 
fication of Hagemaster. He claims that Wright's identi- 
fication is unreliable and therefore constitutes a denial of 
his Fifth Amendment Due Process rights. This argument 
is without merit. 


During the course of the trial, Wright described a 
particular drug transaction that transpired in 1988 in 
which he gave money to Henson to deliver to Rutledge in 
exchange for an ounce of cocaine. Wright testified that he 
had waited several hours and after calling Rutledge twice 


44 


to remind him of his order, Rutledge assured Wright that 
the courier was on his way. Wright continued: 


Forty-five minutes to an hour later, a car pulled 
up in the driveway, an old VW bug with no 
fenders on the rear end, and a tall, skinny guy 
got out wearing a fatigue jacket, pearl earring in 
his ear. Like I say, a very slender person. Crowe 
let him in. He introduced me to — I believe his 
name was — his name was Rick at the time. And 
we sat there and talked and, anyway, this guy, 
this Rick or the guy that had brought the dope, 
he threw it out on the coffee table and he said, 
“This is what it is.” 


Wright testified that he was displeased with the quality of 
the cocaine and that Hagemaster must have realized 
Wright’s displeasure by the expression on his face 
because Hagemaster informed Wright that if the cocaine 
was unacceptable, Rutledge would return Wright's 
money. Wright then identified Hagemaster, in court and 
seated at the defense table, as the cocaine courier. 


On cross-examination, Hagemaster’s counsel pressed 
Wright for more details of the transaction. Wright happily 
obliged. Wright described Hagemaster’s clothing again 
and testified that Hagemaster sat for thirty minutes in his 
living room where there were three or four lamps provid- 
ing light. Wright also testified that he had seen Hagemas- 
ter on another occasion at Rutledge’s trailer when Wright 
was there to obtain cocaine. 


Wright also testified that he had originally described 
Hagemaster to investigating agents in 1990. Also, in a 
subsequent meeting with them, the agents showed 
Wright a single photograph and asked him whether he 


45 


recognized the person in the photograph. The person in 
the photograph was Richard Hagemaster, although the 
agents did not so identify him to Wright. It is the presen- 
tation of the single photograph of Hagemaster to Wright 
that Hagemaster claims was so suggestive as to render 
Wright's in-court identification of Hagemaster unreliable. 


The admissibility of a challenged in-court identifica- 
tion is governed by a two-part test. First, we must deter- 
mine whether the initial out-of-court identification was 
unduly suggestive; here, the presentation of the single 
photograph of Hagemaster. If so, the in-court identifica- 
tion is inadmissible unless it is so reliable, in view of the 
totality of the circumstances, as to prevent a substantial 
likelihood of misidentification. Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 
U.S. 98, 107-14 (1977). The district court determined that 
the presentation of the single photograph of Hagemaster 
to Wright was unduly suggestive, and we do not dis- 
agree. But we also agree with the district court that 
Wright’s in-court identification of Hagemaster was suffi- 
ciently reliable that it withstands Hagemaster’s due pro- 
cess challenge. 


Our inquiry into the reliability of Wright's in-court 
identification of Hagemaster is guided by several factors: 
the opportunity of the witness to view the criminal at the 
time of the crime, the witness’ degree of attention, the 
accuracy of his prior description of the criminal, the level 
of certainty demonstrated at the confrontation, and the 
time of the crime and the confrontation. United States v. 
Larkin, 978 F.2d 964, 970 (7th Cir. 1992) (citing Manson, 


46 


432 U.S. at 114). In this case, the totality of the circum- 
stances, within the framework of these factors, demon- 
strates that Wright's in-court identification was indeed 
reliable. 


Wright testified that he spent thirty minutes with 
Hagemaster in his well-lighted living room at the time of 
the crime. This provided Wright with ample opportunity 
to view Hagemaster. Wright's testimony indicates that he 
was quite attentive during the commission of the crime. 
He described Hagemaster’s VW bus and his appearance 
in significant detail. In addition, Wright’s belief that 
Hagemaster could see the displeasure register on 
Wright's face indicates that the two men were in reason- 
ably close proximity with one another, each capable of 
noticing the other’s features and expressions. And while 
the lapse of time between the time of the commission of 
the crime and the trial is not insignificant, Wright's 
detailed description of Hagemaster and his conviction 
that the man at the defense table was Hagemaster demon- 
strate that the identification was reliable. The district 
court properly admitted Wright's in-court identification 
of Hagemaster. Hagemaster’s other claims are without 
merit and do not require discussion. 


Ill. Conclusion 


For the foregoing reasons, the convictions of Tommy 
Lee Rutledge, Shelly Henson, and Richard Hagemaster 
are 


AFFIRMED. 


A true Copy: 
Teste: 


47 


Clerk of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 


48 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 


For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 


January 3, 1995. 
Before 
Hon. WILLIAM J. BAUER, Circuit Judge 
Hon. JOEL M. FLAUM, Circuit Judge 
Hon. JAMES L. FOREMAN, District Judge* 


UNITED STATES Appeal from the United 


) 
OF AMERICA, ) States District Court for the 
Plaintiff-Appellee, ‘ Central District of Illinois, 
No. 93-1122 v. ) 91 CR 40009 
TOMMY L. RUTLEDGE ) Michael M. Mihm, Chief 
) Judge. 
Defendant-Appellant. ) 
ORDER 


On consideration of the petition for rehearing with sug- 
gestion for rehearing en banc filed in the above-captioned 
case by defendant-appellant, a majority of the judges on the 
original panel have voted to deny and none of the judges in 
active service has requested a vote thereon. 


Therefore, the petition for rehearing with suggestion 
for rehearing en banc is DENIED. 


* The Honorable James L. Foreman, United States District Judge 
for the Southern District of Illinois, is sitting by designation. 


[Current Court procedural order omitted] 


