94-12 pom 

U.S. 

FILED 

meReRATCERIIE Wes 
In The OFFICE Ui ‘HE CLERK 

Supreme Court of the Uni 

October Term, 1994 
¢ 

STATE OF FLORIDA, Lawton Chiles, Governor, 

Cross-Petitioners, . 

SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA, 

Cross-Respondents. 

° 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Danie. E. LUNGREN 

Attorney General of the 

State of California 

THomas F. Gepe 

Special Assistant Attorney General 

Counsel of Record for Amici States 
1515 K Street 
Sacramento, CA 95614 
Telephone: (916) 323-7355 

Additional Counsel Listed Inside 

COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 

a\@ 

Jimmy Evans 
Attorney General 
State of Alabama 

Bruce M. BoTEeLHo 
Attorney General 
State of Alaska 

GRANT Woops 
Attorney General 
State of Arizona 

WINSTON BRYANT 
Attorney General 
State of Arkansas 

Gate A. Norton 
Attorney General 
State of Colorado 

RICHARD BLUMENTHAL 
Attorney General 
State of Connecticut 

Larry ECHOHAwk 
Attorney General 
State of Idaho 

RicHARD P. IeyYous 
Attorney General 
State of Louisiana 

MicHaet E. CARPENTER 
Attorney General 
State of Maine 

Scott HARSHBARGER 
Attorney General 
State of Massachusetts 

FRANK J. KELLEY 
Attorney General 
State of Michigan 

Mike Moore 
Attorney General 
State of Mississippi 

JoserpH P. Mazurek 
Attorney General 
State of Montana 

Don STENBERG 
Attorney General 
State of Nebraska 

FRANKIE Sue Det Papa 
Attorney General 
State of Nevada 

Susan B. LovinGc 
Attorney General 
State of Oklahoma 

Jerrrey B. Pine 
Attorney General 
State of Rhode Island 

Mark BARNETT 
Attorney General 
State of South Dakota 

DAN MoRrALEs 
Attorney General 
State of Texas 

JoserpH B. Meyer 
Attorney General 
State of Wyoming 

—_—— 

pie Lee 

I. 

Il. 

Ill. 

QUESTIONS PRESENTED 

Upon dismissal of a suit on Eleventh Amendment 
grounds, may an Indian tribe directly request the 
prescription of gambling procedures from the Secre- 
tary of Interior? 

Does Eleventh Amendment immunity invalidate 
statutory provisions, allowing the courts to fashion 
new remedies not prescribed by statute? 

Should this Court uphold the Eleventh Amendment 
sovereign immunity of States from suit in federal 
court by Indian Tribes under the Federal Indian 
Gaming Regulatory Act? 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED . .60<:0ccscecneeeun eee i 
INTEREST OF AMICI STATES ....cccsccvcstevcseen 1 
SUGGESTION FOR CONSOLIDATION ............. 3 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENGE « «+ 0<ssytncssseeeneel 4 

ARGUMENT IL. 

UPON DISMISSAL OF A SUIT UNDER IGRA ON 
ELEVENTH AMENDMENT GROUNDS, AN 
INDIAN TRIBE IS NOT ENTITLED TO THE PRE- 
SCRIPTION OF GAMING PROCEDURES BY THE 
SECRETARY OF INTERMIM. ..csccossedatneeueens 

ARGUMENT II. 

ELEVENTH AMENDMENT IMMUNITY IS A 
JURISDICTIONAL BAR AND DOES NOT INVALI- 
DATE STATUTORY PROVISIONS AS UNCON- 
STITUTIONAL .....cscccsvncseeseeese eenennEEEE 

ARGUMENT III. 

THIS COURT SHOULD RESOLVE THE CON- 
FLICTS IN THE COURTS OF APPEAL BY 
UPHOLDING ELEVENTH AMENDMENT SOVER- 
EIGN IMMUNITY ......ccscosestneegeueewannenee 

CONCLUSION oo... cc0cccvcculaemeaa SS ee 

10 

iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

CaAsEs 
Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U.S. 685 (1987)..... 10 

American Federation of Gov. Employees v. Pierce, 697 
Es Me ME Sob eskeestscctecccccconece 9 

Apache Tribe of Mescalero Reservation v. New Mexico, 
CIV 92-076-JC, Slip Op. (DC N.M., Dec. 22, 

SEU MEE UE ENG ebdes cepeteT ele sseccocsscccsess 11 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976)...............04:. 10 
Cabazon Band of Mission Indians v. California, 480 

ES. CU bwdeeeeesycaVed¢essccdesecccces 8 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe v. South Dakota, 3 F.3d 

EE Oe eee 12 
Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123 (1908).................. 13 
Federal Radio Com. v. General Electric Co., 281 U.S. 

EES EES EET S TSE POL ETTE TLE TT TT 11 
eee ee ee, ee WP. Ge CIDEZ). 2... ccc ccccccccees 11 
Landgraf v. USI Film Products, __ U.S. __, 62 

Spates Gee GGT 2M, 19PE) .... 2. crc cccccccccess 8 
Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361 (1989)......... Y 
Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. Transportation Workers, 

Te banc nee sheeessenceccccccccce. 8 
Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388 (1935)..... 10 
Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Co., 491 U.S. 1 (1989)..... 13 

Poarch Band of Creek Indians v. Alabama, 11th Cir. 
EEN epee beet Veersccececccccceces 1,3 

iv 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 

Page 
Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority v. Metcalf 
& Eddy, Inc., 506 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 684, 121 
Rae GP MUOUUE hnctcctncccscivcvanpetatetects, 12 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 
BORG CREM Cae TIP cnc scistedessccces 1, 3, 6, 10, 13 
Seminole Tribe of Indians v. State of Florida, 801 
PSapp. GS CURT. BPE). coc ccccsccvcccevccccace 12 
Spokane Tribe of Indians v. State of Washington, __ 
POG.» SOPE WL, SUGGES CIID 6 in ccccvees ccs. 12 
Sycuan Band of Mission Indians v. Roache, 788 
PS. BGG GAD. Cal. BOR cos cvcctvceseseccccess 8 
United States v. Sisson, 399 U.S. 267 (1970)........... 12 

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 

US. Canst., Acthche GE, BS A, GPO Boe iss ec ccccecss 11 
U.S. Const., Eleventh Amendment ...1, 3, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 

STATUTES 

SS Us BS Bie Oe Wa ieee che ccc desescde wexthipans 3, 4 
Se i. Be re hs abd 044s ce Binks évuse 6, 7, 10 
yr Bee fe | SG MITT Terr 3, 4 
ee ee ss oo ciann cul scckenenackeeuewiate 7 
y Bit toe ll err rrr 5, 6&7, @ 
y Bie he re aan 6, 7, 9 
PUK. © Be ee Oe vo wee vebvcccccciss cus 7 

OTHER AUTHORITIES 

Senate Report 100-446, S. 555, 100th Cong., 2d. 
SOGDs os os tds davcivedehwss Apis skis che atten sa 7 

INTEREST OF AMICI STATES 

Amici States of the Union now face the prospect, as a 
result of Part V of the decision of the Court of Appeals,! 
that Indian tribes will bypass procedures established by 
the Congress for the negotiation and completion of tribal- 
state compacts for serious gambling on Indian lands in 
those states. While holding principally that the Eleventh 
Amendment bars suit by an Indian tribe in federal court 
against an unconsenting state, the Eleventh Circuit added 
- almost as an afterthought — that the tribe may notify the 
Secretary of Interior whenever such a suit is dismissed, 
and the secretary may prescribe gaming. This legal error 
converts the States’ Eleventh Amendment sovereign 
immunity into a means to subvert the will of Congress 
and the sovereignty of the states. Moreover, this judi- 
cially-created remedy allows the tribes to request that the 
Secretary prescribe casino gambling, even in states where 
it is criminally prohibited, on Indian lands, again con- 
trary to the will of Congress and the sovereign states and 
principles of federalism. Indeed, the tribes and the Secre- 
tary may use the states’ judicial sovereign immunity as a 
sword to bypass the tribal-state compacting procedures 
envisioned by Congress and impose as a matter of federal 
regulation the gambling requested by tribes. 

1 Case below consolidated under Seminole Tribe of Florida v. 
State of Florida, 11 F.3d 1016 (11th Cir. 1994), holding principally 
that Eleventh Amendment is a bar to suit by an Indian tribe in 
federal court against an unconsenting State (Part IV). The con- 
solidated decision reversed the district court decision in Semi- 
nole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11th Cir. No. 92-4652, and 
affirmed Poarch Band of Creek Indians v. Alabama, 11th Cir. No. 
92-6244. 11 F.3d at 1029. This identical amicus brief, less Argu- 
ment III, was filed July 5, 1994, in support of Alabama in Poarch 
Creek Indians, No. 94-35. 

Congress provided for such a secretarial remedy only 
upon the judicial finding of a lack of good faith by a state 
to negotiate for that gambling which the state must nego- 
tiate. However, experience shows that upon a state’s 
good faith refusal to negotiate for that gambling which it 
criminally prohibits for all purposes, such as blackjack, 
slot machines or electronic games of chance, tribes have 
sued states in federal court claiming a lack of good faith, 
evoking an Eleventh Amendment defense. The legal error 
of the court leaves states in the untenable position of 
facing tribal demands for casino gaming that is criminally 
prohibited in those states, followed by suit in federal 
court when the states do not negotiate for the criminally- 
prohibited gaming. By purposefully evoking a defense of 
sovereign immunity, tribes may ab initio bypass alto- 
gether the requirement to negotiate a tribal-state com- 
pact, leaving states subject to unbridled federal power to 
impose a scheme that may be entirely contrary to the 
states’ criminal law. 

Amici states believe the Court of Appeals legally 
erred in this case by reading into a federal statute a 
remedy for tribes that does not exist and which properly 
could not have been fashioned in the absence of any 
Congressional direction. Amici states also have an acute 
interest in the proper determination of the question of the 
applicability of Eleventh Amendment sovereign immu- 
nity to suits brought by tribes under IGRA. 

¢ 

SUGGESTION FOR CONSOLIDATION 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

Both cases presented the Eleventh Circuit with the 

same issue, namely, whether the Congress has the power 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

in consolidating the cases and deciding the question. In 
the interest of judicial economy, and given the importance 
to all the States of resolving the issues presented by both 
Alabama and Florida, amici respectfully suggest these 
two cases be consolidated by this Court. 

¢ 

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

States are subject to the provisions of the Indian 
Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 (IGRA), 25 U.S.C. § 2701, 
et seq., and 18 U.S.C. § 1166, et seq.2 As provided by IGRA, 
states must negotiate tribal-state compacts with Indian 
tribes for class III gambling activities (all significant gam- 
bling beyond bingo and non-banked card games), and 
face suits by tribes in federal court to enforce the nego- 
tiating process. The Court of Appeals’ final statement in 
Part V of the opinion that the tribes may notify the 
Secretary of Interior (and that the Secretary may then act 
to prescribe procedures for class III gaming) whenever 
such a suit is dismissed for subject-matter jurisdiction on 
Eleventh Amendment grounds is not supported by the 
statute and arrogates to the Secretary powers not dele- 
gated to that official by the Congress. 

The states welcome the Court of Appeals’ principal 
holding that an unconsenting state may not be sued in 
federal court by an Indian tribe under IGRA, as it goes to 
the heart of the constitutional scheme balancing the 
powers of the states and the Federal Government. How- 
ever, the Court’s final statement concerning the tribe’s 

2 Amici states Maine, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island 
contend they are not subject to IGRA, based on their respective 
Indian land ciaims settlement acts. 

remedy and the Secretary powers is inconsistent with the 
congressional directive and adversely affects the states. 
As the case before the courts is to be dismissed for subject 
matter jurisdiction, the court below was not free to 
engage in an analysis of severability or to fashion a 
remedy not envisoned by the Congress. For that reason, 
amici states respectfully urge this Court to reverse the 
ruling in Part V of the opinion, and affirm the core 
holding that Congress does not have the power to abro- 
gate States’ sovereign immunity under the Indian Com- 
merce Clause. 

ARGUMENT 

I. 
UPON DISMISSAL OF A SUIT UNDER IGRA ON 
ELEVENTH AMENDMENT GROUNDS, AN INDIAN 
TRIBE IS NOT ENTITLED TO THE PRESCRIPTION 
OF GAMING PROCEDURES BY THE SECRETARY OF 
INTERIOR 

The Court of Appeals, in Part V of the opinion, 
incorrectly states that where a state “pleads an Eleventh 
Amendment defense, the suit is dismissed, and the tribe, 
pursuant to 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii), then may notify 
the Secretary of the Interior of the tribe's failure to negotiate a 
compact with the state. The Secretary may then prescribe 
regulations governing class III gaming on the tribe's lands.” 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 1016, 
1029 (11th Cir. 1994); italics added. This procedure, how- 
ever, does not appear in 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii), as 
cited,> or anywhere else in IGRA. 

3 All cited sections refer to Title 25 of the United States 
Code. 

At the beginning of Part V of the opinion, the 
Court of Appeals notes that the procedures in 
§§ 2710(d)(7)(A)(i) and (B)(i)-(vi) necessarily fail when an 
unconsenting state refuses to consent to suit. Seminole, at 
1029. This logically follows the Court’s holding that the 
Eleventh Amendment serves as a jurisdictional bar to suit 
against an unconsenting state. Ibid. However, following 
the adoption of a severability analysis, the Court of 
Appeals reasoned that the final clause of section 
2710(d)(7)(B), clause (vii), provided below, is somehow 
unaffected by the jurisdictional bar. By its plain language, 
however, that clause like the clauses preceding it, is inex- 
tricably tied to the jurisdiction of the federal court. As is 
evident, it is tied to the very clauses preceding it, from 
which it derives its meaning. Clause (vii) provides: 

“If a State does not consent during the 60- 
day period described in clause (vi) to a proposed 
compact submitted by a mediator under clause (v), 
the mediator shall notify the Secretary and the 
Secretary shall prescribe, in consultation with 
the Indian tribe, procedures - 

“(I) which are consistent with the proposed 
compact selected by the mediator under clause (iv), 
the provisions of this Act, and the relevant pro- 
visions of the laws of the State, and [] (II) under 
which class III gaming may be conducted on the 
Indian lands over which the Indian tribes has 
jurisdiction.” 

Italics added. 

Clearly, IGRA, at § 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii), contemplates 
the continuatiun of the process initiated with the lawsuit 

in §§ 2710(d)(7)(A)(i) and (B)(i)-(vi). It is the court-appoin- 
ted mediator, not the tribe, who notifies the Secretary of 
Interior, and only upon the refusal of a state to consent to 
the compact proposed by the mediator in clause (v). 

The Secretary, in turn, is empowered solely to 
respond to a mediator’s notification and may prescribe 
only those class III gaming procedures consistent with a 
proposed compact selected by a mediator. 25 U.S.C. 
§ 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii)(1). Congress did not provide that 
tribes would be authorized to notify the Secretary 
directly with a request for class III gaming. Nor did it 
provide the Secretary with powers to prescribe gaming 
procedures independent of a court-appointed mediator’s 
selected compact. Congress envisioned these procedures 
as a limitation upon the Secretary of Interior, following 
multiple opportunities to resolve outstanding differences 
between a state and tribe once litigation has arisen. To 
provide a remedy independent of the statutory process 
would be like proceeding to sentencing once a criminal 
defendant asserts the protection of the Fifth Amendment. 
Congress attempted to provide a process which protected 
the significant interests of the parties. Indeed, Congress 
noted the entire § 2710(d)(7) was 

“ 

... the result of the Committee balancing the 
interests and rights of tribes to engage in gam- 
ing against the interests of the States in regulat- 
ing such gaming.” 

Senate Report 100-446, S. 555, 100th Cong., 2d. Sess., 14. 

The Committee noted that the provision permitting 
the tribe to sue the state on the basis of a lack of good- 
faith negotiation was designed as the least offensive 

option “to encourage States to deal fairly with tribes «s 
sovereign governments,” ibid., but also noted that the 
state had legitimate governmental interests to protect, 
including an interest in regulating class III gaming. Con- 
gress made no provision for the Secretary to substitute 
his discretion for that of the state, particularly in deciding 
important and difficult issues of state gambling law. It 
instead limited the Secretary to actions consistent with 
the exercise of a mediator’s discretion. Congress could 
have provided an alternate means for the tribe to request 
class III gaming from the Secretary and for the Secretary 
to respond to that request, but Congress did not provide 
any such mechanism. The Court of Appeals is not free to 
fashion remedies that Congress has specifically chosen 
not to extend. Landgraf v. USI Film Products, __ U.S. __. 
__, n. 36, 62 U.S.L.W. 4255, 4267, n. 36 (April 26, 1994); 
see Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. Transportation Workers, 451 
U.S. 77, 97 (1981). 

Amici states now face the prospect that the Court of 
Appeals’ statement, will be offered by Indian tribes to the 
Secretary of Interior as a by-pass mechanism to serious 
negotiations and a new judicially-created protocol for the 
Secretary to entertain requests for class III gaming. The 
difficulty arises whenever a state refuses to concede to tribal 
demands for casino-type class III gaming which violates state 
law, but which a tribe maintains is “part of the public policy 
of the state” under Cabazon Band of Mission Indians v. Califor- 
nia, 480 U.S. 202 (1988). In California and Texas, federal 
district courts have opined that certain casino-type games 
are properly the subject of negotiations, notwithstanding the 
criminal prohibitions on this activity. See, e.g., Sycuan Band of 
Mission Indians v. Roache, 788 FSupp. 1498, 1503 (S.D. Cal. 

me swe 

1992). Where the state believes that it need not negotiate for 
such activity, it faces the prospect of a lawsuit by the tribe for 
failure to negotiate in good faith, with the possibility of an 
unwanted mediation and secretarial procedures consistent 
with an appointed mediator’s decision. Under such condi- 
tions, the unequal burden is on the state, which must then 
concede to the tribal demands or face the possibility that an 
appointed mediator’s discretion will be substituted for the 
discretion of the state. It is under these and similar circum- 
stances that certain states have raised the Eleventh Amend- 
ment as a bar to the lawsuits. In other states there are 
constitutional or other internal impediments to the express 
waiver of state sovereign immunity. 

In any case, states have no reason to expect that upon 
dismissal of a suit for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction 
the Secretary of Interior has the unfettered power to 
consider tribal requests for class II] gaming, as this is 
simply not evident in the statute. Instead, the Secretary's 
powers rest on the jurisdiction of the federal court to 
order compact negotiations and appoint a mediator, who, 
in turn, must follow statutorily-prescribed procedures 
before the Secretary may act upon the appointed media- 
tor’s notification and compact selection. Congress speci- 
fically granted the Secretary limited regulatory discretion 
in § 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii), namely, to prescribe consistently 
with an appointed mediator’s compact selection; in this 
subsection, the Secretary has no power to decide a matter 
involving legislative discretion, such as what class III gam- 
ing to permit or not permit. See American Federation of 
Gov. Employees v. Pierce, 697 F.2d 303, 306 (D.C. Cir. 1982). 
While broad delegations of power have been upheld, see 
Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 373-374 (1989), by 

10 

contrast here, IGRA grants a narrow regulatory discretion 
to the Secretary. See Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 
388, 415-430 (1935). 

ELEVENTH AMENDMENT IMMUNITY IS A JURIS- 
DICTIONAL BAR AND DOES NOT INVALIDATE 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS AS UNCONSTITU- 
TIONAL 

The court-fashioned secretarial remedy discussed 
above is apparently premised on the Court of Appeals’ 
conclusion that the lawsuit and mediation provisions in 
§§ 2710(d)(7)(A)(i) and (B)(i)-(vi) were severable from 
IGRA. Amici states submit the severance analysis is 
legally incorrect. In concluding that the Eleventh Amend- 
ment serves as a jurisdictional bar in IGRA, the Court of 
Appeals has upheld the states’ sovereign immunity as a 
defense to certain actions. The Court of Appeals did not, 
however, hold the lawsuit and mediation provisions in 
IGRA to be unconstitutional. In fact, in footnote 15, the 
Court below noted that a state may consent to suit, “in 
which case these provisions remain in full force.” If the provi- 
sions remain in full force for states consenting to suit and 
are barred for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction for states 
not consenting to suit, the provisions are not unconstitu- 
tional; the Court of Appeals did not invalidate them. As 
the Court of Appeals decided, the provisions are subject 
to a defense of lack of jurisdiction in certain cases. Were 
the provisions invalid as contrary to the Constitution, 
they should be dropped altogether. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 
U.S. 1, 108 (1976). Unconstitutional provisions must be 
severed from the statute. Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 

11 

U.S. 685 (1987). However, the lawsuit provisions of IGRA 
cannot be unconstitutional and severable on the one hand 
and “remain in full force” here and there, as acknowledged 
by the Court of Appeals, Seminole, n. 15. 

By upholding the constitutional validity of the Elev- 
enth Amendment as a jurisdictional bar, the Court of 
Appeals determined that the case must be dismissed for 
lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. Thus, it cannot prop- 
erly reach the question of severability or whether other 
remedies might work for the tribe under IGRA. Indeed, 
upon affirmance of the dismissal for lack of subject mat- 
ter jurisdiction, there is no further “case or controversy,” 
within the meaning of Article III, § 2, clause 1, of the 
Federal Constitution, before the Court of Appeals. The 
court cannot give decisions which are primarily advisory, 
nor can it exercise functions which are essentially legisla- 
tive. Federal Radio Com. v. General Electric Co., 281 U.S. 464, 
469 (1930); Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83, 95 (1942). 

As the bar of the Eleventh Amendment is jurisdic- 
tional, once the action is found to be barred, a severance 
analysis and further interpretation is inappropriate. See 
Apache Tribe of Mescalero Reservation v. New Mexico, CIV 
92-076-JC, Slip Op. at 2 (DC N.M., Dec. 22, 1992).4 Fur- 
ther, dismissal on Eleventh Amendment grounds bars the 
consideration of the merits of the underlying action. 

4”... it would be improper for this Court to address the 
severability issue raised by the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation [having] already found that the Eleventh Amend- 
ment precludes this action in federal court absent waiver by the 
State of its immunity in a federal forum.” Apache Tribe, Slip Op. 
at 2. 

12 

Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority v. Metcalf & Eddy, 
Inc., 506 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 684, 121 L.Ed.2d 605, 613 
(1993); United States v. Sisson, 399 U.S. 267, 270 (1970). 
Here, the Eleventh Circuit, upon affirming the Poarch 
Band dismissal on Eleventh Amendment grounds, contin- 
ued with a severance analysis and substantive commen- 
tary, including the creation of a judicial remedy not 
expressed by the Congress. This analysis and the creation 
of a remedy not found in IGRA has far-reaching and 
destructive consequences to significant State govern- 
mental interests. 

Ill. 

THIS COURT SHOULD RESOLVE THE CONFLICTS 
IN THE COURTS OF APPEAL BY UPHOLDING ELEV- 
ENTH AMENDMENT SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY 

[CONTROL: procedural-metadata paragraph omitted; no legal inference from omission.]

13 

held that notwithstanding Congress’ intent to abrogate 
states’ sovereign immunity, Congress lacks the power to 
do so under the Indian Commerce Clause, noting that the 
unique abrogation power afforded Congress under the 
Interstate Commerce Clause in Pennsylvania v. Union Gas 
Co., 491 U.S. 1 (1989), cannot be extended to the Indian 
Commerce Clause. This derives, the court noted, from the 
fundamentally different purposes underlying the two 
clauses. Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 
at 1027. 

Amici States agree with Florida that this Court 
should address the Eleventh Amendment issue, but like 
Florida, do not accede to the arguments of the petitioning 
Tribe. The Eleventh Circuit properly found the Interstate 
and Indian Commerce Clauses distinguishable, correctly 
limited the plurality holding in Union Gas to the Inter- 
state Commerce Clause, and properly rejected the appli- 
cation of the exceptions set forth in Ex parte Young, 209 
U.S. 123 (1908). If this Court were to review these cases, 
amici States will argue the correctness of the Eleventh 
Circuit holdings on the Eleventh Amendment core issues. 

¢ 

14 

CONCLUSION 

For the reasons stated herein, amici states respect- 
fully urge this Court to review and affirm the core Elev- 
enth Amendment holdings, but to reject Part V of the 
opinion below. 

Danie. E. LUNGREN 
Attorney General of the State of 
California 

THomas F. Gepe 

Special Assistant Attorney 
General 

Counsel of Record for Amici States 
1515 K Street 
Sacramento, CA 95614 
Telephone: (916) 323-7355 

Additional Counsel 

Jimmy Evan 
Attorney General 
State of Alabama 

Bruce M. BoTreLHo 
Attorney General 
State of Alaska 

GRANT Woops 
Attorney General 
State of Arizona 

WINsTON BRYANT 
Attorney General 
State of Arkansas 

Gate A. Norton 
Attorney General 
State of Colorado 

RicHARD BLUMENTHAL 
Attorney General 
State of Connecticut 

Larry EcHOHAwkK 
Attorney General 
State of Idaho 

RicHarp P. Ievous 
Attorney General 
State of Louisiana 

MIcHAEL E. CARPENTER 
Attorney General 
State of Maine 

Scott HARSHBARGER 
Attorney General 
State of Massachusetts 

FRANK J. KELLEY 
Attorney General 
State of Michigan 

Mike Moore 
Attorney General 
State of Mississippi 

JoserH P. Mazurek 
Attorney General 
State of Montana 

Don STENBERG 
Attorney General 
State of Nebraska 

FRANKIE Sue Det Papa 
Attorney General 
State of Nevada 

Susan B. Lovinc 
Attorney General 
State of Oklahoma 

Jerrrey B. Pine 
Attorney General 
State of Rhode Island 

Mark BARNETT 
Attorney General 
State of South Dakota 

Dan MORALES 
Attorney General 
State of Texas 

JoserH B. MEYER 
Attorney General 
State of Wyoming 


