—¥ . 


Supreme Court, U. 


2 hm Se. 
(10) 


MAR 3 1 1995 


Orriot—or THE CLERA 


No. 94-12 
In the 


Supreme Court 
of the 


Gnited States 


October Term, 1994 


SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA, 
Petitioner, 


Vv. 


STATE OF FLORIDA, AND 
LAWTON CHILES, GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari To The United States 
Court of Appeals For The Eleventh Circuit 


BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE THE MICCOSUKEE 
TRIBE OF INDIANS OF FLORIDA, IN SUPPORT 
OF THE SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA 


Sonia Escobio O’Donnell 

Counsel of Record 

Lehtinen, O'Donnell, Malman, 
Cortifias, Vargas & Reiner, P.A. 
7700 N. Kendall Drive, Suite 303 
Miami, Florida 33156 

(305) 279-1166 

Attorneys for Amicus Curiae, 
The Miccosukee Tribe 

of Indians of Florida 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


ARGUMENT 


I. 


Il. 


III. 


THE ELEVENTH AMENDMENT DOES 
NOT EXPRESSLY BAR A CITIZEN FROM 
SUING THAT CITIZEN’S OWN STATE .... 


CONGRESS HAS THE POWER TO 
ABROGATE ELEVENTH AMENDMENT 
IMMUNITY AND EXPRESSLY DID SO BY 
ENACTING THE INDIAN GAMING 
REGULATORY ACT (IGRA) ................ 


a. Congress Has The Power Under The 
Indian Commerce Clause, As Well As 
Under The Interstate Commerce Clause, 
To Abrogate Eleventh Amendment 
Sovereign Immunity .................... 


b. Congress Intended To Abrogate Eleventh 
Amendment Immunity By Enacting The 


Indian Gaming Regulatory Act ......... 
EX PARTE YOUNG AUTHORIZES THE 
SEMINOLE TRIBE’S FEDERAL CLAIMS 
AGAINST STATE OFFICIALS’ FOR 
PROSPECTIVE RELIEF ................... 


Er 


ae 


19 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES: Page(s) 
Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon, 

473 US. 306 CAGRED.. 3 i ccc i i 5, 8,19 
Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 

601 U.S. 776 (1901) <0i.nc. ddsnceeet ces 4,5,6 
California v. Cabazon Band of Mission 
Indians, 

480 U.S. 208 (1687)... ....20cccisccnwsesess 1, 8, 15 
Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 

408 US. 16GB (ROG vice ccccdtsenstmentn 10 
Delaware Tribal Business Committee v. 
Weeks, 

430 US. TB (RGCEP ics ccvccbehesscepanie 12 
Dellmuth v. Muth, 

401 US. S33 (UGG)... sicins eGisecueias 19 
Employees v. Missouri Dept. of Public Health 
and Welfare, 

433 UB. Bee (ROGGE o cccsccdsesthecsueweas 14 
Ex parte Young, . 

308 US. .15B (RGGED «on cccencnceenanneae 20, 21 
Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 

Pi yes @ OF). | eae 12 
Green v. Mansour, 

474 UB. O06 CUBED 5.000 0ck dectbacsuananen 20 
Hans v. State of Louisiana, 

134 UD. 1 GBGED on ccccescdaceeoenneaueel 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc., v. United States, 

379 U.S. B41 (2GGE) 2... cccccnsetsbuncesess 18 
Hess v. Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corp., 

_.. US. ——, 115 S.Ct. 394 (1994) ..... 7 

ii 


, $ 
” y | ‘ ey | (ee on Pa a! yA pe 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — (Continued) 


CASES: Page(s) 
McClanahan v. Arizona Tax Comm’n, 

CC 13 
Monaco v. Mississippi, 

| eee 6 


Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Citizen Band 
Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 
er 11 


Oneida County, N.Y. v. Oneida Indian Nation 
of New York State, 


470 U.S. 226 (1985) ................ eee 12 
Parden v. Terminal Railway of Alabama, 
ee IID oss ccc cciccccccccccccs 14 
Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. 
Halderman, 
EE 21 
Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, 
EE 5, 6, 7, 8,9 
10, 12, 13 
14, 19 
Perez v. United States, 
Ee 18 
Ramah School Bd. v. Bureau of Rev., 
CNet ec ccen 11 
Rice v. Olson, 
5 13 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 
801 F.Supp. 655 (S.D. Fla. 1992)......... 10, 20 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 
11 F.3d 1016 (11th Cir. 1994)............ 8, 9, 19, 20 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—(Continued) 


CASES: Page(s) 
Spokane Tribe of Indians v. Washington 
State, 

28 F.3d 991 (9th Cir. 1994) ...........--- 11, 12, 13 

14, 15 

Thurlow v. Com. of Mass. (License cases), 

46 (5 How.) 504 (1847) .......----- ee eens 9 
United States v. Ceraso, 

467 F.2d 653 (3rd Cir. 1972) ..........--- 16, 17, 18 
United States v. Sacco, 

491 F.2d 995 (9th Cir. 1974) (en banc) ... 18 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 

448 U.S. 136 (1980) .......... eee eee eens: 11 
STATUTES AND OTHER AUTHORITIES 
Article I, §8, cl.3............ cece eeeeeeeeeeees 3 
Organized Crime Control Act of 1970, 
O46 Died. GOD... cccccesccccccondtuccsdecucesss 16, 17, 18 
Pub.L. 100-497 100th Cong. 2nd Sess. (1988) 15, 16 
S.Rep. No.446, 100th Cong. 2d Sess. (1988) 16, 19 
18 U.S.C. $1955 ........cccccccccccecccccevecs 18 
25 U.S.C. §2701 et seq .......--- eee eee eeees 7 
25 U.S.C. §2702(1) ... 2... e eee eee e eee ee eeee 1 
25 U.S.C. $2702(2) ....... cece cece eee eeeeeees 16 
25 U.S.C. §2710(d 3M A)... «eee eee ee eee eee 21 


iv 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


Amicus Curiae, the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of 
Florida, files this brief in support cf Petitioner, the 
Seminole Tribe of Florida.1 The Miccosukee Tribe has 
existed as an independent federally-recognized Indian 
tribe since 1962 when it organized a council and board, 
pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act, and formally 
became the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida. In 
1971, the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida was the 
first Indian tribe in the nation to formalize a contract with 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs whereby it assumed complete 
responsibility for managing its own financial, social, 
economic, and political affairs. 


Petitioner, the Seminole Tribe, sought a Tribal-State 
compact with the State of Florida, required under the 
Indian Regulatory Gaming Act (IGRA) as a pre-condition 
to establishing Class III gaming. When negotiations did 
not result in a compact, the Seminole Tribe sued the State 
of Florida. IGRA was enacted at the urging of states who 
wanted a voice in Indian gaming after the Supreme Court 
decision in California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 
480 U.S. 202 (1987), which reconfirmed that tribal 
sovereignty is subordinate only to the federal government. 


The State of Florida asserted sovereign immunity to 
bar the Seminole Tribe’s suit under IGRA, even though 
IGRA was legislation which the states themselves had 
sought. The outcome of this litigation will directly affect 
the course of the Miccosukee Tribe’s negotiations with the 
State as well as any litigation which might arise from those 
negotiations. The State of Florida’s assertion of immunity, 
if sustained, would preclude Indian tribes from asserting 


‘Letters of consent to file this brief for Amicus Curiae have been 
filed with the Clerk of the Supreme Court. 


their rights under IGRA to establish Class III gaming. One 
of IGRA’s primary goals is to provide a statutory basis for 
the operation of gaming by Indian tribes as a means of 
promoting tribal economic development, self-sufficiency, 
and strong tribal governments. 25 U.S.C. §2702(1). For the 
reason expressly set forth in IGRA — to obtain economic 
self-sufficiency — the Miccosukee Tribe sought a Tribal- 
State compact with the State of Florida in late 1993; the 
State failed to negotiate the compact in good faith. 


In summary, the Miccosukee Tribe joins as Amicus 
Curiae in support of Petitioner, the Seminole Tribe of 
Florida, because the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeal’s 
decision that sovereign immunity barred the lawsuit by the 
Seminole Tribe against the State, has a direct and 
economically adverse effect on the Miccosukee Tribe of 
Indians which also is seeking to establish Class III gaming 
activities and which also has unsuccessfully sought a 
compact with the State of Florida. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Amicus Curiae adopts the Statement of the Case of 
Petitioner, Seminole Tribe of Indians. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The State of Florida relied on sovereign immunity to 
bar the Petitioner’s lawsuit which alleged that the State 
had failed to negotiate in good faith, as required by the 
Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. The suit sought to compel 
the State, through the Governor, to conclude the Tribal- 
State compact and also requested declaratory judgment on 
the obligations of the State of Florida under IGRA to 
negotiate in good faith regarding the conduct of Class III 
gaming. 


a — 


The State’s assertion of Eleventh Amendment 
immunity should be rejected. The Eleventh Amendment 
does not by its terms preclude citizens from suing their 
own state; rather, it prohibits suits against a state by 
citizens of another state or by aliens. The judicially created 
doctrine of sovereign immunity found in Hans v. State of 
Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890), which bars citizens from 
suing their states, should be revisited. 


Even if Hans v. Louisiana is not revisited, Congress 
had the power to abrogate the States’ sovereign immunity 
when it enacted IGRA and it clearly intended to abrogate 
this immunity. The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals 
erred by reversing the district court’s denial of the State’s 
motion to dismiss on sovereign immunity grounds, on the 
basis that Congress did not have the power under the 
Indian Commerce Clause to enact IGRA. Congress had the 
power to abrogate the State’s sovereign immunity under 
both the Indian Commerce Clause and the Interstate 
Commerce Clause. Both clauses derive from the same 
plenary grant of power in the Constitution, Article I, §8 cl.3. 


Through the Indian Commerce Clause the states 
relinquished authority over Indian affairs to the federal 
government. Pursuant to its plenary power to legislate in 
the field of Indian affairs, Congress had the power to 
abrogate the sovereign immunity of the states. The 
Interstate Commerce Clause also gave Congress the power 
to enact IGRA because one of the stated concerns in its 
enactment was to prevent infiltration by organized crime in 
Indian gaming. At the urging of the states, and in order to 
provide the states with a voice in Indian gaming, Congress 
enacted IGRA. Having urged for its passage, the states 
cannot at the same time assert sovereign immunity to bar 
a suit by an Indian tribe for the state’s failure to negotiate 
in good faith as required by the Act. 


Finally, the Eleventh Amendment does not prohibit 
suits against state officials based upon federal law when 
prospective injunctive or declaratory relief is sought to 
vindicate federal law. Thus, under the doctrine of Ex parte 
Young, the relief requested by Petitioner is proper and the 
decision of the Eleventh Circuit should be reversed. 


ARGUMENT 
1. 


THE ELEVENTH AMENDMENT DOES NOT 
EXPRESSLY BAR A CITIZEN FROM SUING 
THAT CITIZEN’S OWN STATE. 


The language of the Eleventh Amendment does not 
expressly bar a citizen from bringing a suit against his own 
state. To the contrary, the text of the Eleventh Amendment 
refers only to suits brought by citizens of another state or a 
foreign country: 


The Judicial power of the United States shall not 
he construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, 
commenced or prosecuted against one of the 
United States by citizens of another State, or by 
citizens or subjects of any Foreign State. 


However, in Hans v. State of Louisiana, 134 US. 1 
(1890), the Supreme Court held that a citizen’s suit against 
that citizen’s own state was barred and, as a result, 
judicially extended the Eleventh Amendment beyond its 
text. In fact, the Eleventh Amendment has no application 
outside the context of State/citizen and State/alien 
diversity suits. See Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 
501 U.S. 775 —___, 111 S.Ct. 2578, 2586 (1991) (Blackman, 
Marshall, Stevens, J.J., dissenting) and Amicus Curiae 
respectfully requests that Hans v. Louisiana be revisited. 


4 


Amicus Curiae urges the Court to adopt the 
interpretation of the Eleventh Amendment found in 
Justice Stevens’ concurring opinion in Pennsylvania v. 
Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1 (1989), which emphasizes the 
important “distinction between our two Eleventh 
Amendments.” Jd. at 23. First, there is the “correct and 
literal interpretation of the plain language of the Eleventh 
Amendment that is fully explained in Justice Brennan’s 
dissenting opinion in Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon. 
In addition, there is the defense of State sovereign 
immunity that the Court has added to the text of the 
Amendment in cases like Hans v. Louisiana.” Union Gas, 
supra, at 23-24 (citations omitted).* Justice Steven's 
opinion states that, notwithstanding the judicially created 
doctrine of state sovereign immunity, Congress has the 
plenary power to subject the States to suits in federal 
court: 


Suffice it to say that the Eleventh Amendment 
carefully mirrors the language of the citizen-state 
and alien-state diversity clauses of Article III and 
only provides that “(t]he Judicial power of the 
United States shall not be construed to extend” to 
these cases. There is absolutely nothing in the text 
of the Amendment that in any way affects the 


2Had Congress intended to include the doctrine of sovereign 
immunity in the Eleventh Amendment, it would have done so 
specifically; the Eleventh Amendment was merely intended to bar 
citizens of another state, or aliens, from suing a state in federal court. 
See e.g., Atascadero States Hosp. v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234, 286-90 
(1985). As the dissent pointed out in Blatchford v. Native Village of 
Noatak, 501 U.S. 775 (1991), 111 S.Ct. 2578, there is no constitutional 
principle of State sovereign immunity, no constitutionally mandated 
policy excluding suits against States from federal court and the 
historical analysis that supports this view already has been 
exhaustively detailed in numerous decisions. Blatchford, supra, 111 
S.Ct. at 2586. 


other grants of “judicial power” contained in 
Article II]. Plainer language is seldom, if ever, 
found in constitutional law. 


Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, supra, 491 U.S. at 24. 


Hans v. Louisiana departed from the plain language, 
purpose, and history of the Eleventh Amendment, 
extending to the states immunity from suits promised 
under the “arising under” jurisdictional grant of Article III, 
Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, supra, 491 U.S. at 25.3 The 
expansion of state immunity is “not a matter of Eleventh 
Amendment law at all, but rather it is based on a 
prudential interest in federal-state-comity and a concern 
for ‘Our Federalism.” Id. at 25. Justice Stevens’ 
concurring opinion correctly points out that the Eleventh 
Amendment, as does Article III, speaks in terms of judicial 
power. Thus, the question is whether the federal court has 
power to entertain the suit, and in cases where there is no 
such power, Congress may not provide it. However, many 
Eleventh Amendment decisions do not deal with judicial 
power at all but instead speak in terms of federalism and 
comity, and are better understood as invoking these 


3Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 501 U.S. 775 (1991) does 
not resolve the Eleventh Amendment Immunity issues in the case at 
bar. The Supreme Court in Blatchford was not asked to revisit Hans v. 
Louisiana. Instead, the respondent argued that the traditional 
principles of immunity presumed by Hans do not apply to suits by 
sovereign Indian tribes, and even if they did, the states had consented to 
suit in the “plan of the convention.” Blatchford, supra, 111 S.Ct. at 2581. 
The Supreme Court rejected the respondent’s argument that state 
sovereign immunity does not extend to suits by another sovereign (citing 
to Monaco v. Mississippi, 292 U.S. 313 (1934)) and also rejected the 
“plan of the convention” argument that the states waived their 
immunity against Indian tribes when they adopted the Constitution. 
Furthermore, the Supreme Court in Blatchford only addressed the 
question of damage suits against the State and not any issue of 
injunctive or other prospective relief. 


concerns. Union Gas, supra, at 25-27. The broad notions of 
sovereign immunity accepted in federal jurisprudence 
since Hans v. Louisiana are not merely, “misguided as a 
matter of federal law” but they are also unjust. Hess v. Port 
Authority Trans-Hudson Corp., ___ U.S. ——, 115 S.Ct. 
394 (1994) (Stevens, J., concurring).‘ 


If the Supreme Court adopts the interpretation of the 
Eleventh Amendment found in Justice Steven's 
concurrence, the Petitioner prevails and the State of 
Florida’s claim of sovereign immunity fails. For purposes of 
the remaining arguments in this brief, however, Amicus 
Curiae will assume that the principles of Eleventh 
Amendment sovereign immunity, as embodied in Hans v. 
Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890), are applicable. 


Il. 


CONGRESS HAS THE POWER TO 
ABROGATE ELEVENTH AMENDMENT 
IMMUNITY AND EXPRESSLY DID SO BY 
ENACTING THE INDIAN GAMING 
REGULATORY ACT (IGRA). 


In enacting the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act 
(“IGRA”), 25 U.S.C. §2701 et seq., Congress unequivocally 
expressed its intention to abrogate the Eleventh 
Amendment bar to suits against the states in federal court. 


‘Particularly in this case, where the states sought the legislation, 
and where the legislation was a compromise to give the states some 
control over Indian gaming, it is truly unjust to allow the State of 
Florida to assert sovereign immunity when it failed to comply with its 
duty under IGRA. Moreover, the Seminole Tribe did not seek monetary 
relief and, therefore, concerns over the vulnerability of the State’s purse 
is not a concern here, as it may be in some instances. See e.g., Hess v. 
Port Authority Trans-Hudson, Corp., __._ U.S. ——, 115 S.Ct. 394 
(1994). 


Not only did Congress unequivocally intend to abrogate the 
State’s Eleventh Amendment immunity but it had the 
power to do so under Commerce Clause. IGRA was enacted 
following the decision of California v. Cabazon Band of 
Mission Indians, 480 U.S. 202 (1987) which left Indian 
gaming largely unregulated by the states; it was enacted at 
the urging of the states, who sought to be involved in the 
process of regulating Indian gaming. 


a. Congress Has The Power Under The 
Indian Commerce Clause, As Well As 
Under The Interstate Commerce Clause, 
To Abrogate Eleventh Amendment 
Sovereign Immunity 


Although the Eleventh Amendment was not intended 
to bar a suit by a citizen of a State against his own State, 
see Argument I, supra, the Supreme Court has held that 
the principle of sovereign immunity limits the grant of 
judicial authority in Article III, Atascadero State Hospital 
v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234 (1985), and thus, in order to 
overcome this immunity, Congress must make its intent 
clear in the legislation and it must do so under a specific 
constitutional power. 


The Eleventh Circuit acknowledged in its opinion in 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 1016 
(11th Cir. 1994), that the Supreme Court has held that 
Congress has the power to abrogate a state’s Eleventh 
Amendment immunity pursuant to the Commerce Clause; 
however, the court of appeals erroneously concluded that 
Congress’ power to abrogate the Eleventh Amendment 
existed only pursuant to the Interstate Commerce Clause. 
The court of appeals distinguished the facts in the case at 
bar from those in Union Gas by finding that Union Gas was 
limited solely to the exercise of Congress’ power to legislate 


under the Interstate Commerce Clause. Acknowledging an 
intention by Congress to abrogate State sovereign 
immunity when it passed IGRA, the court below 
nevertheless found that it was passed pursuant to the 
Indian Commerce Clause and that the “unique abrogation 
power afforded Congress under the Interstate Commerce 
Clause in Union Gas could not be extended to the Indian 
Commerce Clause.” Seminole Tribe v. State, supra, 11 F.3d 
at 1027. 


The Eleventh Circuit was incorrect for a number of 
reasons. First, Congress had the power under the Indian 
Commerce Clause to abrogate the State’s Eleventh 
Amendment Immunity. Second, Congress also had the 
power to abrogate the State’s sovereign immunity 
pursuant to the Interstate Commerce Clause. 


Power Under The Indian Commerce Clause 


The plain language of Article I, §8, cl.3 gives Congress 
the power to regulate commerce and defines what types of 
commerce: with foreign nations, and among the several 
States and with the Indian Tribes. As the Supreme Court 
stated in the “License cases,” Thurlow v. Com. of Mass., 
46 U.S. (5 How.) 504 (1847), the words in this clause give 
“all the authority which the United States have over 
Commerce.” Jd. at 523. The Supreme Court recognized that 
Congress has the power to abrogate the State’s Eleventh 
Amendment immunity when regulating interstate 
commerce. Union Gas, supra. That the Supreme Court has 
recognized the existence of this power when Congress 
enacts legislation pursuant to the Interstate Commerce 
Clause does not mean that Congress does not also possess 
the same power when regulating commerce with Indian 
tribes. 


The decision in Union Gas implicated one of the three 
types of commerce which Congress has the power to 
regulate. This does not mean, however, that Congress 
cannot similarly legislate with regard to the other types of 
commerce mentioned in the Commerce Clause, pursuant to 
the same constitutional grant of plenary power. As the 
district court noted below, “(i]t is a mistake to simply 
dismiss Union Gas as being inapposite, especially since 
congressional power over both interstate and Indian 
commerce derives from precisely the same constitutional 
clause, Article I, §8, cl. 3, and since its power in both areas 
is plenary.” Seminole Tribe v. State, 801 F.Supp. 655 (S.D. 
Fla. 1992). 


In Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 
163, 192-93 (1989) the United States Supreme Court 
recognized that the Interstate Commerce Clause and the 
Indian Commerce Clause have very different applications: 


[W]hen the Interstate Commerce Clause is 
concerned with maintaining free trade among the 
States even in the absence of implementing 
federal legislation, the central function of the 
Indian Commerce Clause is to provide Congress 
with plenary power to legislate in the field of 
Indian affairs. 


Id. at 192 (citations omitted). Cotton Petroleum does not 
hold that the Indian Commerce Clause gives Congress less 
power than does the Interstate Commerce Clause, it 
simply holds that Indian tribes are not states for purposes 
of the Interstate Commerce Clause and that broad 
principles of preemption under the Interstate Commerce 
Clause would not apply. 490 U.S. at 191-192. 


10 


, ; 
: 


; + ahd i + sl ete te A as v ? - At - ~ - 
Se seen eee ee RE ee a ee ee SEER Ne a ee OR, 2) ae ene 


Amicus Curiae does not dispute that the Interstate 
Commerce Clause and the Indian Commerce Clause have 
different applications. Tribal reservations are not states 
and the “differences in the form and nature of their 
sovereignty make it treacherous to import to one notions of 
preemption that are properly applied to the other.” White 
Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 143 
(1980). However, the unique standing of federally 
recognized Indian tribes in no way restricts the power of 
Congress to override a state’s Eleventh Amendment 
immunity under the Indian Commerce Clause. To the 
contrary, the sovereign power of the Indian tribes makes it 
an even more compelling argument that Congress has the 
power, under the Indian Commerce Clause, to abrogate a 


state’s claim of sovereign immunity against an Indian 
tribe.® 


In overriding the states’ Eleventh Amendment 
immunity when enacting IGRA, Congress was legislating 
in the field of Indian affairs. Congress clearly had the 
power to do so under the Indian Commerce Clause and it 
intended to do so. Indeed, the Indian Commerce Clause 
provides a stronger basis than the Interstate Commerce 
Clause for Congress to abrogate State sovereign immunity. 
In a reaffirmation of an Indian tribe’s inherent power of 
self government, the Supreme Court stated that, absent 
Congressional action, no state may impose its laws on the 
reservation. Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Citizen Band 
Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 498 U.S. 505 (1991). The court of 
appeals in Spokane Tribe of Indians v. Washington State, 
28 F.3d 991 (9th Cir. 1994) reasoned, “Congressional power 


5In Ramah School Bd. v. Bureau of Rev., 458 U.S. 832 (1982), 
finding that federal law preempted state taxes and that it imposed an 
impermissible burden on tribal sovereignty, the Supreme Court 
recognized the broad power of Congress to regulate tribal affairs under 
the Indian Commerce Clause. Jd. at 837. 


11 


pursuant to the Indian Commerce Clause, then, cannot be 
less than its authority under the Interstate Commerce 
Clause.” Id. at 997. The Ninth Circuit in Spokane agreed 
with the district court judge in the case at bar that, based 
on its paramount and plenary authority over Indian 
affairs, Congress’ power to act pursuant to the Indian 
Commerce Clause is at least as great, if not greater than 
its power under the Interstate Commerce Clause. In fact, 
the plurality in Union Gas speaks in terms of the 
Commerce Clause as a whole, and that decision was not 
limited to the Interstate Commerce Clause. Spokane, 
supra, 28 F.3d at 996. Through the Indian Commerce 
Clause, the states relinquished authority over Indian 
affairs to the federal government. Pursuant to its plenary’ 
power to legislate in the field of Indian affairs, Congress 
had the power to abrogate the sovereign immunity of the 
states. With the adoption of the United States 
Constitution, Indian relations became the exclusive 
province of federal law, Oneida County, N.Y. v. Oneida 
Indian Nation of New York State, 470 U.S. 226, 234 (1985), 
and as a result, the states ceded whatever authority they 
previously had to regulate Indians affairs. 


In Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445 (1976) the 
Supreme Court held that Congress could abrogate a state’s 
sovereign immunity when acting pursuant to its plenary 
authority under §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. In 
exercising its power under the Fourteenth Amendment, 


6“A)though Justice Brennan’s opinion in Union Gas was a plurality 
opinion, a fifth Justice, Justice White, agreed that states are not 
immune from suit under statutes enacted pursuant to the Interstate 
Commerce Clause, provided the Congressional intent is clear.” Spokane 
Tribe of Indians v. Washington State, 28 F.3d 991, 996 (9th Cir. 1994). 


7Plenary does not mean absolute and Congress is, of course, subject 


to constitutional constraints. Delaware Tribal Business Committee v. 
Weeks, 430 U.S. 73, 83-85 (1977). 


12 


| , Sa) ar es 
yd ee et a 


Congress was acting pursuant to an amendment of the 
Constitution whose other sections by their terms embodied 
limitations of state authority. Union Gas, supra, 491 U.S. 
at 16-17. As noted in Union Gas, the Commerce Clause, 
like the Fourteenth Amendment, gives Congress power 
while taking it away from the states. The broad grant of 
power to Congress over Indian affairs necessarily limits 
the power of the states. Spokane, supra, 28 F.3d at 996. 
Congressional power over Indian Commerce and Interstate 
Commerce derives from the same clause of the 
Constitution and Congressional authority to abrogate the 
State’s immunity cannot be less under one clause than the 
other. Moreover, based on its plenary authority over Indian 
affairs, Congress’ power to act pursuant to the Indian 
Commerce Clause is at least as great, if not greater than 
its power under the Interstate Commerce Clause.® 


Power Under The Interstate Commerce Clause 


Congress also had the power under the Interstate 
Commerce Clause to enact IGRA and to abrogate the 
State’s Eleventh Amendment immunity. For reasons often 
explained in terms of comity or federalism, power under 
the Interstate Commerce Clause has not always been given 
as broad an interpretation as the power to legislate Indian 


8In fact, the delegation of power to the states to regulate Indian 
gaming conflicts with the deeply rooted policy of leaving Indians free 
from states’ jurisdiction. See, e.g., McClanahan v. Arizona Tax Comm'n, 
411 U.S. 164, 168 (1973); Rice v. Olson, 324 U.S. 786 (1945). Thus, 
perhaps the question should be whether Congress had the power at all 
to enact legislation which allows the states to regulate Indian gaming. 
Certainly, to delegate such power to the states, pursuant to the request 
of the states, but at the same time allow the states to invoke sovereign 
immunity when sued to enforce the requirement to negotiate in good 
faith, would surrender federal control of Indian matters to the states 
and, given the express language of the Indian Commerce Clause, raises 
serious constitutional issues. 


13 


commerce and foreign commerce. However, Congress also 
possesses the power under the Interstate Commerce 
Clause to abrogate a state’s sovereign immunity. In 
Employees v. Missouri Dept. of Public Health and Welfare, 
411 U.S. 279 (1973), the Supreme Court acknowledged that 
the states surrendered a portion of their sovereignty when 
they granted to Congress the power to regulate commerce. 
Id. at 286.9 The power to regulate commerce includes the 
power to override a state’s immunity from suit as long as 
Congress has expressed an intent to do so. The Eleventh 
Circuit opinion acknowledged that Congress has the 
power, under the Interstate Commerce Clause, to abrogate 
a state’s Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity claim. 
The Supreme Court has specifically decided this in Union 
Gas, supra, 491 U.S. at 14-15. The Eleventh Circuit simply 


%Although the Eleventh Circuit opinion rejected the argument that 
the State may have consented to suit either explicitly, under the “plan of 
the convention” (by ratifying the Constitution), or by participation in a 
Congressional program, Amicus Curiae notes that in this case the states 
not only participated in the enactment of IGRA but they actually 
pursued it in order to have a voice in regulating Indian gaming and to 
enforce the states’ laws. The states consented to suit by participating in 
the enactment of IGRA. The Eleventh Circuit rejected the Seminole’s 
reliance on Parden v. Terminal Railway of Alabama, 377 U.S. 184 
(1964) and concluded that Parden was “not quick enough to breath life 
into the Indian tribes’ claims in these cases.” Under Parden, by entering 
a field of economic activity that is federally regulated, a state impliedly 
consents to suit and waives sovereign immunity. The reports of Parden’s 
death are greatly exaggerated. The attempt to distinguish Parden on the 
basis that the activity involved there was typical of individuals is too 
narrow. The states entered into the field of economic activity regarding 
Indian gaming regulation and indeed sought the enactment of IGRA in 
order to participate in this economic activity. They have, therefore, 
waived any immunity they may have had. “Indeed, principles of state 
sovereignty are singularly out of place in such a scheme where the 
federal government is tailoring a limited grant of power to the states. In 
this case, sovereign immunity would undermine rather than promote 
the assertion of state interests.” Spokane Tribe of Indians v. 
Washington, 28 F.3d 991, 997 (9th Cir. 1994). 


14 


decided that IGRA was not enacted under the Interstate 
Commerce Clause. This conclusion is incorrect. Congress 
had the power to enact IGRA under both the Indian 
Commerce Clause and the Interstate Commerce Clause. 


Congress has the power to abrogate Eleventh 
Amendment immunity when it is exercising any 
constitutional provision that gives Congress plenary power 
over matters affecting the states. Spokane, supra, 28 F.3d 
at 995. The fact that IGRA primarily involves matters 
relating to Indian tribes does not mean that these matters 
cannot also involve issues of interstate commerce affecting 
the states. 


IGRA was enacted following the Supreme Court's 
decision in California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 
480 U.S. 202 (1987) which made tribal sovereignty 
subordinate only to the federal government. Although 
IGRA reaffirmed the federal interest in providing a means 
for self-sufficiency and economic development for Indian 
tribes, it was also a response to concerns of the states 
which sought a voice in regulating gaming within their 
borders. Pub.L. 100-497 100th Cong. 2nd Sess. 1988. In 
fact, IGRA actually provided the states with a role in 
Indian gaming that they did not possess after the Supreme 
Court decision in Cabazon. Given the involvement of the 
states in the passage of IGRA, and the policy reasons for its 
passage, which was the result of a compromise urged by 
the states, Congress’ power under the Interstate 
Commerce Clause can be relied upon as a basis for 
overriding the State’s sovereign immunity. 


In enacting IGRA, Congress tried to fashion a plan 
that would give the states a voice in how tribal gaming 
should operate and also a means to enforce the states’ own 
laws. Spokane, supra, 28 F.3d at 997. The Background of 


15 


. Le ah a sed » Cad. 4 Ponty bm 


P.L. 100-497, S.Rep.No.446, 100th Cong. 2d Sess. (1988) 
specifically notes that state and federal law enforcement 
officials expressed fear that Indian bingo and other 
gambling enterprises could become targets for infiltration 
by criminal elements. S.Rep. 446, supra at 1. Although, as 
noted in the “Additional Views” of Senator McCain in that 
Senate Report, as the debate on IGRA unfolded it became 
clear that the interests of the states and of the gaming 
industry extended far beyond their expressed concern 
about organized crime and centered more in the protection 
of their own games from a new source of economic 
competition, the fact remains that the states made 
organized crime their motive for seeking the enactment of 
IGRA and Congress relied on this stated intent in enacting 
it. 25 U.S.C. §2702(2). Moreover, assuming the states also 
had an economic interest in urging the enactment of IGRA, 
it cannot be seriously argued that gaming has no effect on 
interstate commerce. By its very nature gaming affects 
commerce between the states. Both the desire to protect 
gaming from the influences of organized crime, and the 
economic interest in protecting their own economy, affect 
interstate commerce.!° 


In a challenge to the power of Congress in enacting the 
Organized Crime Control Act of 1970, 84 Stat. 922, the 
Third Circuit Court of Appeals in United States v. Ceraso, 
467 F.2d 653 (3rd Cir. 1972), rejected the argument that 
Congress lacked the power to enact the Act. Citing to the 
evidence given to Congress showing the serious effects of 
gambling on interstate commerce the court said: 


10The State attempts to have it both ways. It wants to allow for the 
power of Congress to enact IGRA to impose the State’s regulation on 
Indian gaming but it does not want to comply with its duty under the 
Act to negotiate in good faith. 


16 


The Report of the President’s Commission on Law 
Enforcement and Administration of Justice, 
supra, at 188-89 stated that “gambling is the 
greatest source of revenue for organized crime.” It 
noted that estimates of the total amount bet 
through organized crime’s facilities each year 
varied from $7 billion to some $50 billion. All of 

- this activity was accomplished by an intricate 
system of local, regional, and national “lay-off 
men,” who through the use of the facilities of 
interstate commerce, captured the substantial 
bankroll which has been used to “infiltrate 
legitimate businesses and labor unions, to harm 
investors and competing businesses, and to 
corrupt the democratic process.” Schneider v. 
United States, 459 F.2d 540, at 542 (8th Cir. filed 
April 12, 1972). As we previously noted, Congress 
placed great reliance on the report and the 
findings it contained. We find that this 
information was a sufficient rational basis for the 
conclusion that gambling produced serious 
detrimental effects on interstate commerce. 
Further, Congress acted within its authority 
because the means selected for controlling this 
evil are reasonably related to the effectuation of 
the end sought to be achieved. 


United States v. Ceraso, supra, 467 F.2d at 657-58. 


The Organized Crime Control Act set forth Congress’ 
findings about the effects of organized crime on interstate 
commerce: it is a highly sophisticated and widespread 
activity that drains the economy by unlawful conduct and 
illegal fraud and corruption. The Organized Crime Control 
Act cites gambling as one of the sources from which 
organized crime derives its power and finds that this power 


17 


Bats Bk ki. 
“ee o~ To PP Te See Pe ee eee ee vem, wee me Pn att oh) Api, {> 3 : ee 


and money are increasingly used to infiltrate and corrupt 
legitimate business and corrupt the democratic process: 


[O]rganized crime activities in the United States 
weaken the stability of the nation’s economic 
system, harm innocent investors and competing 
organizations, interfere with free competition, 
seriously burden interstate and foreign commerce 
and undermine the general welfare of the nation 
and its citizens. . . 


467 F.2d at 658 n.7 


In United States v. Sacco, 491 F.2d 995 (9th Cir. 1974) 
(en banc), the appellants challenged 18 U.S.C. $1955 
stating that its prohibition of illegal gambling businesses 
regulated purely local activity and had no effect on 
interstate commerce. The Ninth Circuit rejected that 
argument stating that although an activity is local and not 
regarded as commerce, it can be reached by Congress if it 
exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate 
commerce. See also, Perez v. United States, 402 U.S. 146 
(1971) (Loan sharking operations are carried on, to a 
substantial extent, in interstate and foreign commerce, and 
through the means and instrumentalities of such 
commerce, and even where extortionate credit transactions 
are purely intrastate in character, they nevertheless affect 
interstate and foreign commerce). The class of activities 
which Congress intended to regulate under IGRA burdens 
interstate commerce. Congress has found that gambling is 
one of the sources from which organized crime derives its 
power. Therefore, Congress had a rational basis to find that 
the regulated activity affected commerce and the 
regulatory scheme provided by IGRA is reasonable. Heart 
of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379 U.S. 241 (1964). 


18 


The legislative: history of IGRA is repiete with 
references to Congress’ concern over the infiltration of 
organized crime into tribal gaming operations. See, e.g., 
S.Rep. No. 446, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 1, 5 (1988). Congress 
enacted IGRA not only to ensure tribal self-sufficiency, 
because this was assured to Indian tribes by Cabazon and 
its limits on a state’s authority, but also to protect gaming 
from the corrupting influences of organized crime. Because 
the stated policy in enacting IGRA was, in large part, to 
provide a statutory basis for the regulation of gaming by 
Indian tribes, to shield the gaming from organized crime 
and other corrupting influences, to ensure that the Indian 
tribes were the primary beneficiaries of the gaming 
operation and to also ensure that gaming was conducted 
fairly and honestly, this policy gives Congress the power 
under the Interstate Commerce Clause to abrogate the 
state’s sovereign immunity. 


b. Congress Intended To Abrogate Eleventh 
Amendment Immunity By Enacting The 


Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. 


The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in its opinion 
recognized that Congress intended to abrogate the State’s 
sovereign immunity when it enacted IGRA. Seminole Tribe 
v. Florida, supra, 11 F.3d at 1024. Congress may abrogate 
the State’s Eleventh Amendment immunity from suit only 
when the Congressional intent to abrogate that immunity 
is unequivocal. Atascadero State Hosp. v. Scanlon, 473 
U.S. 234, 242 (1985). (Congress has power to abrogate state 
immunity when acting pursuant to §5 of the Fourteenth 
Amendment); see also, Union Gas, supra, 491 U.S. at 7 
(Congress must make its intent to override a state’s 
immunity unmistakably clear); Dellmuth v. Muth, 491 US. 
223, 227 (1989) (same). In enacting IGRA Congress gave 
federal district courts jurisdiction “over three types of 


19 


cases, the first of which is ‘any cause of action initiated by 
an Indian tribe arising from the failure of a State to enter 
into negotiations with the Indian tribe for the purpose of 
entering into a Tribal-State compact under paragraph (3) 
or to conduct such negotiations in good faith.’ The only 
possible defendant to such a suit is a state.” Seminole Tribe 
of Florida v. State of Florida, supra, 11 F.3d at 1024 
(citations omitted). It is clear that Congress intended to 
abrogate the state’s sovereign immunity when it enacted 
IGRA. The question is not whether Congress intended to 
abrogate sovereign immunity when it enacted IGRA, and 
respondent conceded as much, Seminole Tribe v. Florida, 
801 F. Supp. at 658, referring to the State’s Memorandum 
at 1, but whether Congress had the power to abrogate the 
State’s Eleventh Amendment. Congress had such power 
under the Indian Commerce Clause as well as under the 
Interstate Commerce Clause. 


Ii. 


EX PARTE YOUNG AUTHORIZES THE 
SEMINOLE TRIBE’S FEDERAL CLAIMS 
AGAINST STATE OFFICIALS FOR 
PROSPECTIVE RELIEF. 


The Eleventh Amendment does not prohibit suits 
against state officials based upon violations of federal law 
when only prospective injunctive and declaratory relief is 
sought. Green v. Mansour, 474 U.S. 64, 68 (1985). ‘The 
Seminole Tribe’s lawsuit against the Governor of the State 
of Florida, Lawton Chiles, properly sought to invoke the 
doctrine of Ex parte Young and force the state officials to 
negotiate in good faith. Under IGRA, state officials are 
required to conduct negotiations for Class III gaming in 
good faith, and the Act creates a cause of action which 
gives the federal court jurisdiction for failure of a state to 


20 


ut 


I. SO 


enter into negotiations, or to conduct such negotiations in 
good faith. 25 U.S.C. §2710 (d) (7) (A) (i). 


Sovereign immunity does not preclude a suit against a 
state official for prospective relief designed to vindicate 
federal law. Pennhurst State School and Hosp., v. 
Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 104-06 (1984). Petitioner sought 
to require the Governor of the State of Florida to negotiate 
a compact in good faith and asked for declaratory relief. 
The Governor is the official in the State of Florida 
authorized to negotiate on behalf of the state, therefore, 
the prospective relief requested by Petitioner clearly falls 
within the doctrine of Ex parte Young. Pennhurst State 
School & Hosp., supra, 465 U.S. at 102-03. If a suit seeks 
prospective relief against a state official to vindicate 
federal law, it is permitted under Ex parte Young 
notwithstanding the impact on the state itself. Jd. at 104. 


Moreover, the Eleventh Circuit incorrectly held that 
the actions of the State involved discretionury acts. The 
State is required to negotiate in good faith and has no 
discretion to decline to do so. 25 U.S.C. §2710(d\(3XA). If 
the state official declines to negotiate at all, there are 
procedures in IGRA which prescribe the process for 
regulating the Class III gaming. Because the State of 
Florida opted to negotiate with Petitioner, it was required 
to negotiate in good faith; this was not discretionary. It was 
only the decision to negotiate at all which was 
discretionary. 


Under Ex parte Young, the State’s assertion of 
sovereign immunity to bar the lawsuit by Petitioner must 
fail. Even if the Court were to decide that the Eleventh 
Amendment bars a lawsuit by a citizen against his own 
state, based on the need to promote the supremacy of 


21 


federal law, Pennhurst State School and Hosp., supra, 465 
U.S. at 105, such immunity would not apply here. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated above, Amicus Curiae, the 
Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, supports the 
Petitioner, the Seminole Tribe of Florida, in its request to 
reverse the judgment of the Eleventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals. 


Respectfully Submitted, 


Sonia Escobio O’Donnell 

Lehtinen, O’Donnell, Malman, 
Cortifas, Vargas & Reiner, P.A. 
7700 North Kendall Drive, Suite 303 
Miami, Florida 33156 

Telephone: (305) 279-1166 
Facsimile: (305) 279-1365 


Attorneys for Amicus Curiae 


SAA ene 5 citi e iee tala bie Ph i ae 
i ay ae sa Fa 


