~~ Supreme Court, U.S. 


®) FILED 


No. 94-12 > MAY 3 


Ponce or wae cen | 


1995 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
> 


SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA, 


Petitioner, 


STATE OF FLORIDA, ET AL., 


Respondents. 
® 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Eleventh Circuit 


e 


BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE STATES OF CALIFORNIA, 
WASHINGTON, ALABAMA, ARIZONA, ARKANSAS, 
COLORADO, CONNECTICUT, HAWAII, IDAHO, 
KANSAS, LOUISIANA, MAINE, MASSACHUSETTS, 
MICHIGAN, MISSISSIPPI, MISSOURI, MONTANA, 
NEBRASKA, NEVADA, NEW HAMPSHIRE, NEW YORK, 
NORTH CAROLINA, OHIO, OKLAHOMA, 
PENNSYLVANIA, RHODE ISLAND, SOUTH DAKOTA, 
TEXAS, VERMONT, VIRGINIA AND WEST VIRGINIA 
SUPPORTING THE STATE OF FLORIDA, ET AL. 


,% 
A 


CurisTINE O. GREGOIRE Danie. E. LUNGREN 
Attorney General Attorney General 
State of Washington State of California 

JONATHAN Tate McCoy Manuet M. Mepeiros 
Assistant Attorney General Deputy Attorney General 
1125 Washington Street, S.E. 

THomas F. Gepe 
P.O. Box 40100 Special Assistant 
Olympia, WA 98504-0100 Pavesi “eteaas 
(360) 753-2693 Attorney General 
Counsel of Record 
1515 K Street 


Sacramento, CA 95814 
(916) 323-7355 


Additional Counsel Listed Inside 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


Jerr SESSIONS 
Attorney General 
State of Alabama 


Grant Woops 
Attorney General 
State of Arizona 


WINSTON BRYANT 
Attorney General 
State of Arkansas 


GaLe A. Norton 
Attorney General 
State of Colorado 


RICHARD BLUMENTHAL 
Attorney General 
State of Connecticut 


Marcery S. BRONSTER 


Attorney General 
State of Hawaii 


ALAN LANCE 
Attorney General 
State of Idaho 


Cara J. STOVALL 
Attorney General 
State of Kansas 


RicHArD P. IEvous 
Attorney General 
State of Louisiana 


ANDREW KETTERER 
Attorney General 
State of Maine 


Scott HARSHBARGER 

Attorney General 

Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts 


FRANK J. KELLEY 
Attorney General 
State of Michigan 


Mike Moore 
Attorney General 
State of Mississippi 


JEREMIAH W. Nixon 
Attorney General 
State of Missouri 


JosepH P. Mazurexk 
Attorney General 
State of Montana 


Don STENBERG 
Attorney General 
State of Nebraska 


FRANKIE SuE Det Papa 


Attorney General 
State of Nevada 


JerrREY R. Howarp 
Attorney General 


State of New Hampshire 


Dennis C. Vacco 
Attorney General 
State of New York 


MicnHaet F. EAsiey 
Attorney General 


State of North Carolina 


Betty D. MONTGOMERY 
Attorney General 
State of Ohio 


Drew EDMONDSON 
Attorney General 
State of Oklahoma 


Ernest D. Preate, Jr. 

Attorney General 

Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania 


Jerrrey B. Pine 
Attorney General 
State of Rhode Island 


Mark BARNETT 
Attorney General 
State of South Dakota 


DAN MOoRALES 
Attorney General 
State of Texas 


JerrreY L. AMestToy 
Attorney General 
State of Vermont 


James S. Gir_more III 
Attorney General 
Commonwealth of Virginia 


Darre_t V. McGraw, Jr. 
Attorney General 
State of West Virginia 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
INTEREST OF AMICI STATES.................000. 1 
TEFEGARY OF} ATNSURGIINE «oo oc cc cece cccscveccene 2 
SE ik Ga an Nand so nds Cah MMe eweaed ote 4 


ARTICLE I DOES NOT GRANT CONGRESS 
AUTHORITY TO ABROGATE STATE SOVEREIGN 
RINE EERE 378- E  enee e Pe yt a ee 


A. The States Entered Into The Union With 
Their Sovereignty Intact, Including Their 
Immunity From Suit As Sovereigns........ 


a. 


The Eleventh Amendment Preserves 
State Sovereign Immunity............ hee 


States May Not Be Sued Unless Their 
NENT FORE occ ones ccssvecens 


Abrogation Is An Analytical Corollary 
To A State’s Waiver of Immunity, Not A 
Separate Congressional Power ......... 


B. Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Represents a Radi- 
cal Departure From Prior Case Law, Is Con- 
stitutionally Unsound, And Should Be 
Car aiaks caseenscuvsnesssiseceuses 


1. 


The Jurisdiction Of The Federal Courts Is 
Determined By Article III, Not By Con- 
CD THEE BED FB ciosccccccccccovcne 


Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Should Be 
RRR PE ror 


EVEN UNDER UNION GAS, CONGRESS DOES 
NOT HAVE THE POWER TO ABROGATE STATE 
JUDICIAL IMMUNITY UNDER THE INDIAN 
CEE Ss oetecicccesiscodscencceses 


10 


10 


12 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 


A. Plenaty Power Alone Does Not Give Con- 
gress the Power to Abrogate State Sovereign 
Immunity ......... 0 eee cece cece cece eeeeeees 17 


B. Displacement Of States’ Power Does Not 
Give Congress Power Over States.......... 18 


EX PARTE YOUNG IS NOT AUTHORITY FOR AN 
ORDER COMPELLING A GOVERNOR TO EXER- 
CISE THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE STATE FOR 
THE SOLE PURPOSE OF EFFECTUATING A FED- 
ERAL REGULATORY SCHEME .................. 20 


THE TENTH AMENDMENT PROHIBITS APPLI- 
CATION OF THE COERCIVE PROVISIONS OF 
THE INDIAN GAMING REGULATORY ACT..... 23 


ee ell: | ee errrrrrrrrrry Ter tr tT Sere rire 29 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234 

ES SER Abacus ches bbbn aeked datdednedcaketecnenaas 8 
Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 501 U.S. 775 

rey eee ere eee ee > & &2, 13, 15 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe v. State of South Dakota, 

DP Oe eee Ue Gh Ie ob AG NS ere cconsn duces 16 
Chisholm v. Georgia, 2 Dall. (2 U.S.) 419 (1793)...... 6, 7 
Delmuth v. Muth, 491 U.S. 223 (1989)................ 20 
Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651 (1974)............... 21 
Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123 (1908)........ 3, 20, 21, 22 
FERC v. Mississippi, 456 U.S. 742 (1982) ............. 25 


Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445 (1976)..8, 9, 17, 18, 19 


FTC v. Ticor Title Ins. Co., 504 U.S. 621 (1992)....... 28 
Green v. Mansour, 474 U.S. at 68 .................... 12 
Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890) ............ 6, 7, 12 
Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation 

Msen.. t., GES WH. BHA CIPS) .2occccccccccccccess 25 
In Re State of New York, 256 U.S. 490 (1921).......... 4 
Larson v. Domestic & Foreign Commerce Corp., 337 

U.S. 682 (1949)...... | hea Cee bead ne ease neds ébeees 6 
Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) .............. 21 


Monaco v. Mississippi, 292 U.S. 313 (1934)........... 7, 8 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES —- Continued 


Page 
New York v. United States, 505 U.S. __, 112 S.Ct. 
2408, 120 L.Ed.2d 120 (1992)......... 5, 11, 12, 24, 26 
Penrhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 
8 Ee ee Pe rer Te Ee Teme re 6, 21 
Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1 (1989)..... passim 
Ponca Tribe of Oklahoma v. State of Oklahoma, 37 F. 
Be ee Ge I TE So ca ccec chal eedensdadéccs: 16 


Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority v. Metcalf 
& Eddy Inc., __ U.S. __, 113 S. Ct. 684 (1993) ...2, 6 


Quern v. Jordan, 440 U.S. 332 (1979)..........00 000s. 21 
Red Lake Band of Chippewa v. Brown, 928 F.2d 467 

is GU I Soc vad riececnanesdys vot obi ks 0k 25 
Red Lake Band of Chippewa v. Swimmer, 740 F. Supp. 

Ps ME Loi via nudecshannbaveeentes Passcess 25 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 

SU Cree Ga Gee oo vs dv ccltvictvccstseci 13, 16, 19 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1936)............ 25 
South Dakota v. North Carolina, 192 U.S. 286 (1904)..... 8 
Spokane Tribe of Indians v. Washington State, 28 F.3d 

BD ee re IVT TTT eer TTT 16 
United States v. Bekins, 304 U.S. 27 (1938)............ 26 
United States v. Lopez, __ U.S. __, __, (Kennedy, 

J., concurring, slip op., at 11)............... 1, 11, 28 
United States v. Mississippi, 380 U.S. 128 (1965)....... 8 


Welch v. Texas Dep't of Highways & Public Transp., 
SP Se. Ge Cae 0d ee doneshececboe nnseases 6, 12 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
CONSTITUTION, STATUTES AND REGULATION 
ey ig WS We NO I ve ced eececesccccceaeess 24 
25 U.S.C. §§ 2701(3), 2701(4), 2702(3)..............5. 13 
BP iss Oe BEES BA oss reese nccsesscdennsene 23 
ee ey ae Re once seen teradeevenrdsesianns 24 
SP WBA. B EF ORID ov cc ccscccccncccvess 23, 25, 26 
o's sn ccebiacn<estencdeeenes 22 
ee nti  ienadsnedhecderndeaccees 25 
ee es Ie II 0 n'55.-0:0 066-v0s cacuvesccnsenes 21 
BP a Oe ED 6 oo 5b cece cvewvocsctsncsenes 26 
ee as OF I aincvcevencacesvanconess 21, 23 
SD WBA. B TPO vv vc vesvsnscsccsenecs 22, 26 
ee Ss Oe BIOS o 6ccs cvevevecnscncucnsde 26 
ZB UBL. © FTI OD «vc ccc cece ccccescccccses 26 
ee is MIO 6 00 da Swab 05-060 00nnwesea000edas 28 
Fy Gis dnb bars 00656 duke ses conccccesicns 26 


OTHER AUTHORITIES 
S.Rep. No. 446, 100th Cong. 2d. Sess. 1, p. 2 (1988) .... 13 


RE EE er 5 
ee I I a I et el eu eteesee’ ey 


INTEREST OF AMICI STATES 


This case is more about federalism than about Indian 
tribes. Although the Parties are nominally an Indian tribe 
and a State, the conflict which brings the case to this 
Court is between the Congress of the United States and 
the governments of the several States of the Union. This 
case involves a statute which directly mandates State 
participation in a federal regulatory program and seeks to 
enforce that mandate through federal court action. In so 
doing, the statute offends the principles of federalism: the 
idea that we enhance our freedom by diffusing sovereign 
power “by the creation of two governments, not one.” 
United States v. Lopez, __ U.S. __, __, (Kennedy, J., 
concurring, slip op., at 11). 


The sovereign interests of all the States of the Union 
— those with Indian lands within their borders as well as 
those without - are seriously jeopardized by the method 
chosen by the Congress to implement this legislation. The 
statute here directly commands the States to do certain 
acts, as if the States were mere subdivisions of a national 
government. No choice, incentive or acceptable alterna- 
tive is given a State under this legislation. States must 
comply or face federal court orders. 


Thus, the issues in this case go to the heart of our 
federal system of government - the relationship of States 
of the Union with the Federal Government and the auton- 
omy of States to govern their own citizens. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Congress does not have the authority to abrogate 
State sovereign immunity under any of its Article | 
powers. The States, in creating the Union, did not agree 
to allow the federal Congress to create jurisdiction over 
them in suits brought by private parties against their 
consent. 


The Eleventh Amendment of the United States Con- 
stitution is emblematic of the States’ deeper sovereign 
immunity, part of the understood background against 
which the Constitution was adopted: without their con- 
sent, either expressly given or “inherent in the plan of the 
convention,” States are immune from suit in federal 
courts. The immunity enjoyed by the States extends to all 
suits, regardless of the relief sought. Puerto Rico Aqueduct 
and Sewer Authority v. Metcalf & Eddy, Inc., _. U.S. __. 
113 S. Ct. 684, 688 (1993). 


Petitioner, Seminole Tribe of Florida, asks the Court 
to reject that history and understood background of the 
Constitution, and to extend the limited holding of its 1989 
plurality decision in Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1 
(1989), to other Article I powers of Congress, so as to 
provide Congress with a unilateral authority to allow 
suits against States in federal courts by private citizens. 
Brief for Petitioner, at 17. This Court has never before 
accepted that view, nor should it now. 


Amici States ask the Court to reject Petitioner’s 
claim; to reaffirm that Article I, standing alone, does not 
grant Congress unilateral authority to abrogate State sov- 
ereign immunity - a separate waiver of State sovereign 
immunity is constitutionally required; and to restore the 


Constitutional balance between federal and State author- 
ity “inherent in the plan of the [constitutional] conven- 
tion” by overturning the 1989 plurality opinion of the 
Court in Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1 (1989). 
Certainly, the Court should reject the notion that the 
powers given the Congress over Indian affairs gives it 
authority to abrogate State sovereign immunity, immu- 
nity that this Court has recognized, as Petitioner con- 
cedes, was never surrendered to Indian tribes in the plan 
of the convention. Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 
501 U.S. 775 (1991). 


The United States, appearing amicus curiae, contends 
Congress has the power to abrogate State sovereign 
immunity under the extensive plenary power that it has 
over Indian affairs, reflecting the erroneous assumption 
that a plenary power given the Congress includes the 
authority to subject States to suit in federal courts by 
private citizens. Brief for United States, at 24-25. The 
United States also argues, citing Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 
123 (1908), as its basis, that state officials can be sued in 
federal court for prospective injunctive relief under the 
Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 (“IGRA”), not 
merely to restrain an official from performing an uncon- 
stitutional act, but to compel the undertaking of any 
obligation imposed by federal law, without regard to the 
official’s conduct or whether the obligation is discretion- 


ary. 

Ex parte Young does not support the United States’ 
contention. A litigant may not avoid the jurisdictional 
proscription of the Eleventh Amendment by the expe- 


dient of naming a state officer as a Defendant, when it is 
the State that is ultimately compelled to take action. In 


fact, IGRA, by its own terms and in its practical effect, is 
directed at the State qua State. To the extent a suit Is 
maintained against the governor of the State, or any other 
state officer, seeking to compel that officer to exercise the 
sovereignty of the State in its sovereign capacity, it is a 
suit against the State and is barred by the Eleventh 
Amendment. Finally, because IGRA directly coerces the 
States to negotiate and complete tribal-state gambling 
compacts and sanctions a lawsuit in federal court to 
compel this exercise of sovereign legislative discretion, it 
is a definitive example of a Tenth Amendment violation 
enforced by an Eleventh Amendment violation. 


¢ 


ARGUMENT 


NGRESS 
ARTICLE I DOES NOT GRANT CO 
AUTHORITY TO ABROGATE STATE SOVEREIGN 
IMMUNITY. 


In this case, the Court is presented with the novel 
assertion that Congress has unilateral authority to abro- 
gate State sovereign immunity acting solely under the 
Indian Commerce Clause, an Article I power. This Court 
has never endorsed that view. The implications of the 
argument are far broader than the statute at issue here, or 
even Congress’ specific authority under the Indian Com- 
merce Clause, upon which IGRA is explicitly based. The 
assertion presupposes that any Article I power gives Con- 
gress the power to abrogate State sovereign immunity, 
abandoning the long-standing constitutional requirement 
of a separate waiver. 


A. The States Entered Into The Union With Their Sov- 


ereignty Intact, Including Their Immunity From 
Suit As Sovereigns. 


When the States entered into the Union, they did so 
with their sovereignty intact. Blatchford v. Native Village of 
Noatak, 111 S. Ct. at 2581. “ ‘The Constitution . . . leaves to 
the several States a residuary and inviolable sover- 
eignty’ . . . reserved explicitly to the States by the Tenth 
Amendment.” New York v. United States, 505 U.S. Li ae 
S. Ct. 2408, 2434-35 (1992), quoting The Federalist, No. 39. 


One of the most important aspects of that retained 
sovereignty is State sovereign immunity. For nearly two 
hundred years the analysis expressed by Alexander Ham- 
ilton in the Federalist, No. 81, guided this Court's deter- 
mination of State sovereign immunity claims: 


It is inherent in the nature of sovereignty, not to be 
amenable to the suit of an individual without its 
consent. This is the general sense, and the gen- 
eral practice of mankind; and the exemption, as 
one of the attributes of sovereignty, is now 
enjoyed by the Government of every State in the 
Union. Unless, therefore, there is a surrender of 
this immunity in the plan of the Convention, it 


will remain with the States[.]” (Emphasis 
added.) 


1. The Eleventh Amendment Preserves State Sov- 
ereign Immunity. 


Article III of the Constitution explicitly grants to the 
federal judiciary authority to adjudicate claims involving 
States in certain enumerated areas. The Eleventh Amend- 
ment just as explicitly limits that authority. 


6 


This withdrawal of jurisdiction [in the Eleventh 
Amendment] effectively confers an immunity 
from suit. Thus this Court has consistently held 
that an unconsenting State is immune from suits 
brought in federal courts by her own citizens as 
well as by citizens of another State. Absent 
waiver, neither a State nor agencies acting under 
its control may be subject to suit in federal 
court. 


Puerto Rico Aqueduct v. Metcalf & Eddy, 121 L.Ed.2d 605, 
612 (1993) (citations omitted); see also, Pennhurst State Sch. 
& Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 98 (1984). 


The Eleventh Amendment of the United States Con- 
stitution reflects the states’ deeper sovereign immunity, 
which is itself “part of the understood background 
against which the Constitution was adopted, . . . ” Penn- 
sylvania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1, 32 (1989) (Scalia, J., 
concurring in part and dissenting in part); see also Welch v. 
Texas Dep't of Highways & Public Transp., 483 U.S. 468, 487 
(1987). Thus, the States, in creating the Union, did not 
contemplate federal jurisdiction over suits brought 
against them against their consent. Hans v. Louisiana, 134 
U.S. 1, 15 (1890). Whether the Eleventh Amendment is 
wholly jurisdictional or more fundamentally tied to the 
question of a sovereign’s consent, it is clear that its pas- 
sage was the result of the “shock of surprise throughout 
the country” at the decision of the Supreme Court in 
Chisholm v. Georgia, 2 Dall. (2 U.S.) 419 (1793), permitting 
the suit against Georgia by a citizen of another State. The 
Amendment was proposed and ratified with “vehement 
speed,” Larson v. Domestic & Foreign Commerce Corp., 337 
U.S. 682, 708 (1949) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting), from 
March 4, 1793 to February 7, 1794. 


In Hans v. Louisiana, the Court made it clear that the 
Eleventh Amendment's effect was to overturn the result 
in Chisholm and restore the “original understanding” that 
Article III’s grant of federal court jurisdiction did not 
extend to suits against the States. Hans, 134 U.S. at 14-16. 
This original understanding suppoited the view that 
immunity flowed not from the Eleventh Amendment, but 
from broader concepts of state sovereign immunity gen- 
erally. 


Behind the words of the constitutional provi- 
sions are postulates which limit and control. 
There is the . . . postulate that States of the 
Union, still possessing attributes of sovereignty, 
shall be immune from suits, without their con- 
sent, save where there has been ‘a surrender of 
this immunity in the plan of the convention.’ 


Monaco v. Mississippi, 292 U.S. 313, 322-323 (1934) (quot- 
ing A. Hamilton, The Federalist, No. 81). 


2. States May Not Be Sued Unless Their Immunity 
Is Waived. 


Reflecting the view that the state judicial immunity 
derives from a broader, general governmental immunity, 
it follows the immunity is a privilege that the State may 
waive at its pleasure. This may be done expressly, or 
impliedly, as suggested by the language of Alexander 
Hamilton: consent may be implied where there has been a 
“surrender of this immunity in the plan of the conven- 
tion.” Monaco, 292 U.S. at 323. 


This surrender of immunity, or implied waiver, is 
found in the plan of the convention in suits against the 


States by the United States because of the Supremacy 
Clause and because the allowance of such suits was 
inherent in the agreement to be bound by the Constitu- 
tion. United States v. Mississippi, 380 U.S. 128, 140 (1965). 
Similarly, the states may sue each other since, inherent in 
the nature of a federated republic, is the idea that there 
should be a forum in which states can sue each other on 
an even footing. Monaco, 292 U.S. at 327-328; South Dakota 
v. North Carolina, 192 U.S. 286, 318 (1904). 


Upon the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, a 
new source for the surrender or withdrawal of immunity 
appeared by virtue of the purpose and text of the Four- 
teenth Amendment - which was explicitly addressed to 
controlling State action - and necessarily limited the 
reach of the earlier adopted Eleventh Amendment. When 
acting pursuant to § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, 
Congress can annul, or abrogate, the States’ sovereign 
immunity without the States’ consent. Atascadero State 
Hospital v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234, 238 (1985), relying on 
Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445, 456 (1976). This author- 
ity, however, was still derived from a separate constitu- 
tionally-based surrender of State immunity - as the Court 
repeatedly noted in Fitzpatrick. 


3. Abrogation Is An Analytical Corollary To A 
State’s Waiver Of Immunity, Not A Separate 
Congressional Power. 


“Waiver” has been the consistent hallmark of this 
Court’s determination of State sovereign immunity 
claims. The only circumstance in which the Eleventh 
Amendment does not bar suits against a State in federal 


court is where a State has consented to such a suit. In Re 
State of New York, 256 U.S. 490, 497 (1921). 


It was in Fitzpatrick that the Court first used the word 
“abrogation” to express its view of the intersection of 
Congress’ Article I authority to legislate in a given field 
and the federal judiciary’s Article III authority to hear 
cases brought pursuant to such legislation. Implicit in the 
concept of congressional abrogation is not just delegation 
of federal authority to legislate in a particular sphere, 
however, but a surrender of State sovereignty to the 
judicial authority of the United States. 


“Abrogation” has never been deemed by this Court 
as a separate power granted to Congress, as asserted by 
Petitioner. Brief for Petitioner, at 20. Rather, it is a short- 
hand expression used by the Court to express Congress’ 
exercise of its power when coupled with a pre-existing, 
constitutionally-based separate waiver of State immunity. 
Such an “inherent waiver,” albeit dormant, is given life 
when Congress speaks. There is no separate power to 
abrogate a retained right of the States. Rather, more prop- 
erly speaking, Congress is enabled to make States liable 
to suit in federal court because of a preexisting, inherent 
waiver given to it by the States. Thus, any such power in 
Congress can go no further than the waiver that was 
initially made by the states “in the plan of the conven- 
tion.” When viewed in that light, it is clear that the States 
made no such broad-gauged waiver as is argued here, or 
as was suggested in Union Gas. 


10 


B. Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Repxesents A Radical 
Departure From Prior Case Law, is Constitutionally 
Unsound, And Should Be Overturned. 


In 1989, this Court, in a splintered and ambiguous 
plurality decision, decided that the power granted to the 
Congress in Article I of the Constitution to regulate inter- 
state commerce was also a limitation on the sovereign 
immunity of a State, thereby allowing Congress to subject 
States to suit in federal court by private citizens. Pennsyl- 
vania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1 (1989). The premise of Union 
Gas was that Congress’ power to regulate interstate com- 
merce would be incomplete if Congress could not subject 
the States to suit in the federal courts. Amici States con- 
tend the Union Gas decision is constitutionally unsound 
and its rationale effectively eviscerates the Eleventh 
Amendment. To understand why Union Gas is constitu- 
tionally unsound it is necessary to review the intersection 
of Articles I and III of the Constitution. 


1. The Jurisdiction Of The Federal Courts Is Deter- 
mined By Article III, Not By Congress Under 
Article I. 


The powers of Congress are set forth in Article I of 
the Constitution, the scope of judicial authority in Article 
III. Because of this separation, one branch may not 
expand or otherwise affect the inherent constitutional 
authority of any other branch. “[T]he Constitution pro- 
tects us from our own best intentions: It divides power 
among sovereigns and among branches of government 
precisely so that we may resist the temptation to concen- 
trate power in one location as an expedient solution to 


11 


the crisis of the day.” New York, supra, 112 S. Ct. at 2434. 
Although Congress is given the power to make laws, 
including the power to create causes of action under 
federal law, it cannot create jurisdiction in federal courts 
which is not otherwise established by Article III. 


Petitioner's argument deviates from this established 
rule by suggesting that Congress can unilaterally create 
jurisdiction, secured by the Eleventh Amendment, when- 
ever it legislates under its Article I authority. This con- 
struction skews both the balance of authority inherent in 
the federal structure of the Constitution and the balance 
of responsibilities between the federal judicial and legis- 
lative branches. It further ignores that 


Congress exercises its conferred powers subject 
to the limitations of the Constitution. Thus, for 
example, under the Commerce Clause Congress 
may regulate publishers engaged in interstate 
commerce, but Congress is constrained in the 
exercise of that power by the First Amendment. 


New York, supra, 112 S. Ct. 2408, 2418. This Court in New 
York continued by pointing to the limitation on the power 
of Congress found in the Tenth Amendment: “the power 
of the Federal Government is subject to limits that may, in 
a given instance, reserve power to the States.” Ibid. 
Recently, this Court relied on the principles of federalism 
to invalidate an Act of Congress where the latter branch 
so interfered in State matters using its commerce clause 
powers that it “upset[] the federal balance,” thereby 
bringing this Court to “recognize meaningful limits on 
the commerce power of Congress.” United States v. Lopez, 
__ US. ___ __, (Kennedy, J., concurring, slip op., at 17). 


12 


Similarly, in Blatchford this Court found that the judicial 
authority in Article III is limited by State sovereign immu- 
nity as exemplified by the Eleventh Amendment. Blatchford, 
supra, 111 S. Ct. at 2581; Accord Hans, supra, 134 U.S. at 14-16; 
Green v. Mansour, 474 U.S. 64, 68 (1985); Welch v. Texas Dep't of 
Highways & Public Trans., 483 U.S. at 487. 


2. Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Should Be Over- 
turned. 


The fundamental error of Union Gas is its misap- 
prehension of the relationship between the nature of Con- 
gress’ Article I powers and the federal judiciary’s Article 
III authority over the States. Union Gas, and the Indian 
Gaming Regulatory Act suits at issue in this case, repre- 
sent private rights of action against States. It was the pursuit 
of precisely that remedy which the Eleventh Amendment 
was enacted to forbid. 


There are numerous areas where Congress has the 
authority to legislate, and Congress has at its disposal a 
variety of mechanisms to encourage State compliance.' 
What Congress does not have the authority to do, how- 
ever, is create a private right of action against a State to 
enforce a federal mandate, without a separate waiver of 
State immunity, either express or inherent. As the Court 
noted in Blatchford, just because the federal government 


1 For example, Congress can restrict the availability of fed- 
eral funds to States, or make them contingent upon an express 
waiver of State immunity; it can regulate directly in the absence 
of a State assertion of authority; and, in some circumstances, 
may even sue States directly to require compliance. See New 
York, supra, 112 S. Ct. at 2423. 


13 


can sue a State, does not mean that Congress can autho- 
rize others to do so. Blatchford, supra, 111 S. Ct. at 2584. 


The premise of the 1989 plurality decision announced 
in Union Gas was that the Interstate Commerce Clause 
represented a surrender of State immunity “inherent in 
the plan of the Convention.” There is no such waiver. 
Union Gas is the first and only time that this Court has 
found a constitutionally-based waiver of State sovereign 
immunity beyond that arising from state-federal and 
state-state relationships, and, by clear implication, in the 
Fourteenth Amendment. In so finding, Union Gas is a 
radical departure from the Court’s previously uniform 
precedents regarding inherent waiver. 


The plurality opinion in Union Gas also launched 
what has become an increasingly detailed search by liti- 
gants for other “implied” waivers of State immunity in 
diverse provisions of the Constitution, anc herculean 
efforts to shoehorn legislation into the analytical niche 
created by the decision.2 These pursuits have done 
serious damage to the fundamental balance of authority 
between the State and federal governments inherent in 
the structure of the Constitution. 


2 The Amicus Brief of the National Indian Gaming Associa- 
tion typifies this effort. Although neither the Act nor its legisla- 
tive history make any reference to interstate commerce, amici 
tribes contend that it “must have been on Congress’ minds.” 
The Eleventh Circuit properly rejected this line of argument. 
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida, 11 F.3d 1016, 1027, n. 13 
(11th Cir. 1994); see S.Rep. No. 446, 100th Cong., 2d. Sess. 1, p. 2 
(1988); 25 U.S.C. §§ 2701(3), 2701(4), 2702(3). 


14 


As the Eleventh Amendment is a limitation on the 
Article III jurisdiction of the federal courts, Congress 
cannot change that limitation through the exercise of 
Article I powers. This is an appropriate case in which to 
abandon the plurality decision in Union Gas. At a mini- 
mum, this case presents an opportunity to confine Union 
Gas to its facts and not to extend its reach. Otherwise, the 
Eleventh Amendment is transformed from a constitu- 
tional wall to a statutory hurdle, easily cleared by con- 
gressional recitation of a “clear” intent to abrogate the 
States’ sovereign immunity.? That is not what the framers 
of the Constitution, or the States which ratified it, 
intended. 


3 One example is the passage last fall of amendments to 
Section 106 of the Bankruptcy Code which were explicitly 
directed at overturning this Court’s earlier holding in Hoffmar: v. 
Conn. Dept. of Income Maintenance, 492 U.S. 96 (1989). Those 
revisions, which are to be applied retroactively allow a private 
individual to force a state into a federal bankruptcy court any- 
where in the country to defend enforcement and collection 
activities that were fully legal at the time they took place. The 
difficulties this imposes on state governments is exacerbated by 
the short notice periods in bankruptcy cases and the financial 
strains of defending out-of-state litigation. As such, the States 
are highly vulnerable to frivolous or bad faith filings by parties 
who challenge bona fide actions of the state simply in the hope 
that the States will be unable to defend themselves adequately. 
For that reason, we suggest that this Court must consider care- 
fully the ramifications of upholding the rationale of Union Gas, 
particularly if that rationale is given an expansive reading that 
could be expanded to other Article I powers such as the Bank- 
ruptcy Clause. 


15 


EVEN UNDER UNION GAS, CONGRESS DOES NOT 
HAVE THE POWER TO ABROGATE STATE JUDICIAL 
IMMUNITY UNDER THE INDIAN COMMERCE 
CLAUSE. 


Even if the Co irt chooses not to address Union Gas in 
the context of this case, the reasoning of that case does 
not logically extend to the Indian Commerce Clause. As 
Petitioner acknowledges, Florida did not expressly waive 
its sovereign immunity and the Indian Commerce Clause 
contains no such inherent waiver. Brief of Petitioner, at 
16, citing Blatchford, 501 U.S. at 779. The Indian Com- 
merce Clause does not, therefore, represent a waiver of 
State immunity empowering Congress to make States 
liable to private litigation in federal court. 


This Court’s conclusion in Blatchford that there was 
no waiver of sovereign immunity “inherent in the plan of 
the convention,”* is a compelling answer to why Con- 
gress does not have the power to abrogate state sovereign 
immunity under the Indian Commerce Clause. States did 


4 What makes the States’ surrender of immunity from suit 
by sister States plausible is the mutuality of that con- 
cession. There is no such mutuality with either for- 
eign sovereigns or Indian tribes. We have repeatedly 
held that Indian tribes enjoy immunity against suits 
by States [citation omitted], as it would be absurd to 
suggest that the tribes surrendered immunity in a 
convention to which they were not even parties. But if 
the convention could not surrender the tribes’ immu- 
nity for the benefit of the States, we do not believe that 
it surrendered the States’ immunity for the benefit of 
the tribes. 

Blatchford, 111 S. Ct. at 2582-83, emphasis in original. 


16 


not contemplate granting Congress power to nullify an 
immunity which they did not intend to surrender, nor did 
the States contemplate that Congress would have the 
power to compel the States to perform acts wholly within 
the scope of federal responsibility. 


This Court has not previously found congressional 
power to abrogate state sovereign immunity when legis- 
lating pursuant to the power to regulate commerce with 
Indians. Nevertheless, several Circuit Courts have done 
so, citing Union Gas as their authority. The Eighth, Ninth 
and Tenth Circuits found the power of Congress to abro- 
gate state sovereign immunity under the Interstate Com- 
merce Clause is equally “applicable” to the Indian 
Commerce Clause prong. Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe v. 
State of South Dakota, 3 F.3d 273, 280-281 (8th Cir. 1993); 
Spokane Tribe of Indians v. Washington State, 28 F.3d 991, 
996 (9th Cir. 1994); Ponca Tribe of Oklahoma v. State of 
Oklahoma, 37 F.3d 1422, 1430 (10th Cir. 1994). The Ninth 
Circuit went further and suggested that the Union Gas 
plurality framed its analysis in terms of the “Commerce 
Clause” as a whole, and did not limit it to the Interstate 
Commerce Clause prong. In contrast, the Eleventh Circuit 
in this case correctly noted that the Union Gas Court, in 
each of its opinions - plurality, concurrences and dissents 
— addressed only the interstate prong, and that its ratio- 
nale goes only to the regulation of commerce among the 
States. Seminole, 11 F.3d at 1027. 


17 


A. Plenary Power Alone Does Not Give Congress 
The Power to Abrogate State Sovereign Immu- 


nity. 

Amicus Curiae United States rests its application of 
Union Gas to the Indian Commerce Clause on the notion 
that that clause embodies a plenary power of the Con- 
gress that limits the power of the states, citing Fitzpatrick 
v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445, 456 (1976) (finding congressional 
power to abrogate under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment), and Union Gas, 491 U.S. at 19 (plurality opinion) 
(like the Fourteenth Amendment, the “Commerce Clause 
withholds power from the States at the same time as it 
confers it on Congress.”) Brief for United States, 20-21. 
Under this reasoning, of course, any Article I power 
granted to the Congress by the States in the Constitution 
- since all arguably withhold power from the States in 
some way - would serve as a basis for congressional 
power to abrogate state sovereign immunity - rendering 
the Eleventh Amendment superfluous. It was just such an 
analysis that Justice Scalia cautioned against in his partial 
dissent in Union Gas: 


[I]f the Article I commerce power enables abro- 
gation of state sovereign immunity, so do all the 
other Article I powers. An interpretation of the 
original Constitution which permits Congress to 
eliminate sovereign immunity only if it wants to 
render the doctrine a practical nullity and is 
therefore unreasonable. 


Pennsylvania v. Union Gas, 491 U.S. at 42 (Scalia, J., con- 
curring in part and dissenting in part). 


However, only the Fourteenth Amendment and, 
arguably, the Interstate Commerce Clause provide any 


18 


rationale for abrogation. First, they explicitly limit the 
autonomy of State governments to take certain actions 
and provide for federal supremacy relating to those par- 
ticular activities. Second, without conceding the wisdom 
of Union Gas, the plurality in that case expressed an 
important limitation on the power of Congress to sum- 
marily override a state’s Eleventh Amendment immunity: 
the power to abrogate was found to exist only because 
Congress’ power would be incomplete without rendering 
the States themselves liable in federal court. Union Gas, 
supra, 491 U.S. at 15, and at 19-20; see also Fitzpatrick, 427 
U.S. at 456 (Congress’ power to enforce the Fourteenth 
Amendment would be incomplete without the power to 
make the States, as employers, liable in federal court for 
unlawful employment discrimination: “Congress may 
.. . provide for private suits against States or state offi- 
cials which are constitutionally impermissible in other 
contexts.”). The same cannot be said about the Indian 
Commerce Clause. Congress’ authority over Indian rela- 
tions is complete, and need not involve the States at all. 


B. Displacement Of States’ Power Does Not Give 
Congress Power Over States. 


The Indian Commerce Clause was not intended to 
affect the autonomous operation of a State government. 
Fulfilling a different purpose than the interstate com- 
merce prong, it allocated the responsibility for that activ- 
ity to the United States government.5 While the plenary 


5 The Eleventh Circuit below recognized the important dis- 
tinctions in the respective purposes of Interstate Commerce 


19 


power of the Congress with respect to Indian affairs may 
displace the power of the States with respect to Indians, 
the Indian Commerce Clause does not permit Congress to 
mandate the States to assume the federal government's 
responsibilities with respect to Indian tribes —- its dis- 
placement of the States simply leaves the States out of the 
matter. Nor does the Clause provide the power to abro- 
gate state sovereign immunity to compel a State to per- 
form an act otherwise solely within the scope of the 
federal government's responsibilities. This use of the fed- 
eral courts to compel the States’ performance offends not 
only the Eleventh Amendment, but also the Tenth 
Amendment, as discussed below. 


To date, this Court has found Congress’ power to 
abrogate only in Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, 
Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445, and in the Interstate 
Commerce Clause, Union Gas, 491 U.S. 1. The significance 
of finding yet another constitutional provision that gives 


Clause and the Indian Commerce Clause, noting the distinctly 
different purposes behind each clause: 
In [Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 

163, 192], the Court acknowledged the plenary 
powers under the Interstate Commerce Clause that 
allow Congress to place limits on the states [was] in 
order to “maintain[] free trade among the States.” Id. 
By contrast, “the central function of the Indian Com- 
merce Clause is to provide Congress with power to 
legislate in the field of Indian affairs. Id. Although 
Congress has the power to limit the states under the 
Indian Commerce Clause as well, the different pur- 
poses underlying the two clauses mandate they be 
treated distinctly. 

Seminole Tribe v. Florida, 11 F.3d at 1027. 


20 


the Congress power to abrogate state sovereign immu- 
nity, one that permits the courts to compel States to 
perform certain acts, cannot be understated - it would 
lead to a critical undermining of the federal system of 
government and further strengthen the power of the fed- 
eral government at the expense of the states. Delmuth v. 
Muth, 491 U.S. 223, 227-28 (1989). 


Ill. 


EX PARTE YOUNG IS NOT AUTHORITY FOR AN 
ORDER COMPELLING A GOVERNOR TO EXERCISE 
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE STATE FOR THE SOLE 
PURPOSE OF EFFECTUATING A FEDERAL REGULA- 
TORY SCHEME. 


Amicus curiae United States argues that Ex parte 
Young, 209 U.S. 123, permits a suit against a state official 
who is assertedly required under IGRA to negotiate with 
Indian tribes for class III gaming. Brief of the United 
States, at 12. This reliance on Ex parte Young is manifestly 
misplaced, for nothing in that decision, or any successor 
decisions by this Court, has ever suggested that the Elev- 
enth Amendment does not bar a federal court from com- 
pelling the exercise of state sovereign powers in the first 
instance. 


In Ex parte Young, plaintiff railroad stockholders 
brought an unsuccessful action to enjoin Young, the state 
attorney general, from enforcing a state law alleged to be 
unconstitutional. The question presented by Young was 
essentially this: Is a suit against the State’s attorney gen- 
eral seeking to restrain unconstitutional conduct tanta- 
mount to a suit against the State itself for purposes of the 


21 


Eleventh Amendment? In answer to that question, this 
Court determined that, where a state actor’s conduct is 
unconstitutional, the official is “stripped” of the mantle 
of state sovereignty and, therefore, neither the suit nor 
any consequent order requiring the state actor to bring 
his conduct into conformity with the Constitution offends 
the Eleventh Amendment. Ex parte Young, supra, 209 U.S. 
at 159-160; see also, Pennhurst, supra, 465 U.S. at 102. 


The successors to Ex parte Young that are relied on by 
the Solicitor General thus concern the inquiry whether an 
order mandating prospective conduct by a state actor is 
tantamount to an order against the State itself. In each of 
those cases, the Court determined that the order was not 
against the State for purposes of the Eleventh Amend- 
ment. Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651, 663 (1974) (public 
assistance benefits); Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) 
(expenditure of public funds to remedy effects of past de 
jure segregation); Quern v. Jordan, 440 U.S. 332 (1979) 
(notice to class members of retroactive relief).) 


In this case, however, there can be no reasonable 
doubt that a suit under 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B) is neces- 
sarily and always a suit against the State itself. Whether or 
not Ex parte Young and its progeny permit orders compel- 
ling affirmative conduct by state actors, no decision of 
this Court has ever read Ex parte Young to suggest that an 
order compelling a state officer to exercise the sover- 
eignty of the State is permissible under the Eleventh 
Amendment. 


22 


Whoever may be the nominal defendant, a suit under 
IGRA is necessarily directed against the State in its sover- 
eign capacity. As a threshold matter, the statute on its 
face expressly states that an order issuing from any suit 
brought under IGRA is directed against the State itself. 25 
U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(iii). Indeed, such a suit must be 
directed against a State in its sovereign capacity, because, 
under IGRA, a tribal-state compact addresses issues 
related to the scope and extent of state police power on 
Indian lands within the State. 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(3)(C). 
Accordingly, an order directing a State “to conclude a 
compact,” 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(iii), is necessarily an 
order compelling an unwilling State to exercise sovereign 
powers. 


Therefore, even if an order under IGRA is nominally 
issued against a state governor or any other nominal 
defendant chosen by the Tribe, rather than against the 
State itself, it is necessarily presumed that that officer 
exercises the sovereignty of the State vis-a-vis Indian 
Tribes and that that officer, therefore, has the power to 
negotiate and bind the State in a compact defining the 
extent of the State’s sovereignty over lands within its 


6 Petitioner named the State of Florida in this suit, in addi- 
tion to Governor Lawton Chiles. 


7 In contrast, the orders issued in Ex parte Young and suc- 
cessor decisions of this Court sought to compel a state actor, who 
is already exercising state governmental powers, to bring his con- 
duct into conformity with federal law. Thus, in the language of 
Ex parte Young, an injunction lies to “restrain” or to “prevent” 
the state actor from doing that which he has no right to do. Ex 
parte Young, at 159. 


23 


boundaries. The order would be pointless otherwise. 
However, inasmuch as a suit against a state governor or 
other official under 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B) is a suit to 
compel the governor to exercise the sovereignty of the 
State, it is necessarily a suit against the State in its sover- 
eign capacity and is therefore barred by the Eleventh 
Amendment. 


IV. 


THE TENTH AMENDMENT PROHIBITS APPLICA- 
TION OF THE COERCIVE PROVISIONS OF THE 
INDIAN GAMING REGULATORY ACT 


In IGRA, Congress directly commands the States to 
exercise their sovereignty by negotiating and implement- 
ing a tribal-state compact once requested by a tribe. Such 
a command deprives the States of their sovereign role, in 
violation of the Tenth Amendment. Under the Act, an 
Indian tribe retains the sovereign prerogative to request 
state participation in the regulation of gaming activities 
on Indian lands. 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(1)(C). If an Indian 
tribe requests a State to negotiate for a compact concern- 
ing class III gaming, the State “shall negotiate with the 
Indian tribe in good faith to enter into such a compact.” 
25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(3)(A) (emphasis added). The federal 
government, while it has broad plenary authority for 
Indian affairs, assumes minimal responsibility under this 


8 Contrary to the suggestion of the Solicitor General, an 
order compelling a governor to exercise the sovereignty of the 
State cannot reasonably be characterized as an order compelling 
a “ministerial” act. 


24 


law for the formulation or implementation of a regulatory 
scheme for serious Indian gaming. 


The coercive elements of 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(3), require 
States to negotiate, under pain of federal court compul- 
sion. They reduce the States to mere administrative sub- 
divisions of the Federal Government and do injury to 
their sovereignty. IGRA requires the States to exercise 
their sovereign discretion and carry out duti which the 
federal government has chosen not to undertake. As this 
Court most recently reaffirmed in New York v. United 
States, __ U.S. __, 112 S. Ct. 2408 (1992): 


States are not mere political subdivisions of 
the United States. State governments are neither 
regional offices nor administrative agencies of 
the Federal Government. . . . The Constitution 
instead leaves to the several States a residuary 
and inviolable sovereignty, reserved explicitly to 
the States by the Tenth Amendment. 


112 S. Ct. at 2434 (citations omitted). 


The federal government may not compel a State to 
regulate in an area of federal responsibility. Indeed, 
“{w]here a federal interest is sufficiently strong to cause 
Congress to legislate, it must do so directly; it may not 
conscript state governments as its agents.” 112 S. Ct. at 
2429 (emphasis added). When it comes to handling cer- 
tain affairs, the States expressly vested in Congress 
responsibility for regulating commerce “with foreign 
nations, and among the several states, and with the 
Indian tribes.” U.S. Const., art. 1, § 8, cl. 3. Article I of the 
Constitution does not authorize Congress to avoid its 
obligation by forcing the several States to assume respon- 
sibility for handling Indian affairs. 


25 


Instead, Congress chose to compel a state to negoti- 
ate a tribal-state compact under 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(3)(A), 
at the request of a tribe; to subject that state to being 
hauled into federal court under a claim that it failed to 
negotiate in good faith under 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7); to 
subject the state to the compulsion of a federal court 
order to further negotiate; to subject the state to compul- 
sion to submit a last best offer to a court-appointed 
mediator; and to require the state to make a selection 
from the mediator. 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7). 


Congress may, of course encourage the aid of the 
States in regulating the conduct of gaming activities on 
Indian lands. Red Lake Band of Chippewa v. Swimmer, 740 F. 
Supp. 9, 13-14 (D.D.C. 1990), aff'd, Red Lake Band of Chip- 
pewa v. Brown, 928 F.2d 467 (D.C. Cir. 1991). Under Con- 
gress’ spending power, it may encourage a state to 
regulate in a certain way, short of outright coercion, by 
attaching conditions on the receipt of federal funds.” 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203, 206 (1936). Where 
Congress has the authority to regulate private activity 
under the Interstate Commerce Clause, Congress may 
offer States the choice of regulating that activity accord- 
ing to federal standards or having state law preempted 
by federal regulation. Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & 
Reclamation Assn., Inc., 452 U.S. 264, 288 (1981); see also 
FERC v. Mississippi, 456 U.S. 742 (1982) (where States are 
encouraged to conform to federal policy choices, the resi- 
dents of the State retain the ultimate decision as to 
whether or not the State will comply). Where Congress 
encourages state regulation rather than compelling it, 
“state governments remain responsive to the local electo- 
rate’s preferences; state officials remain accountable to 


26 


the people.” New York v. United States, 112 S. Ct. at 2424. 
No such incentive is present under IGRA. 


As with the coercive “take title” provision in the 
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 
1985, Public Law 99-240, 99 Stat. 1842, 42 U.S.C. § 2021b 
et seq., struck down by the Court in New York v. United 
States, 112 S. Ct. at 2408, IGRA’s scheme unconstitu- 
tionally coerces States into participation in IGRA by hold- 
ing out two impermissible choices, two coercive 
applications of federal law: “the State shall negotiate with 
the Indian tribe,” 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(3)(A), or else face 
litigation in federal court, 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(A) — with 
the additional coercive processes of forced negotiations, 
25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(iii); mediation, 25 U.S.C. 
§ 2710(d)(7)(B)(iv); and ultimately, of imposition of a 
federally prescribed regulatory system which may com- 
pel the state to create a system for regulating a game that 
is illegal within that state, 25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(7)(B)(vii). 


Nor does IGRA merely provide “encouragement,” as 
opposed to a mandate, to achieve “cooperative rulemak- 
ing” with the tribe. IGRA, by its own terms, imposes a 
requirement on the states to fashion, implement and 
enforce a regulatory program which the federal govern- 
ment has not done itself. This constitutes a direct interfer- 
ence with the states’ sovereign reserved powers to 
contract. United States v. Bekins, 304 U.S. 27 (1938). It is a 
direct commandment to the states to engage in a regula- 
tory process or face the prospect of being sued in federal 


27 


court, with all of the attendant costs and risks associated 
with litigation.? 


Nor are IGRA’s remedial provisions a set of “default 
provisions,” which leave a “choice” for States. A State’s 
mere “choosing” to not negotiate must necessarily result 
in a court finding that the State is in bad faith before the 
mediational procedures ensue to the Tribes’ benefit. Then, 
the State ignores at its peril a court order to complete a 
compact within a 60-day period. States submitting them- 
selves to being adjudged to be in bad faith and ignoring federal 
court orders at their own peril is not a legitimate choice nor 
wouid it be a responsible exercise of the State's sovereign 
authority and its legislative discretion. 


Finally, when Congress conscripts states into fashion- 
ing and implementing a regulatory scheme to achieve 
federal ends, congressional representatives avoid political 
accountability. In IGRA, the scheme created by Congress 
minimizes the accountability of federal officials to the 
public. The legislation mandates that the States “work it 
out” with the tribes. It is thus the State officials who must 
bear the brunt of public disapproval, while congressional 
representatives — and, of course, the Secretary of the 
Interior, who ultimately approves the regulatory scheme, 


* If IGRA only “encourages” “cooperative rulemaking,” 
and compliance with IGRA’s negotiation provisions is volun- 
tary, then there would be no Article III “case or controversy” in 
IGRA cases. If the States do not negotiate in a voluntary 
arrangement, that is the end of the matter - there is then no 
controversy for the court to adjudicate, no need for orders to 
negotiate and mediate, and no reason for Article III courts to 
declare the rights of tribes to negotiate with an unwilling part- 
ner. 


28 


25 U.S.C. § 2710(d)(8) — remain insulated from the politi- 
cal consequences of the conduct of gaming on Indian 
lands. As Justice Kennedy noted in United States v. Lopez, 
__. ~-U.S. __, federalism “ ‘serves to assign political 
responsibility, not to obscure it.’” (Kennedy, J., concur- 
ring, slip op., at 13), quoting FTC v. Ticor Title Ins. Co., 504 
U.S. 621, 636 (1992). The result here leaves us unable to 
hold either branch of our dual federal-state government 
properly answerable to the citizens. Id., at 13. 


The States did not authorize Congress to impose 
upon them responsibility for determining the conditions 
under which casino gambling will be conducted on 
Indian lands within the State. Congress may either regu- 
late such gambling directly, or Congress may permit the 
tribes to regulate such gambling exclusively; within 
either option, Congress may invite the States to undertake 
regulation of the activity in lieu of direct federal or tribal 
regulation. Such a scheme ensures the electoral accoun- 
tability of federal and state officials, as the case may be, 
for the decisions made concerning the regulation of 
casino gambling on Indian lands. But Congress may not 
shield itself and federal officials from accountability for 
the conduct of casino gambling on Indian lands by mak- 
ing state officials responsible for fashioning the regula- 
tory scheme - under threat of suit by Indian tribes who 
have no accountability to the electorate. 


° 


29 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated here, the judgment of the 
Court of Appeal should be affirmed on the issues pre- 
sented. 


Respectfully submitted: 


Danie. E. LUNGREN 
Attorney General 
State of California 


Manuet M. Mepeiros 
Deputy Attorney General 


THomas F. Gepe 
Special Assistant Attorney General 
Counsel of Record 
1515 K Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
(916) 323-7355 


CurisTINE O. GREGOIRE 
Attorney General 
State of Washington 


JONATHAN TaTE McCoy 
Assistant Attorney General 
1125 Washington Street, S.E. 
P.O. Box 40100 
Olympia, WA 98504-0100 
(360) 753-2693 


May 3, 1995 


