Ee Ot Oe ween» vee ae ee ae y 


ry) FAILED 
\ 
No. 95 678 OCT 2 319% 


OFFICE OF THE CLERK 


In Th 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
: ; 


Pete Wilson, Governor of the State of California; 
Bill Jones, Secretary of State, California; Frank Zolin, 
Director of the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
Eloise Anderson, Director of the California Department 
of Social Services; Brenda Premo, Director of the 
California Department of Rehabilitation, 


Vs. Petitioners, 


Voting Rights Coalition; Coalition for an African-American 
Community Agenda; League of Women Voters of California; 
California Common Cause; ‘94 Committee; Stella Dominquez; 

Cynthia Moreno; and Veronica Moreno, 


Respondents. 


# 
Pete Wilson, Governor of California; State of California, 


Vs. Petitioners, 


Janet Reno, U.S. Attorney General; United States of America, 


Respondents. 


S 


On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
* 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
+ 


Dantet E. LUNGREN 
Attorney General of the 
State of California 


FLtoyp D. SHIMOMURA 

Senior Assistant Attorney General 
Cyrus J. RICKARDS 

Deputy Attorney General* 

P.O. Box 944255 

Sacramento, California 94244-2550 
Telephone: (916) 324-5494 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


*Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO,, (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


~ 


_h & & 


a «fa 


a. eee 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


This case arises from California’s Tenth Amendment 
challenge to the National Voter Registration Act, 42 
U.S.C. § 1973gg et seq., popularly known as the “Motor 
Voter” Act, which was purportedly enacted pursuant to 
Congress’s power under Article I, section 4 of the U.S. 
Constitution, which authorizes it to regulate the time, 
place and manner of federal elections. The Act requires 
state agencies and »mployees, whose responsibilities 
under state law were heretofore unrelated to the adminis- 
tration of elections, to administer a federal voter registra- 
tion program. This petition presents this Court with an 
unusual opportunity to address several important, unset- 
tled issues of federalism, including - for the first time - 
the extent of the Tenth Amendment's restraint on Con- 
gress’s Article I powers other than the Commerce Clause; 
the reach of this Court’s decision in New York v. United 
States, 505 U.S. 144 (1992); and the extent to which Con- 
gress may exercise its Article I power to conscript state 
agencies and employees whose responsibilities were 
heretofore unrelated to the federal statutory program that 
they are now being required to administer. Specifically, 
this petition presents the following questions: 


1. Whether the National Voter Registration Act, 42 
U.S.C. § 1973gg et seq., violates the Tenth Amendment of 
the U.S. Constitution by directing the States to designate 
state agencies “as voter registration agencies” and by 
commandeering state employees, whose responsibilities 


ii 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED - Continued 


were heretofore unrelated to voter registration, to admin- 
ister a federal voter registration program. 


2. Whether Article I, section 4 of the U.S. Constitu- 
tion, which authorizes the Congress to “make or alter” 
regulations as to the time, place, and manner of holding 
elections for Senators and Representatives, should be 
construed, in deference to the concept of federalism 
embodied in the Tenth Amendment, so as not to 
empower Congress to commandeer state agencies and 
state employees, whose responsibilities are unrelated to 
the administration of state election laws, to administer 
the federal voter registration program required by the 
National Voter Registration Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg et seq. 


3. If Article I, section 4 does not empower Congress 
to enact the National Voter Registration Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg et seq., then whether the Fourteenth and Fif- 
teenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution grant Con- 
gress the power to commandeer state agencies and state 
employees, whose responsibilities are unrelated to the 
administration of state election laws, to administer the 
federal voter registration program required under the 
Act. This last issue was fully briefed, but not reached, in 
the court below. 


iii 


LIST OF PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 
IN THE COURT BELOW 


This proceeding consists of two consolidated actions. 


In the first action (district court case no. C-94-20860 
JW), the plaintiffs (respondents herein) are: the Voting 
Rights Coalition; Coalition for an African-American Com- 
munity Agenda; League of Women Voters of California; 
California Common Cause; ‘94 Committee; Stella Domin- 
quez; Cynthia Moreno; and Veronica Moreno. The defen- 
dants (petitioners herein) are: California Governor Pete 
Wilson; Bill Jones, Secretary of State of California; Frank 
Zolin, Director of the California Department of Motor 
Vehicles; Eloise Anderson, Director of the California 
Department of Social Services; and Brenda Premo, Direc- 
tor of the California Department of Rehabilitation. 


The second action (district court case no. 95-20042- 
JW) was brought by California Governor Pete Wilson and 
the State of California (petitioners herein) against Janet 
Reno, U.S. Attorney General; the United States of Amer- 
ica; Trevor Potter, Chairman, Federal Elections Commis- 
sion; and the Federal Elections Commission. Trevor Potter 
and the Federal Elections Commission were dismissed by 
the district court and were not before the Court of 
Appeals; thus, they are not parties herein, and they have 
no interest in this petition. 


iv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


i ee aN Page 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED ......-----++e+eeerrrrees 


LIST OF PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE 
COURT BELOW. ....----eeeccecrerererereesseeee 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ......----++eeerrrrrerees 
OPINIONS BELOW.....------eeeeeeerresstttteeee 
STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION....--------++++++ 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVI- 
SIONS INVOLVED .....-------eeereeccr reste 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE......-----+eeeerrereee 
A. The Provisions Of The National Voter Registra- 
tion Act. .....lescecccccccccccccccsccsescones 

1. The Department of Motor Vehicles’ New 
Voter Registration Duties .......------++- 

2. The Social Service Agencies’ New Voter 
Registration Duties .......---+++++++++++: 

3. The Designation of A Chief Election Offi- 
Pn SOS pr Oey Pr ery a ie ey eee 

4. Financial Effects of the Act in California ... 

B. The Proceedings Below .....---------+++++++ 


1. The Governor’s Executive Order .......-- 


2. The District Court Proceedings and the Basis 
for Jurisdiction in the District Court........ 


3. The Appeal to the Ninth Circuit .......-. 


4. Other States’ Challenges to the Motor Voter 
Bae cos nn vvedcde ret thands Bact snpex dense 


iil 


an RY ne aA aa Tut 


Vv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION ....... 11 


A. This Court Should Settle Whether The Ruling 
in New York v. United States Is Limited To Con- 
gress’s Exercise Of Power Under The Com- 
SGD CIONEO. hades cocuidvevecucevissaedanen 14 


B. This Court Should Settle The Important Ques- 
tion Of Whether The Tenth Amendment Pro- 
hibits Congress From Conscripting Into The 
Service Of The Federal Government State 
Employees And Agencies Whose Respon- 
sibilities Are Unrelated To The Article I Power 
Which Congress Is Exercising...............-. 18 


1. The Extent To Which Congress May Con- 
script State Employees Is Unsettled ...... 18 


2. Federal Conscripting of State Employees 
Raises Issues of Political Accountability 
Upon Which Our Federal System Rests... 23 


C. Alternatively, This Court Should Decide The 
Important Question Whether Article I, Section 
4 Of The Constitution Authorizes Congress To 
Commandeer State Employees And Agencies 
Whose Responsibilities Are Unrelated To The 
Administration Of State Election Laws....... 24 


D. This Case Also Raises The Question Whether 
Either The Fourteenth Or Fifteenth Amend- 
ment Grants Congress The Power to Enact The 
National Voter Registration Act.............. 27 


a oo ods Foo bo cc dela se asle 29 
I ee tN ee pe a a ee App. 1 


erences 


vi 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 


CASES 


Association of Community Organizations for Reform 
Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d 791 (7th Cir. 1995)...10, 11, 17 


Bowen v. American River Hospital Assn., 476 U.S. 
30) @ ):..) 20 


Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (ADTE) ivcccceerscregadese 26 
City of Rome v. United States, 446 U.S. 177 (1979) .... 28 


Commonwealth of Virginia v. United States, Civil 
Action No. 3:95CV357 (RLW) (U.S.D.C., E.D. 


Va.) .ccccvccccccesonesvsceevorosctegespocssesionses 11 
Condon v. Reno, Civ. Action No. 3-95-192-0 

(U.S.D.C., D.S.C.)..... cee cece eee r creer eeeeereceees 11 
Coyne v. Smith, 221 U.S. 559 (1911).... 0. ee eeeeeeeee 19 
Ex Parte Siebold, 100 U.S. 371 (1879)....----++++eeees 25 
Ex Parte Virginia, 100 U.S. 339 (1880).....-----+++++: 28 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission v. Mississippi, 

456 U.S. 742 (1982)... ec ee cree eee cent ee eeeeees 19 
Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority, 

469 U.S. 528 (1985) ...... eee cece errr e cece eeeerees 26 
Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (199A). . cnc renee 11, 25 
Kentucky v. Dennison, 24 How. 66, 107, 16 L.Ed. 717 

(19GE) csc eke cdes vena rnecosWe supe teneneees as ye rs 19 
Mack v. United States, 1995 U.S. App. Lexis 25263 

(9th Cir. 1995)...... cece eee eee eer ees 13, 17, 21, 22 


McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 316 (1819) ....------- 18 


vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833 
(1976), overruled, Garcia v. San Antonio Metro- 
politan Transit Authority, 469 U.S. 528 (1985)....... 11 


New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144 (1992) ... passim 


Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 111 (1970)..........+.--- 29 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) ............ 19 
State of South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301 

ES Uae edu tans cuter evesensten cb¥eneceynds 28 
United States v. Lopez, ___ U.S. ___, 131 L.Ed.2d 626 

SR aero Por r sy terra T 11, 23, 25 
United States v. Reese, 92 U.S. 214 (1875) ............ 28 


Voting Rights Coalition v. Wilson, 60 F.3d 1411 (9th 
Ce BI cc eed ce vircccarerecescccueovesceetete passim 


Wilson v. United States, 878 F. Supp. 1324 (N.D. 
See ee ey Cor Sart Ser 9 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 


United States Constitution 


EE Dv sebccades de sbasecuateseresess 2 18) 2a. are oe 
amt. TB 4. nn ccc cccisccccecevccvedeasesevvanss passim 
Tenth Amendment..........-----eeeeeeeeecees passim 
Fourteenth Amendment...........--+++: 2, 14, 27, 28 
Fifteenth Amendment...........----- 2, 14, 27, 28, 29 


viii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
STATUTES 
28 U.S.C. 
G 1254(1) 0... ce ceccecerccevveccrcecreccerseecesees 1 
BZ UDB. cr ccccccccccccccsscvscnccesoscscvvcevoncess 9 
G1FBL. ccc ceccccccecevceccevcscccessvcoscsconeers 8 
G 1345... cc ce ceccececcnceccccncvececessessesessess 8 
G 221... cscccccccecccrcevcvcecsccvescerevesceees 8 
National Voter Registration Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973 gg et SEG...--- eee reece eer trees enenenereere » tas 
§ 1973 gg-3... 0. e cece cece cece n erent eenecenenereeee 2 
§ 1973 gg-3(c)(1)..-- eee rere ieee cece eeeerenercerere 4 
§ 1973 gg-3(c)(2)...- eee ee reer cree ee eeeeeeneeeerces 4 
SB CAT 4-6) (: | 5 
§ 1973gg-3(e)......---- oobdeseeved ear kstaeeneatel 5 
§ 1973 gg-5. 1.1 e cece cece cere erence ne eneeeeenees 15, 16 
§ 1973 gg-5(a)...-- eee e cere eee eee renter en eeneneees 5 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(1).....- eee cece rere cere e eens 3, 14, 16 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(2)....-- cece eee cree cere cece ee cncnees 3 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(3)(B)....-. eee reece eee eee e cece eeees 6 
SB CAS -4 0) C)) C) Se 3, 6 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(4)(B)..- 6-6. - eee eee eee rere reece ences 6 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(6)(B)....--- eee eee eee renee eee eens 6 


§ 1973 gg-5(c) . 1... eee cece e eee renee teen eeeeeeeee 6 


ix 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
DS FOFORIT ccc ccccccvccevcccsscccssevnvecrraresee 6 
Nh aii ch vik p vii axes epee 6, 15, 16 
PFD ihe cegccccecorvvctadectecevecncutoees 
DPOF OMIOU) oc cccccccocccvvccvsecovcvcecrsevcceess Fs) 
Court RuLes 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
CE ee Dees eke te cecil) babs bxeneccvedses y 
REGULATIONS 
59 Fed.Reg. 32,311, 32,316 (Jan. 23, 1994)...........-- 5 
OTHER AUTHORITIES 
GR OR Pe epee Pe Pre ees ore 26 


ee OE —— —— a 


Pete Wilson, Governor of the State of California; Bill 
Jones, the California Secretary of State; Frank Zolin, 
Director of the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
Eloise Anderson, Director of the California Department 
of Social Services; Brenda Premo, Director of the Califor- 
nia Department of Rehabilitation; and the State of Cali- 
fornia respectfully petition for a writ of certiorari to 
review the judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in this case. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals is 
reported at 60 F.3d 1411. The opinion of the district court 
is reported at 878 F. Supp. 1324. 


STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the Ninth Circuit from which review 
is sought was entered on July 24, 1995. 


The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 
U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


This matter involves the following constitutional and 
statutory provisions: 


Article I, section 4 of the U.S. Constitution provides: 


“The times, places and manner of holding 
elections for Senators and Representatives, shall 
be prescribed in each state by the legislature 
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by 
law make or alter such regulations, except as to 
the places of chusing Senators.” 


1 


2 


The Tenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution pro- 
vides: 
“The powers not delegated to the United 
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it 
to the states, are reserved to the states respec- 
tively, or to the people.”! 
The National Voter Registration Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg et seq., is the statute whose constitutionality is 
challenged in this proceeding. One relevant section 
requires state motor vehicle agencies to serve as voter 
registration agencies and requires driver’s license appli- 
cations and renewals to be modified to serve as voter 
registration applications. 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-3. Another 
relevant section provides: 
“(1) Each State shall designate agencies for the 
registration of voters in elections for Fed- 
eral office. 
(2) Each State shall designate as voter regis- 
tration agencies — 
(A) all offices in the State that provide 
public assistance; and 
(B) all offices in the State that provide 
State-funded programs primarily 
engaged in providing services to per- 
sons with disabilities. 


(4)(A) At each voter registration agency, the 
following services shall be made 
available: 


(i) Distribution of mail voter reg- 
istration application forms in 
accordance with paragraph (6). 


1 The full text of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amend- 
ments, which will only be addressed if this Court decides the 
third question presented, are set forth in the Appendix. 


Danks Stet nee 5 Wala 


3 


(ii) Assistance to applicants in 
completing voter registration 
application forms, unless the 
applicant refuses such assis- 
tance. 


(iii) Acceptance of completed voter 
registration application forms 
for transmittal to the appropri- 
ate State election official.” 


42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a)(1), (2) and (4). 
The full text of this Act is set forth in the Appendix. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This proceeding arises out of California Governor 
Pete Wilson’s challenge to the National Voter Registration 
Act, popularly known as, and hereinafter referred to as, 
the “Motor Voter” Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg et seq., which 
requires that the States designate certain state agencies to 
assist with, and process applications for, voter registra- 
tion for federal elections. 


The Governor claims that the Act is an unconstitu- 
tional exercise of Congress’s authority under Article |, 
section 4 of the U.S. Constitution and violates the Tenth 
Amendment because it commandeers state agencies and 
employees, which heretofore had nothing to do with the 
administration of election laws, to administer a federal 
voter registration program. Unlike this Court’s other 
recent cases which address the Tenth Amendment's 
restraint on the Congress’s Commerce Clause power, this 
challenge raises the issue of the Tenth Amendment's con- 
straint on another Article I power (Article I, section 4). It 
also squarely addresses the scope of the federal govern- 
ment’s right to conscript state employees to administer a 


4 


federal program when that program is totally outside the 
scope of their state-designated responsibilities. 


A. The Provisions of The National Voter Registra- 
tion Act 


As stated by the Ninth Circuit in the opinion below, 
the National Voter Registration Act is “a complex statute 
of ten sections bearing the marks of legislative draftsman- 
ship similar to those borne by the Internal Revenue 
Code.” Voting Rights Coalition v. Wilson, 60 F.3d at 1413. 

Under the Act, every state is required to designate 
certain state agencies, including its Department of Motor 
Vehicles and local welfare offices, as federal voter regis- 
tration agencies. These agencies are required to prepare 
new voter registration forms for federal elections, assist 
in the registration of applicants for driver’s licenses or 
social service benefits (to the point of home assistance for 
the disabled), and process the forms within ten (10) days 
or less. 


1. The Department of Motor Vehicles’ New 
Voter Registration Duties 


Under Section 5 of the Act, each state shall “include a 
voter registration application form for elections for Fed- 
eral office as part of an application for a State motor 
vehicles driver’s license.” 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-3(c)(1). The 
voter registration application “may not require any infor- 
mation that duplicates information required in the 
driver’s license portion,” and “may require only the mini- 
mum amount of information necessary” to enable state 
officials to assess the eligibility of the applicant. 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg-3(c)(2). These provisions have been construed 
by respondents to prohibit even inquiry of the place of 


omen 


meer eee yee 


Pom AE A aNd, ag ill NR AA TRIES RC te hie AIG ee 


Pe ee ee Oe Sr a 


5 


birth or a verification of the applicant’s citizenship 
beyond a simple attestation. See, e.g., 59 Fed.Reg. 32311, 
32316 (Jan. 23, 1994). 

Any change of address submitted in connection with 
a driver’s license must also serve as a change of address 
for voter registration purposes in federal elections unless 
the registrant states otherwise. 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-3(d). 

Finally, the Department of Motor Vehicles must pro- 
cess the completed voter registration portion of the appli- 
cation and transmit it to the appropriate state election 
officials not later than ten days after the date of accep- 
tance, and in some circumstances within five days. 42 
U.S.C. § 1973gg-3(e). 

The Department of Motor Vehicles estimates that in 
order to provide the voter registration services required 
by the Act and maintain existing levels of service, fifty- 
eight additional full-time employees will be required 
statewide at a cost exceeding $1.7 million. Prior to the 
imposition of these new voter registration duties, wait 
times at Department of Motor Vehicles offices in large 
urban centers already exceeded thirty minutes. 


2. The Social Service Agencies’ New Voter 
Registration Duties 


Under Section 7 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a), 
“lejach State shall designate agencies for the registration 
of voters in elections for Federal office.” These include 


“all offices in the State that provide public assistance,” 
“all offices in the State that provide State-funded pro- 
grams primarily engaged in providing services to persons 
with disabilities”, and “other offices within the State,” 
such as public libraries, public schools, unemployment 
compensation offices, and government revenue offices. It 


6 


may also designate “Federal and nongovernmental 
offices, with the agreement of such offices.” 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg-5(a)(3)(B).? 

These voter registration agencies must make the fol- 
lowing services available: distribution of a new federal 
voter registration application with each application for 
the agency’s services or with any change of address; 
transmittal of a form inquiring about the applicant’s 
interest in registering and advising them of various 
rights; “[a]ssistance to applicants in completing voter 
registration application forms, unless the applicant 
refuses such assistance” [emphasis added]; and “[a]ccep- 
tance of completed voter registration application forms 
for transmittal to the appropriate State election official.” 
42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a)(4) and (a)(6)(B). 

Moreover, if the office provi < services to a disabled 
person at that person’s home, “ii agency shall provide 
the [voter registration] services .. . at the person’s 
home.” 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a)(4)(B). 

Each agency must process and transmit the com- 
pleted registration applications not later than ten days 


after the date of acceptance, or in some circumstances, 
within five days. 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(d). 


3. The Designation of A Chief Election Offi- 
cial 


Under Section 10 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-8, 
each State “shall designate a State officer or employee as 


2 The state is also obligated to work with the Secretary of 
Defense to jointly develop and implement procedures so that 
persons may apply to register to vote at recruitment offices of 
the United States Armed Forces. 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(c). 


7 


the chief State election official to be responsible for coor- 
dination of State responsibilities” under the Act. 


4. Financial Effects of the Act in California 


The State of California has estimated that the annual 
cost to the State of implementing this Act, over and above 
any federal funding, is at least $18 million. (Respondents 
did not present any admissible evidence to contest this 
figure in the lower courts.) 

Moreover, federal financial assistance appears to be 
limited to a postal discount for mailings and an 
announcement by the Department of Health and Human 
Services that voter registration assistance to AFDC clients 
will be reimbursable at the normal administrative match 
rate of fifty percent (50%). 

Implementation of the Act will also require the State 
to revise, in wholesale fashion, the California Elections 
Code in order to conform state registration law with the 
new requirements for registration for federal elections. 
Indeed, the State will have to either conform its own state 
registration procedures for state elections with the Act's 
federal requirements for federal elections or go to the 
extraordinary expense of having separate voter registra- 
tion rolls for state and federal elections. 


B. The Proceedings Below 


1. The Governor’s Executive Order 


By executive order dated August 12, 1994, Governor 
Wilson designated various state agencies as federal voter 
registration agencies as required by the Act. He directed 
the agencies to implement the Act - but only to the extent 
federal funding was made available for such purposes. 


8 


2. The District Court Proceedings and the 
Basis for Federal Jurisdiction in the District 
Court 


On December 15, 1994, certain respondents - the 
Voting Rights Coalition and others? (the “Voting Rights 
Coalition plaintiffs”) - brought this action for declaratory 
and injunctive relief in the U.S. District Court for the 
Northern District of California pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1331 and 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-9, seeking enforcement of 
the Act. 


On December 20, 1994, petitioners - Governor Wilson 
and the State of California - brought their own action 
against the United States; U.S. Attorney General Janet 
Reno; the Chairman of the Federal Elections Commission; 
and the Federal Elections Commission (the “federal 
respondents”) for declaratory and injunctive relief pur- 
suant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331, seeking to enjoin enforcement 
of the Act, in whole or in part, on the grounds that the 
Act violated the Tenth Amendment. 


The federal respondents thereafter answered and 
brought a counterclaim against Governor Wilson, the 
State of California, and the California Secretary of State 
for declaratory and injunctive relief, seeking to enjoin 
petitioners from refusing to comply with the Act pur- 
suant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331, 1345 and 2201 and 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg-9(a), the latter of which authorizes the “Attor- 
ney General .. . [to] bring a civil action in an appropriate 


3 The other parties were the Coalition for an African-Amer- 
ican Community Agenda, League of Women Voters of Califor- 
nia, California Common Cause, ‘94 Committee, Stella 
Dominquez, Cynthia Moreno, and Veronica Moreno. 


ee ee 


ee 


9 


district court for such declaratory or injunctive relief as is 
necessary to carry out this subchapter.” 


The district court consolidated the two actions. The 
petitioners, the federal respondents, and the Voting 
Rights Coalition plaintiffs filed motions for preliminary 
injunction, seeking to enforce or to enjoin enforcement of 
the “Motor Voter” Act. On February 17, 1995, the district 
court consolidated the hearing of the preliminary injunc- 
tion motions with the trial on the merits pursuant to Rule 
65(a)(1), Fed. R. Civ. P., and set the hearing date for 
March 2, 1995. 


At the conclusion of the hearing, the U.S. District 
Court issued a permanent injunction, entered March 2, 
1995, ordering the State of California and Governor Pete 
Wilson to comply with the Act. Relying solely on United 
States v. Manning, 215 F. Supp. 272 (W.D.La. 1963), for the 
proposition that the Tenth Amendment does not reduce 
the powers of the United States, the Court reasoned: 


“ _.. Article I, Section 4 specifically states 
that Congress may make or alter state regula- 
tions concerning the time, place and manner of 
federal elections. Consequently, Congress 
through the NVRA may directly regulate the 
state’s manner and means of voter registration 
without invading an area reserved to the states.” 


Wilson v. United States, 878 F. Supp. 1324, 1328 (N.D. Cal. 
1995). 


3. The Appeal To the Ninth Circuit 


On March 9, 1995, petitioners filed a timely notice of 
appeal from the district court’s injunction. The Court of 
Appeals had jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. 


In the Ninth Circuit, petitioners again argued that the 
“Motor Voter” Act violated the Tenth Amendment by 


10 


conscripting state agencies and employees to administer 
a federal regulatory program, citing, in part, this Court’s 
ruling in New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 188 
(1992), that the “Federal Government may not compel the 
States to enact or administer a federal regulatory pro- 
gram.” 


The Ninth Circuit rejected that argument on the 
grounds that New York was decided under the Commerce 
Clause, whereas the congressional power here was 
granted under Article I, section 4. The Ninth Circuit then 
concluded — without citing any authority therefor — that 
Article I, section 4 empowers the Congress to conscript 
state agencies: 


“The flaw in the State of California’s argument 
is that it ignores Article I, section 4, which, 
unlike the commerce power in Article I, section 
8, empowers Congress to impose on the states 
precisely the burden at issue. 

Congress may conscript state agencies to 
carry out voter registration for the election of 
Representatives and Senators. The exercise of 
that power by Congress is by its terms intended 
to be borne by the states without compensa- 
tion.” 


Voting Rights Coalition v. Wilson, 60 F.3d at 1415. 


4. Other States’ Challenges to the Motor Voter 
Act 


In addition to California, four other states challenged 
the constitutionality of the Motor Voter Act: Illinois, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Virginia. 

On January 23, 1995, the U.S. Department of Justice 
sued Illinois and Pennsylvania as well as California for 
their refusal to implement the Act. See, e.g., Association of 


11 


Community Organizations for Reform Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d 
791 (7th Cir. 1995). South Carolina and Virginia, like 
California, sued the federal government. Condon v. Reno, 
Civ. Action No. 3-95-192-0 (U.S.D.C., D.S.C.); Common- 
wealth of Virginia v. United States, Civil Action No. 
3:95CV357 (RLW) (U.S.D.C., E.D. Va.). 


Although the Seventh Circuit — the only other circuit 
to rule on the “Motor Voter” Act — rejected Illinois’s 
challenge to the Act, Illinois had primarily challenged the 
Act on the grounds it altered the qualifications for voters 
set by the State. Association of Community Organizations for 
Reform Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 794-796. 


Still, the fact that five states have separately chal- 
lenged the constitutionality of the Act highlights the 
serious intrusion on state sovereignty which the Act con- 
stitutes. Even the federal government acknowledged in 
the district court that the Act was an unprecedented 
conscription of state agencies and employees into the 
service of the federal government. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


This is the next logical case for this Court to address 
in its efforts to preserve federalism. All of this Court's 
recent cases on the subject have addressed the constraint 
imposed by ‘ederalism on Congress's exercise of its Com- 
merce Clause powers. E.g., United States v. Lopez, __ U.S. 
__, 131 L.Ed.2d 626 (1995); New York v. United States, 505 
U.S. 144 (1992); and Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 
(1991). Even the earlier cases which grappled with feder- 
alism — National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833 
(1976), overruled, Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit 
Authority, 469 U.S. 528 (1985) - addressed the Tenth 


12 


Amendment in the context of Congress’s Commerce 
Clause powers. 


The instant case gives this Court the opportunity to 
address whether, and the extent to which, the Tenth 
Amendment constrains Congress’s other Article I powers 
— here, Congress’s power under Article I, section 4 to 
make or alter regulations specifying the time, place and 
manner of holding federal elections. Both the district 
court and the Ninth Circuit took the position that “unlike 
the commerce power in Article I, section 8, [Article I, 
section 4] empowers Congress to impose on the state 
precisely the burden at issue.” Voting Rights Coalition v. 
Wilson, 60 F.3d at 1415. The lower courts also limited to 
the Commerce Clause context this Court’s unqualified 
ruling in New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 188 
(1992), that the “Federal Government may not compel the 
states to enact or administer a federal regulatory pro- 
gram” — another issue which needs clarification and 
which this case raises. 


Finally, this case presents the unsettled issue of 
whether Congress has the power under Article I (in this 
case, under Article I, section 4) to conscript state agencies 
and employees to administer a federal program that is 
entirely unrelated to their state-paid duties. In this case, 
the Motor Voter Act, in an unprecedented expansion of 
federal power, directs the Department of Motor Vehicles 
and public assistance agencies, to administer a federal 
voter registration scheme, although these agencies ordi- 
narily have nothing to do with voting or elections. The 
Motor Voter Act therefore raises the issue whether Con- 
gress’s Article I powers authorize Congress to radically 
alter the nature of the responsibilities of state agencies 
and the nature of the job descriptions of their employees. 


13 


Nothing less is at stake than state autonomy and the right 
of states to organize their own governments, since once 
Congress can commandeer state agencies whose respon- 
sibilities are outside the field that Congress is empowered 
to regulate, Congress can shift with ease the cost of any 
federal measure to state government. Although this Court 
in New York v. United States, supra, 505 U.S. at 188, 
observed that “[t]he positions occupied by state officials 
appear nowhere on the Federal Government’s most 
detailed organizational chart,” the Ninth Circuit in this 
case deemed New York irrelevant, and recently, in the 
cases arising out of the federal duties imposed by the 
Brady Act on local law enforcement officials, has again 
approved the conscription of state employees. Mack v. 
United States, 1995 U.S. App. Lexis 25263 (9th Cir. 1995). 
Thus, the question of Congress’s power to conscript into 
federal service state employees, and the consequent 
impact on state sovereignty is ripe for clarification by this 
Court. 


Accordingly, this Court should grant review of this 
case so that it can settle the following important ques- 
tions central to federalism: 


1. Whether the ruling in New York v. United States, 
supra, 505 U.S. at 188, that the “Federal Government may 
not compel the States to enact or administer a federal 
regulatory program” is limited to the exercise of Con- 
gress’s power under the Commerce Clause, or whether, to 
the contrary, Congress’s enactment of the Motor Voter 
Act under Article I, section 4 is subject to this Court's 
ruling in New York. 


2. Regardless of whether New York applies to this 
Act, whether it nonetheless violates the Tenth Amend- 
ment for Congress to exercise its powers under Article I 


14 


to commandeer state employees to administer a federal 
program that is wholly outside the scope of their state 
responsibilities. 

3. Conversely, whether Congress’s power to regu- 
late the time, place, and manner of federal elections 
under Article I, section 4 of the Constitution authorizes it 
to commandeer state agencies and employees not 
involved in the election process. 


4. If Article I, section 4 does not authorize Congress 
to commandeer state agencies and state employees, 
whether the Motor Voter Act is authorized under the 
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.‘ 


A. This Court Should Settle The Important Ques- 
tion Whether The Ruling In New York v. United 
States Is Limited To Congress’s Exercise Of 
Power Under The Commerce Clause 


In New York v. United States, supra, 505 U.S. 144, 188, 
this Court ruled that “[w]hatever the outer limits of 
[state] sovereignty may be, one thing is clear: The Federal 
Government may not compel the States to enact or 
administer a federal regulatory program.” 


However, the Motor Voter Act does exactly that. It 
compels each State to administer a federal regulatory 
program by requiring each State to “designate agencies 
for the registration of voters in elections for Federal 
office,” 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a)(1), to “designate a State 
officer or employee as the chief State election official to 
be responsible for coordination of State responsibilities 


4 This issue was fully briefed but never reached by the 
lower courts because they found that Article I, section 4 did 
authorize Congress to conscript state employees. 


15 


under this Act,” 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-8, and to work with 
the Secretary of Defense to develop and implement pro- 
cedures so that persons may apply to register to vote at 
military recruitment offices, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-5. The Act 
then requires the state agencies to prepare voter registra- 
tion forms pursuant to federal standards, to provide reg- 
istration assistance pursuant to federal guidelines, and to 
process the completed forms. 


In New York, this Court held that although Congress 
had the power to regulate low-level radioactive waste 
directly, the Low Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amend- 
ments Act violated the Tenth Amendment when it 
directed the States to regulate the disposal of radioactive 
waste according to federal standards. This Court 
observed that requiring the state governments to regulate 
pursuant to Congress’s direction would “present a simple 
command to state governments to implement legislation 
enacted by Congress,” 505 U.S. at 176, but that “even 
where Congress has authority under the Constitution to 
pass laws requiring or prohibiting certain acts, it lacks the 
power directly to compel the states to require or prohibit 
those acts.” 505 U.S. at 166. This Court ruled: 

“No matter how powerful the federal interest 

involved, the Constitution simply does not give 

Congress the authority to require the States to 

regulate. The Constitution instead gives Con- 

gress the authority to regulate matters directly 
and to pre-empt contrary state regulation. 

Where a federal interest is sufficiently strong to 

cause Congress to legislate, it must do so 

directly; it may not conscript state governments 

as its agents.” 


New York v. United States, 505 U.S. at 178. 


16 


Accordingly, in this case, the “Motor Voter” Act con- 
stitutes an unconstitutional exercise of congressional 
power since it conscripts state governments as its agents 
when it directs each State to: “designate agencies for the 
registration of voters in elections for Federal office,” 42 
U.S.C. § 1973gg-5(a)(1); “designate a State officer or 
employee as the chief State election official to be respons- 
ible for coordination of State responsibilities under this 
Act,” 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-8; and develop procedures 
jointly with the Secretary of Defense, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973g¢-5. 


Rather than follow New York, the district court and 
the Ninth Circuit chose to limit this Court’s ruling in New 
York v. United States, id., 505 U.S. 144, to Congress’s exer- 
cise of its Commerce Clause powers. Without any cita- 
tions, the Ninth Circuit ruled that ”[t]he flaw in the State 
of California’s argument is that it ignores Article I, sec- 
tion 4, which, unlike the commerce power in Article I, 
section 8, empowers Congress to impose on the states 
precisely the burden at issue. [{] Congress may conscript 
state agencies to carry out voter registration for the elec- 
tion of Representatives and Senators.” Voting Rights Coali- 
tion v. Wilson, 60 F.3d at 1415. 


Yet, nothing in New York suggests that the ruling 
should be limited to Congress’s exercise of its Commerce 
Clause powers. Instead, without restricting itself to the 
Commerce Clause, this Court stated in New York, “[W]e 
have always understood that even where Congress has 
the authority under the Constitution to pass laws requir- 
ing or prohibiting certain acts, it lacks the power directly 
to compel the States to require or prohibit those acts.” 
New York v. United States, 505 U.S. at 166. Likewise, this 
Court stated in New York that “[t]he Tenth Amendment 


17 


thus directs us to determine, as in this case, whether an 
incident of state sovereignty is protected by a limitation 
on an Article I power.” [Emphasis added] 505 U.S. at 157. 


Nonetheless, the Ninth Circuit and other circuits 
have narrowly construed the ruling in New York. 


For instance, the Seventh Circuit, in upholding the 
constitutionality of the “Motor Voter” Act in Association of 
Community Organizations For Reform Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d 
791 (1995), stated its belief that recent opinions of this 
Court mean that “the Tenth Amendment (not even cited 
by Illinois) [has been] put back in its bottle” and therefore 
that no “extratextual limitation” constrains Article I, sec- 
tion 4, which “places the burden of administering federal 
elections on the states.” Yet, this confuses the distinction 
between regulating the manner of elections (which is 
permitted under Article I, section 4) and directing the 
States to compel certain state agencies to administer 
them. 


Moreover, not long after issuing its decision in the 
instant case — which limited New York to laws enacted 
under the Commerce Clause - the Ninth Circuit again 
restricted the reach of New York. In Mack v. U.S., 1995 U.S. 
App.Lexis 25263 (9th Cir. 1995), the Ninth Circuit upheld 
the constitutionality of a provision in the Brady Act, 
which requires local law enforcement officials to perform 
background checks on handgun purchasers - even 
though the Ninth Circuit acknowledged that it “requires 
state law enforcement officials, the CLEOs, to make rea- 
sonable efforts to assist in carrying out the federal pro- 
gram.” Nonetheless, the Ninth Circuit in Mack concluded 
that “[aJlthough we concede that there is language in New 
York that lends support to the view of Mack ..., that 
language must be interpreted in the context in which it 


18 


was offered. New York was concerned with a federal intru- 
sion on the States of a different kind and much greater 
magnitude than any involved in the Brady Act.” 


In conclusion, this Court should clarify whether the 
New York decision is limited to Congress’s exercise of its 
Commerce Clause powers as ruled by the Ninth Circuit, 
or extends to Congress’s exercise of powers under Article 
I, section 4. 


B. This Court Should Settle The Important Ques- 
tion Of Whether The Tenth Amendment Pro- 
hibits Congress From Conscripting Into The 
Service Of The Federal Government State 
Employees And Agencies Whose Respon- 
sibilities Are Unrelated To The Article I Power 
Which Congress Is Exercising 


This case also raises an important but long unsettled 
question of federalism: To what extent may Congress, in 
the exercise of its Article I powers, conscript state agen- 
cies and state employees to perform federal duties, par- 
ticularly where those duties are wholly outside their 
normal field of work. 


1. The Extent To Which Congress May Con- 
script State Employees Is Unsettled 


States can only act through their elected officials and 
agents. A state’s capability to function as a sovereign 
government requires that state employees act for the 
state, not the federal, government. Just as “[t]he power to 
tax is the power to destroy,” McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 
U.S. 316 (1819), the power to impose time-consuming 
federal responsibilities on state agencies carries the 
power to destroy state autonomy. Moreover, the power to 


19 


determine the scope of the responsibilities of state offi- 
cials and state agencies, as well as to fix the budget for 
administering those responsibilities, is peculiarly an 
attribute of state sovereignty, no less than the power of 
the State to determine where to place its seat of govern- 
ment. See Coyne v. Smith, 221 U.S. 559 (1911) (upholding 
Oklahoma’s legislation relocating the state’s capital, not- 
withstanding a restriction thereon in the congressional 
enabling act, under which the state was admitted to the 
Union). Accordingly, federal laws which conscript state 
employees, on state time, to assume responsibility for 
administering federal programs necessarily intrude on the 
state’s sovereignty to carry out its own programs — 
unless, of course, the state has consented to perform the 
program as a condition for the receipt of federal funds. 
See New York v. United States, supra, 505 U.S. at 167; South 
Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203, 206 (1987). 


However, the extent to which the federal government 
may conscript state employees to carry out federal 
responsibilities is unsettled. In Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission v. Mississippi, 456 U.S. 742 (1982), this Court 
observed that “the 19th Century view, expressed in a 
well-known slavery case, was that Congress ‘has no 
power to impose on a State officer, as such, any duty 
whatever, and compel him to perform it,’ ” id. at 761, 
quoting Kentucky v. Dennison, 24 How. 66, 107, 16 L.Ed. 717 
(1861), but that “this rigid and isolated statement .. . is 
not representative of the law today. [footnote omitted].” 
This Court, however, declined in that case “to make a 
definitive choice between competing views of federal 
power to compel state regulatory activity.” Id. at 764. 


Since then, this Court has expressed disapproval of 
the federal government’s conscripting of state agencies 


20 


and employees, but has not definitively resolved the 
issue. In Bowen v. American Hospital Assn., 476 U.S. 610 
(1986), this Court addressed whether Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act authorized the issuance of a federal 
regulation that required designated state agencies to 
establish procedures to compel health care providers to 
report known or suspected instances of unlawful medical 
neglect of handicapped infants. This Court, in an opinion 
by Justice Stevens, observed that the regulations “effec- 
tively make medical neglect of handicapped newborns a 
state investigative priority, possibly forcing state agencies 
to shift scarce resources away from other enforcement 
activities. ...” 476 U.S. at 639. The Court observed that 
while state agencies can be requested to document their 
own compliance with Section 504, “nothing in that provi- 
sion authorizes him [the Secretary] to commandeer state 
agencies to enforce compliance by other recipients of fed- 
eral funds (in this instance, hospitals)” and that “State 
child protective services agencies are not field offices of 
the HHS bureaucracy, and they may nof be conscripted 
against their will as the foot soldiers in a federal cru- 
sade.” 476 U.S. at 642. 


This proposition was repeated in New York, supra, 505 
U.S. at 178, where this Court stated: 


“States are not mere political subdivisions 
of the United States. State governments are nei- 
ther regional offices nor administrative agencies 
of the Federal Government. The positions occu- 
pied by state officials appear nowhere on the 
Federal Government’s most detailed organiza- 
tional chart. The Constitution instead ‘leaves to 
the several States a residuary and inviolable 
sovereignty,’ The Federalist No. 39, p. 245 (C. 


21 


Rossiter ed. 1961), reserved explicitly to the 
States by the Tenth Amendment.” 


New York v. United States, 505 U.S. at 188. 


Nonetheless, the Ninth Circuit - without citation to 
any authority whatsoever - ruled that “Congress may 
conscript state agencies to carry out voter registration for 
the election of Representatives and Senators.” 60 F.3d at 
1415. This Court needs to resolve this unsettled question 
over the extent of Congress’s power to commandeer state 
employees to administer a federal program. 


Indeed, the instant case raises the issue of conscrip- 
tion in particularly egregious circumstances because the 
Motor Voter Act seeks to conscript state employees whose 
responsibilities are wholly unrelated to the administra- 
tion of election laws and thus outside the field which 
Congress is authorized to regulate under Article I, section 
4. Congress is not seeking merely to regulate state elec- 
tion officials in their conduct of federal elections, but 
instead, to commandeer state employees at the State 
Department of Motor Vehicles and in public assistance 
agencies, whose state-mandated duties are wholly unre- 
lated to the election responsibilities which Article I, Sec- 
tion 4 authorizes Congress to regulate. 


Nor is this the only case in which the Ninth Circuit 
has approved the federal conscription of state employees. 
In Mack v. United States, 1995 U.S. App. Lexis 25263 (9th 
Cir. 1995), the Ninth Circuit recently upheld, against a 
Tenth Amendment challenge, the Brady Act’s federal 
mandate that state law enforcement officials perform 
background checks of handgun purchasers. Once again, 
citing no authority, the Ninth Circuit reasoned that state 
employees could be conscripted by Congress because 


22 


“(t]he Brady Act is a regulatory program aimed at indi- 
viduals and not the States”: 

“It is true that, for a limited period of time, 
the Act requires state law enforcement officials, 
the CLEOs, to make reasonable efforts to assist 
in carrying out the federal program. But the 
CLEOs are not being commanded to engage in 
the central sovereign processes of enacting legis- 
lation or regulations. ... Their activities are not 
alien to their usual line of work, and represent a 
minimal interference with state functions. In 
that sense, their duties are not different from 
other minor obligations that Congress has 
imposed on state officials.” [Emphasis added.] 


Whatever Congress’s right may be to conscript state 
employees to administer the federal program required 
under the Brady Act, the conscription of state employees 
in the present case goes well beyond the circumstances in 
the Brady Act. As observed by the Ninth Circuit in Mack, 
the background investigation required by the Brady Act 
was “not alien” to the state law enforcement officials’ 
“usual line of work.” Here, in contrast, employees of the 
State Department of Motor Vehicles and state public 
assistance agencies are being commandeered to perform 
federal registration duties wholly outside their “usual 
line of work” and to administer Motor Voter’s registra- 
tion program on state time. 


The Ninth Circuit’s decisions in the Mack case and 
the instant proceeding demonstrate that this Court 
should grant certiorari to determine the extent to which 
the Congress, in the exercise of its Article I powers, can 
conscript state agencies and state employees and require 
them to assume federal duties wholly outside their nor- 
mal field of work. 


23 


2. Federal Conscription of State Employees 
Raises Issues of Political Accountability 
Upon Which Our Federal System Rests 


Conscription of state employees to assume federal 
responsibilities outside the scope of their normal duties 
also raises the issue of accountability, which goes to the 
heart of our federal system. In New York v. United States, 
505 U.S. 144, this Court observed that “where the Federal 
Government compels States to regulate, the accoun- 
tability of both state and federal officials is diminished” 
because “it may be state officials who will bear the brunt 
of public disapproval, while the federal officials who 
devised the regulatory program may remain insulated 
from the electoral ramifications of their decision.” Id. at 
168-9. Likewise, in his concurring opinion, joined by Jus- 
tice O’Connor, in United States v. Lopez, supra, 131 L.Ed.2d 
626, Justice Kennedy stated that in order for the federal 
and state governments to control each other by compet- 
ing for the affections of the people, “those citizens must 
have some means of knowing which of the two govern- 
ments to hold accountable for the failure to perform a 
given function.” 


In this case, state employees will be held responsible 
for the longer lines and greater delays at the Department 
of Motor Vehicles and public assistance offices, although 
the federal government's mandate that they assume fed- 
eral voter registration responsibilities is the cause there- 
for. In essence, the federal government can insulate itself 
from the effects of its directives when it commandeers 
state agencies and employees to administer a federal 


program. 


24 


C. Alternatively, This Court Should Decide The 
Important Question Whether Article I, Section 
4 Of The Constitution Authorizes Congress To 
Commandeer State Employees And Agencies 
Whose Responsibilities Are Unrelated To The 
Administration Of State Election Laws 


Article I, section 4 of the U.S. Constitution provides 
as follows: 

“The times, places and manner of holding 
elections for Senators and Representatives, shall 

be prescribed in each state by the legislature 

thereof; but the Congress may at any time by 

law make or alter such regulations, except as to 

the places of chusing Senators.” 

Manifestly, nothing in the text of that section autho- 
rizes (or requires) Congress to commandeer state agen- 
cies and employees, whose duties are unrelated to the 
elections process, to administer federal eiections. None- 
theless, the Ninth Circuit, in the opinion below, referred 
to the “array of authorities supporting a broad reach of 
Article I, section 4,” 60 F.3d at 1414, and ruled: “The flaw 
in the State of California’s argument is that it ignores 
Article I, section 4, which, unlike the commerce power in 
Article I, section 8, empowers Congress to impose on the 
states precisely the burden at issue.” Voting Rights Coali- 
tion v. Wilson, id., 60 F.3d at 1415. 


This case thus raises the question whether Article I, 
section 4 may properly be construed as authorizing Con- 
gress to commandeer state employees and agencies not 
involved in the election process to administer the “Motor 
Voter” Act. 


In preserving our federalist system, this Court often 
construes statutes and constitutional powers to avoid 
upsetting the federal balance. Thus, the Court construed 


25 


the Age Discrimination in Employment Act so as not to 
intrude on the States’ right to set a mandatory retirement 
age for state judges, Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 
(1991), and it construed the Commerce Clause power so 
as not to authorize the enactment of a Gun-Free School 
Zones Act, in partial recognition of the fact that “in areas 
such as criminal law enforcement or education .. . States 
historically have been sovereign.” United States v. Lopez, 
__ US. __ 115 S.Ct. 1624, 131 L.Ed.2d 626, 641 (1995). 


Likewise, this case presents an opportunity for the 
Court to construe Article I, section 4 in a way that does 
not authorize Congress to override the protections for 
state sovereignty embodied in the Tenth Amendment. 


Despite the Ninth Circuit's decision to the contrary, 
no decision of this Court has ruled that Congress’s autho- 
rization under Article I, section 4 means that Congress 
may conscript into the service of the Federal Government 
state agencies whose responsibilities are unrelated to the 
administration of the time, place, and manner of conduct- 
ing elections. 


Even the broadest decision on the reach of Article I, 
section 4, Ex Parte Siebold, 100 U.S. 371 (1879), merely 
ruled that Congress “may impose additional penalties for 
the prevention of frauds committed by the state offi- 
cers...,” id. at 387, rejecting the argument that Congress 
had “no constitutional power to make partial regulations 
intended to be carried out in conjunction with regulations 
made by the States.” Id. at 382. 


That ruling is a far cry from commandeering state 
employees to administer a federal regulatory program, 
where those employees are not election officials and have 
no election duties to be regulated in accordance with 
Congress’s Article I, section 4 power. 


26 


Indeed, the framers surely never envisioned that 
Article I, section 4 would be construed to authorize the 
federal government's conscription of state employees 
who work in state agencies not responsible for the admin- 
istration of elections. See Federalist No. 59 (observing that 
the Article I, section 4 power was solely designed to 
allow Congress to regulate federal elections in “extraordi- 
nary circumstances” to prevent the States from refusing 
to conduct federal elections). 


As this Court observed in connection with Article I, 
section 4 in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 132 (1976), “[w]e 
see no reason to believe that the authority of Congress 
over federal election practices is of such a wholly differ- 
ent nature from the other grants of authority to Congress 
that it may be employed in such a manner as to offend 
well-established constitutional restrictions stemming 
from the separation of powers.” 


Moreover, the enactment of laws under Article I, 
section 4 requires special scrutiny because the self-inter- 
est of Congress in the regulation of federal elections may 
conflict with its interest in preserving the federal system 
established by the Constitution. This Court acknowl- 
edged in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitian Transit 
Authority, 469 U.S. 528, 554 (1985), that the courts can 
intervene “to compensate for possible failings in the 
national political process” when the States’ participation 
in Congress will not protect the States from intrusions 
into state sovereignty. Such a possible failing exists when 
Congress exercises its power under Article I, section 4 to 
regulate federal elections, because its members have a 
conflict of interest between the enactment of measures 
which may assist in their election, and the maintenance of 
the delicate federal-state balance. In short, “the interests 


27 


of public officials . .. may not coincide with the Constitu- 
tion’s intergovernmental allocation of authority.” New 
York v. United States, 505 U.S. at 183. Hence, where the 
Congress’s Article I, section 4 power is involved, this 
Court must be particularly vigilant to avoid an exercise of 
that power which infringes on state sovereignty. 


Accordingly, this Court should settle the important 
question whether Article I, section 4 - or any Article I 
power, for that matter - should be construed to authorize 
the commandeering of state agencies and employees 
whose duties fall outside the scope of the Article I power 
granted Congress. 


D. This Case Also Raises The Question Whether 
Either The Fourteenth Or Fifteenth Amend- 
ment Grants Congress The Power To Enact The 
National Voter Registration Act 


Because the district court and Ninth Circuit held that 
the Motor Voter Act was authorized under Article I, 
section 4 and did not violate the Tenth Amendment, 
neither court addressed respondents’ other argument that 
the Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendment authorized the 
Act. 

However, were this Court to grant this petition and 
determine that Article I, section 4 cannot constitutionally 
authorize Congress to conscript state agencies and 
employees to administer the federal voter registration 
program required by the Motor Voter Act, the issue 
whether the Act is authorized by the Fourteenth or Fif- 
teenth Amendment would be raised. 


This issue, fully briefed in the courts below, presents 
an important question regarding the relationship between 
the Civil War Amendments and the Tenth Amendment. 


28 


Both the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments grant 
Congress the power to enforce their provisions by 
“appropriate legislation.” However, petitioners’ position 
in the courts below was that the Motor Voter Act was not 
“appropriate” legislation because it was not directed 
toward removing discriminatory registration require- 
ments, but merely toward making registration more con- 
venient. 


Few cases define what constitutes “appropriate legis- 
lation” under those amendments. However, a review of 
this Court’s cases suggesis that the type of legislation 
deemed “appropriate” under the enforcement clauses of 
those amendments is legislation which furthers the prohi- 
bitions of those amendments, such as enactments that 
prohibit certain practices which have a discriminatory 
effect, e.g., City of Rome v. United States, 446 U.S. 177 
(1979) (“It is clear, then, that under § 2 of the Fifteenth 
Amendment Congress may prohibit practices that in and 
of themselves do not violate § 1 of the Amendment, so 
long as the prohibitions attacking racial discrimination in 
voting are ‘appropriate’ .. . ”); Ex Parte Virginia, 100 U.S. 
339 (1880) (Congress may bar practices which in them- 
selves do not violate the Civil War Amendments so long 
as the prohibitions are appropriate, and are “adopted to 
carry out the objects.”.) 


Where Congress is not attacking an evil prohibited 
by the Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendments, this Court 
has found that Congress cannot constitutionally exercise 
its powers under those amendments. For instance, in 
United States v. Reese, 92 U.S. 214, 218 (1875), cited with 
approval by this Court in State of South Carolina v. Katzen- 
bach, 383 U.S. 301, 326 (1966), this Court ruled that Con- 
gress had not properly exercised its power under the 


29 


Fifteenth Amendment when it enacted legislation which 
prohibited all wrongful acts that obstructed a citizen from 
qualifying to vote because it was not limited to address- 
ing racial discrimination but instead broadly prohibited 
any act that obstructed a citizen from qualifying to vote. 

In this case, the Motor Voter Act does not seek to 
address discriminatory or unfair practices of the nature 
which the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments were 
meant to address, but simply attempts to make it more 
convenient for people to register. And it seeks to do so by 
conscripting state agencies which had never administered 
election laws, and thus could not have engaged in any 
discrimination in the administration of elections. 

This Court should therefore decide whether the 
Motor Voter Act constitutes “appropriate” legislation 
under the Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendments. There is 
little case law on this subject, and a decision would 
clarify the restraints on federal power when exercised 
under the Civil War Amendments. Further, since the Act 
conscripts state employees, this case also raises the bal- 
ance between the Civil War Amendments and the Tenth 
Amendment, cf. Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 111, 128 
(1970). This case would be the first to provide some 
critical guidance in this area. 


CONCLUSION 


This case presents an unusual opportunity for the 
Court to address a number of Tenth Amendment issues, 
including the extent of the Tenth Amendment's restraint 
on Congress’s Article I powers other than the Commerce 
Clause, the reach of New York v. United States, the power 
of Congress to exercise its Article I power to conscript 
state agencies and state employees to administer a federal 


7 30 


program, the extent to which Article I, section 4 may be 
construed to authorize Congress to conscript state agen- 
cies and their employees whose responsibilities were 
heretofore unrelated to the administration of elections, 
and the relationship between the Civil War Amendments 
and the Tenth Amendment. 


Petitioners respectfully request that this Court grant 
their petition for writ of certiorari so that the Court may 
take the next step in the preservation of our federalist 
system. 


Dated: October 23, 1995 
Respectfully submitted, 


Danie. E. LUNGREN 
Attorney General of the 
State of California 
Ftoyp D. SHIMOMURA 
Senior Assistant Attorney General 
Cyrus J. Rickarps 
Deputy Attorney General* 
P.O. Box 944255 
Sacramento, California 94244-2550 
Telephone: (916) 324-5494 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


*Counsel of Record 


App. 1 


FOR PUBLICATION 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


VotTING RIGHTS COALITION; 
COALITION FOR AN AFRICAN- 
AMERICAN COMMUNITY AGENDA; 
LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF 
CALIFORNIA; CALIFORNIA COMMON 
Cause; ’94 COMMITTEE; STELLA 
DoMINQUEZ; CYNTHIA MoreENO; and 
VERONICA MORENO, 


Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


V. 


Pere Wison, Governor of the 
State of California; Tony MILLER, 
Acting Secretary of State, 
California; FRANK Zouin, Director 
of the California Department of 
Motor Vehicles; Evoise ANDERSON, 
Director of the California 
Department of Social Services; 
BRENDA Premo, Director of the 
California Department of 
Rehabilitation, 


Defendants-Appellants. 


V. 


Janet Reno, Attorney General; 
Unrirep STATES OF AMERICA, 


Third Party Plaintiffs- Appellees. 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


No. 95-15449 


D.C. No. 
CV-94-20860-JW 


OPINION 


App. 2 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Northern District of California 
James Ware, District Judge, Presiding 


Argued and Submitted 
June 16, 1995 — San Francisco, California 


Filed July 24, 1995 


Before: Alfred T. Goodwin, Joseph T. Sneed, 
and Andrew J. Kleinfeld, Circuit Judges. 


Opinion by Judge Sneed 


COUNSEL 


Cyrus J. Rickards, Deputy Atty. General, Sacramento, Cal- 
ifornia, for defendants-appellants. 


Samuel R. Bagenstos, Steven H. Rosenbaum, United 
States Department of Justice, Washington, DC; Mei Lin 
Kwan-Gett, Mark D. Rosenbaum, ACLU Foundation of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, Robert 
Rubin, Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights of San Fran- 
cisco Bay Area, San Francisco, California, for the plain- 
tiffs-appellees. 


Miriam E. Brewster, Deputy Attorney, County of San 
Diego, San Diego, California; Anton Leof, Latham & Wat- 
kins, San Francisco, California; Michael J. Guzman, 
Latham & Watkins, Washington, DC; Daniel J. Popeo, 
Washington Legal Foundation, Washington, DC; Joseph 
Remcho, Remcho, Johansen & Purcell, San Francisco, Cal- 
ifornia; Donald W. Brown, Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison, 
San Francisco, California; Douglas I. Horngrad, San Fran- 
cisco, California, for amici. 


App. 3 


OPINION 
SNEED, Circuit Judge: 


Governor Wilson, in his official capacity, directed the 
appropriate officials of the State of California not to com- 
ply with the National Voter Registration Act of 1993, 42 
U.S.C. §§ 1973gg-1 to -10 (“the Act”), on constitutional 
grounds. The Voting Rights Coalition, joined by the 
Attorney General of the United States, having come 
together as a result of a suit by the State of California 
against the United States to enjoin permanently the 
enforcement of the Act, obtained a permanent injunction 
in the district court enjoining California from failing to 
comply with the Act. The State of California sought to 
stay that injunction pending appeal by way of a motion to 
this court, which was denied. We affirm the judgment of 
the district court directing the State of California to com- 
ply with the Act. 


The Act in form is not a simple directive to the states 
to provide voter registration at such places as the state 
receives applications for motor vehicle driver’s licenses, 
and provides public assistance or services to persons with 
disabilities. Rather, it is a complex statute of ten sections 
bearing the marks of legislative draftsmanship similar to 
those borne by the Internal Revenue Code. For example, 
42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-3, entitled “SIMULTANEOUS APPLI- 
CATION FOR VOTER REGISTRATION AND APPLICA- 
TION FOR MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVER'S LICENSE,” 
contains five subsections, (a) through (e), of which the 
third, (c), sets forth its own two subsections, (1) and (2), 
and of which the section (2) sets forth its five subsections, 


App. 4 


(A) through (E). That is not all. Within (A) through (E), 
there appear in (C) and (D) three subsections each. Thus, 
following the caption of section 3 of the Act, the State of 
California must conform to four levels of statutory struc- 
tures. 


This complexity suggests that the implementation of 
this Act could generate differences between the United 
States and California of interpretive and, possibly, consti- 
tutional importance. For this reason, our opinion is not 
intended to foreclose future judicial review of any such 
issues. Today we speak only with respect to an as yet 
unapplied statute. As a consequence, we assume, but do 
not decide, that all such interpretive or constitutional 
issues that might arise in the implementation of the Act 
do not impair our analysis of the Act’s facial constitu- 
tionality. 


Three provisions of the Constitution must be consid- 
ered in our analysis of the constitutionality of the Act. 
The most important is Article I, section 4, which vests in 
Congress the power to alter state laws pertaining to the 
“Times, Places and Manner” of electing Representatives 
and Senators. The second is Article I, section 2, which 
gives the states the power to fix the qualifications of its 
voters. The third, on which California primarily relies, is 
the Tenth Amendment. 


The relevant portion of Article I, section 4 reads as 
follows: 


The Times, Places and Manner of holding 
Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall 
be prescribed in each State by the Legislature 
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by 


App. 5 


Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to 
the Places of chusing Senators. 


U.S. Const. art. I, Sec. 4, cl. 1. Initially, two aspects of the 
provision appear. No limits on this power are stated and 
registration procedures are not mentioned. As Chief 
Judge Posner of the Seventh Circuit pointed out in Asso- 
ciation of Community Orgs. for Reform Now (ACORN) v. 
Edgar, No. 95-1800, 1995 WL 329726, at *1 (7th Cir. June 5, 
1995) summarized in 63 U.S.L.W. 2776, 2777 (7th Cir. June 
20, 1995) (No. 95-1800), registration did not exist as a 
procedure, separate from establishing one’s qualifications 
to vote at the time and place of voting, when the Consti- 
tution was drafted. As a consequence, Article I, section 2 
and the Seventeenth Amendment, in vesting the power to 
fix the qualifications of voters for Representatives and 
Senators in the states, do not explicitly remove the regis- 
tration of voters by the states from the reach of the power 
of Congress, provided by Article I, section 4. The fact that 
some states include registration in their enumeration of 
qualifications does not alter this conclusion.’ 


Moreover, the Supreme Court has read the grant of 
power to Congress in Article I, section 4 as quite broad. 
In Smiley v. Holm, 285 U.S. 355, 366 (1932), the Court 
stated that Congress has 


1 With respect to this circuit, Alaska, Hawaii, Montana and 
Oregon treat registration as a qualification of voting. See Alaska 
Const. art. V, § 1; Alaska Stat. § 15.05.010 (1988); Haw. Const. art. 
Il, § 1; Haw.Rev.Stat. § 11-11 (1985); Mont. Const. art. IV, § 2; 
Mont.Code Ann. § 13-1-111 (1994); Or. Const. art. II, § 2; 
Or.Rev.Stat. §§ 247.002, 247.009 (1993). 


App. 6 


authority to provide a complete code for con- 
gressional elections, not only as to times and 
places, but in relation to notices, registration, 
supervision of voting, protection of voters, pre- 
vention of fraud and corrupt practices, counting 
of votes, duties of inspectors and canvassers, 
and making and publication of election returns; 
in short, to enact the numerous requirements as 
to procedure and safeguards which experience 
shows are necessary in order to enforce the fun- 
damental right involved. 


At an earlier date, Ex Parte Siebold, 100 U.S. 371, 
382-97 (1879), upheld the power of Congress to impose 
duties, prohibitions, and sanctions for state election offi- 
cials involved in conducting elections for federal office. 
Conflicting state laws were set aside.? 100 U.S. at 397. 


2 The Court continued to interpret broadly Congress’s 
power under Article I, section 4. See Roudebush v. Hartke, 405 
U.S. 15, 24-25 (1972) (authority to regulate recount of elections); 
United States v. Gradwell, 243 U.S. 476, 483 (1917) (full authority 
over federal election process, from registration to certification 
of results); United States v. Mosley, 238 U.S. 383, 386 (1915) 
(authority to enforce the right to cast ballot and have ballot 
counted); In re Coy, 127 U.S. 731, 752 (1888) (authority to regu- 
late conduct at any election coinciding with federal contest); Ex 
parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651, 662 (1884) (authority to make 
additional laws for free, pure, and safe exercise of right to vote); 
Ex parte Clarke, 100 U.S. 399, 404 (1879) (authority to punish 
state election officers for violation of state duties vis-a-vis Con- 
gressional elections); see also United States v. Simms, 508 F.Supp. 
1179, 1183-85 (W.D.La.1979) (criminalizing payments in refer- 
ence to registration or voting does not offend Tenth Amend- 
ment); Prigmore v. Renfro, 356 F.Supp. 427, 430 (N.D.Ala.1972) 
(absentee ballot program upheld as applied to federal elec- 
tions), aff'd, 410 U.S. 919 (1973); Fowler v. Adams, 315 F.Supp. 592, 
594 (M.D.Fla.1970), appeal dismissed, 400 U.S. 986 (1971) (author- 
ity to exact 5 percent filing fee for Congressional elections). 


App. 7 


The broad power given to Congress over congres- 
sional elections has been extended to presidential elec- 
tions, Burroughs v. United States, 290 U.S. 534, 545 (1934), 
and to party primaries involving contestants for congres- 
sional positions, United States v. Classic, 313 U.S. 299, 317 
(1941). Judge Wisdom of the Fifth Circuit, while sitting on 
a three-judge district court in United States v. Manning, 
215 F.Supp. 272, 284 (W.D.La.1963), expansively observed 
that “ ‘the manner of holding elections’ therefore must be 
read as referring to the entire electoral process, from the 
first step of registering to the last step, the [s]tate’s pro- 
mulgation of honest returns.” It is not necessary to rely 
on a reading of Article I, section 4 of such breadth to find 
that the Act before us, on its face, fits comfortably within 
its grasp. However, we are reminded that Justice Black in 
Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 112, 123-25 (1970), in his 
plurality opinion, recognized that, while Congress could 
lower the voting age in federal elections from twenty-one 
to eighteen, Article I, section 2 bars Congress from doing 
so in elections for state officials. 


This array of authorities supporting a broad reach of 
Article I, section 4 does not permit this court to limit its 
meaning to that given it by Hamilton in Federalist No. 
59.3 He saw it as a means by which Congress could 


3 The Federalist No. 59, at 399 (Alexander Hamilton) (Jacob 
E. Cooke ed., 1961): 

Nothing can be more evident, than that an exclu- 
sive power of regulating elections for the National 
Government, in the hands of the State Legislatures, 
would leave the existence of the Union entirely at 
their mercy. They could at any moment annihilate it, 
by neglecting to provide for the choice of persons to 


App. 8 


preserve itself from states seeking its destruction by 
refusing to conduct elections. Story enhanced its utility 
somewhat in his Commentaries.* 


The Tenth Amendment position argued by the State 
of California rests on New York v. United States, 112 S.Ct. 
2408, 2425-29 (1992), which held, in its relevant part, that 
Congress could not impose on the states the burden of 
exercising its power under the Constitution to regulate 
interstate commerce. Of course, Congress could obtain 
the consent of a state, or states, to undertake such a 
burden upon payment of a mutually acceptable consider- 
ation. The flaw in the State of California’s argument is 
that it ignores Article I, section 4, which, unlike the 
commerce power in Article I, section 8, empowers Con- 
gress to impose on the states precisely the burden at 
issue. 


Congress may conscript state agencies to carry out 
voter registration for the election of Representatives and 
Senators. The exercise of that power by Congress is by its 


administer its affairs. It is to little purpose to say that 
a neglect or omission of this kind, would not be likely 
to take place. The constitutional possibility of the 
thing, without an equivalent for the risk, is an 
unanswerable objection. Nor has any satisfactory rea- 
son been yet assigned for incurring that risk. 


4 Joseph Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the 
United States 292-93 (Rotunda and Nowak ed. 1987). Story gave 
several justifications for Article 1, section 4: as a means to 
correct negligent state law, to impose a check on senatorial plots 
to prevent state citizens from holding elections, to ensure safe 
elections in times of invasion, and to prevent vacancies by main- 
taining uniformity in the times and manner of elections. 


App. 9 


terms intended to be borne by the states without compen- 
sation. None of the authorities recognizing the exercise of 
the Times, Places and Manner power vested in Congress 
have suggested, even remotely, the necessity of the 
United States bearing the burden of any alteration it 
imposed. True, usually the actual cost to the states was 
relatively small, while in this instance, it may be signifi- 
cant. That does not change the principle which is embod- 
ied in Article I, section 4, but it does dictate that the 
implementation of the Act be done sensitively. To sepa- 
rate the power to command change from the burden of 
meeting its costs is always troublesome whatever its con- 
text. Nor is legitimate concern diminished by the fact that 
enactment of the Act was driven substantially by partisan 
politics. 


It is not the role of this court to undertake at this time 
the difficult task of implementing the Act. Even a cursory 
glance at the Act suggests this will not be a simple 
undertaking. Even though the Act by its terms does not 
control the practices of voter registration for elections of 
state and local officials, its impact on such elections prob- 
ably will be significant. 


It is at this juncture that the sovereignty of the State 
of California under the Tenth Amendment becomes a 
constitutional concern. In U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thorn- 
ton, 115 $.Ct. 1842, 1872 (1995), Justice Kennedy, in his 
concurring opinion, explaining his decisive fifth vote in 
the decision to invalidate the effort of certain states to 
limit the terms their Representatives and Senators could 
serve in Congress, eloquently described the fundamental 
structure of the Constitution: 


App. 10 


Federalism was our Nation’s own discovery. 
The Framers split the atom of sovereignty. It 
was the genius of their idea that our citizens 
would have two political capacities, one state 
and one federal, each protected from incursion 
by the other. The resulting Constitution created 
a legal system unprecedented in form and 
design, establishing two orders of government, 
each with its own direct relationship, its own 
privity, its own set of mutual rights and obliga- 
tions to the people who sustain it and are gov- 
erned by it. It is appropriate to recall these 
origins, which instruct us as to the nature of the 
two different governments created and con- 
firmed by the Constitution. 


The State of California is a sovereign body within the 
Constitution. There can be no doubt of that, no less than 
of the power of Congress under Article I, section 4 of the 
Constitution. Absent the invocation by Congress of its 
authority under the Fourteenth Amendment, the State of 
California possesses the power to fix the time, place, and 
manner of the election of its officials. It follows, therefore, 
that an accommodation, as Justice Kennedy made clear, of 
sovereign rights is necessary. 


Presently, we explicitly recognize that, inasmuch as 
Congress only sought to regulate the times, places, and 
manner of electing Representatives and Senators, it did 
not intend to perform the same function for state and 
local officials. No doubt it was recognized by Congress 
that the Act would have an impact on registration pro- 
cedures applicable to state and local elections and even 
perhaps hoped that it would do so. Nonetheless, it did 
not attempt to do so explicitly. 


App. 11 


The State of California, in supplemental briefing, has 
confirmed that the Act will have a significant impact on 
its registration procedures applicable to elections of state 
and local officials. However, at this point we cannot 
determine the extent to which, if at all, these changes 
impinge on the legitimate retained sovereignty of the 
states under the “two orders of government” (as Justice 
Kennedy put it) of the Constitution. Clearly, the Constitu- 
tion denies to the states any power to obstruct the exer- 
cise by Congress of its power to “make or alter” the 
“Times, Places and Manner” of electing “Senators and 
Representatives,” nor does it impose on the United States 
the burden, always heretofore borne by the states, of 
defraying the costs incurred by such alterations. 


At this juncture of these proceedings, we can only 
direct the district court on remand to impose no burdens 
on the state not authorized by the Act which would 
impair the State of California’s retained power to conduct 
its state elections as it sees fit. We foresee the possibility 
in which the district court will be asked to determine 
whether a certain implementation of the statute sought 
by the United States, which is helpful but not essential to 
its interests, is properly resisted by the state on substan- 
tial grounds related to its sovereignty. Should such occa- 
sions arise, we would expect the district court to respond 
with an informed understanding of the duality of sover- 
eignty imbedded within the Constitution of the United 
States. 


This adjuration springs from the same perception 
that led the unanimous Court of Appeals for the Seventh 
Circuit to strike from the district court's decree its fourth 
paragraph which Chief Judge Posner, in his opinion for 


App. 12 


the court, described as failing “to exhibit an adequate 
sensitivity to the principle of federalism.” ACORN, 1995 
WL 329726, at *7. 


We, too, by this opinion, direct the district court to 
approach its task of implementation with an “adequate 
sensitivity to the principle of federalism.” This panel 
hereby retains jurisdiction in the event of subsequent 
proceedings and appeals. 


No party to recover costs on appeal. 


AFFIRMED AND REMANDED FOR IMPLEMENTA- 
TION. 


App. 13 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 


PETE WILSON, Governor of ) 
the State of California; STATE) Case No. 
OF CALIFORNIA, C 95-20042 JW 
.<- Case ™». 
Plaintiffs, C 94-20860 JW 
(Related Action) 


INJUNCTION 
ORDERING THE 
STATE OF 
CALIFORNIA AND 
GOVERNOR PETE 
WILSON TO 
COMPLY WITH THE 
NATIONAL VOTER 
REGISTRATION ACT 
OF 1993 


VS. 


UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA; JANET RENO, 
Attorney General; TREVOR 
POTTER, Chairman, Federal 
Elections Commission; 
FEDERAL ELECTIONS 
COMMISSION, 


Defendants. 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


I. INTRODUCTION 


This action questions whether the National Voter 
Registration Act, an otherwise laudable attempt by Con- 
gress to promote nondiscriminatory voter registration 
standards, is nevertheless unconstitutional because it 
invades powers reserved to the states. 


The United States and a group of private citizens, 
which shall be referred to as “the Voting Rights Coali- 
tion,” seek to compel the State of California and Gover- 
nor Pete Wilson to comply with the National Voter 
Registration Act of 1993, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg, ef seq. 
(“NVRA”). The State of California and Governor Wilson 
seek to enjoin enforcement of the NVRA on the ground 


App. 14 


that it is unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment of 
the United States Constitution. For the reasons set forth 
below, the Court finds that the NVRA is constitutional 
and permanently enjoins the State of California and Gov- 
ernor Wilson from refusing to comply with its provisions. 


II. FINDINGS OF FACT 


There are no disputed issues of material fact. The 
NVRA provides that states requiring advance registration 
to vote in federal elections must permit voter registration 
by: (1) mail-in application; (2) simultaneous application 
with driver’s license application, renewal, or change of 
address; and (3) simultaneous application at disability 
and public assistance agencies as well as other agencies 
designated by the state. See NVRA §§ 4-7, 42 U.S.C. 
§§ 1973gg-2 to 1973gg-5. The NVRA also establishes pro- 
cedures and standards governing maintenance of voter 
registration rolls. NVRA § 8, 42 U.S.C. § 1973-6. States 
were required to comply with the NVRA by January 1, 
1995. NVRA § 13, 42 U.S.C. § 1973gg note. 


On August 12, 1994, Governor Wilson issued Execu- 
tive Order No. V-98-94, which orders California state 
agencies to comply with the NVRA only “to the extent 
[that] federal funding is made available for such pur- 
poses.” Id. 


Believing the Governor’s order was tantamount to a 
direct order that state agencies not implement the NVRA, 
on December 14, 1994, the Voting Rights Coalition and 
other interested private parties filed an action in this 
Court (Voting Rights Coalition, et al. v. Pete Wilson, et al., 


App. 15 


C 94-20860 JW) seeking to enforce the NVRA. Section 11 
of the NVRA permits private enforcement suits. Subse- 
quently, the State of California and Governor Wilson filed 
a lawsuit against the United States, the Attorney General 
of the United States, the Federal Elections Commission 
(“FEC”) and the Chairman of the FEC, contending that 
the NVRA is unconstitutional and requesting that the 
Court permanently enjoin its enforcement. 


On January 23, 1995, the United States filed an 
answer, counter-claim and third party complaint. The 
counter-claim alleges that the State of California is violat- 
ing the NVRA and seeks to compel its enforcement. 


On January 27, 1995, each of the parties filed a 
motion for a preliminary injunction. The United States 
and the private parties seek immediate enforcement of 
the NVRA. The State of California and Governor Wilson 
seek immediate restraint against enforcement. The Court 
determined that the constitutionality of the NVRA is a 
dispositive legal issue in both lawsuits and that its consti- 
tutionality could be decided on the merits at the hearing 
of the motions for preliminary injunction. Accordingly, 
on February 8, 1995, pursuant to Rule 65(a)(2) of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Court ordered the 
hearing on the merits of the constitutionality of the 
NVRA consolidated with the hearing on the motions for 
preliminary injunction. 


On March 2, 1995 the case was argued and submitted 
for decision. 


App. 16 


Ill. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A. Constitutionality of the NVRA 


The Court begins the task of deciding the constitu- 
tionality of the NVRA by examining the language of the 
Constitution. Article I, Section 4 specifically states: 


The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elec- 
tions for Senators and Representatives, shall be 
prescribed in each State by the Legislature 
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by 
Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to 
the Places of chusing Senators. U.S. Const. art. I, 
§ 4, cl. 1. 


Article I, Section 4 has been interpreted to afford 
broad power to Congress. Smiley v. Holm, 285 U.S. 355 
(1931); United States v. Manning, 215 F. Supp. 272 (W.D. 
La. 1963). Courts have approved congressional action 
taken pursuant to Article I, Section 4 which have required 
States to significantly modify their federal voting pro- 
cedures. In Oregon v. Mitchell; 400 U.S. 112 (1970), over 
objections by the State of Oregon, the Supreme Court 
upheld the constitutionality of 1970 amendments to the 
Voting Rights Act. The Court confirmed Congress’ broad 
authority to make or alter laws regulating national elec- 
tions, including its power over voter registration: 


It cannot be doubted that these comprehensive 
words embrace authority to provide a complete 
code for congressional elections, not only as to 
times and places, but in relation to notices, reg- 
istration, supervision of voting, protection of 
voters, prevention of fraud and corrupt prac- 
tices, counting of votes, duties of inspectors and 


App. 17 


canvassers, and making and publication of elec- 
tion returns; in short, to enact the numerous 
requirements as to procedure and safeguards 
which experience shows are necessary in order 
to enforce the fundamental right involved. Id. at 
122 (quoting Smiley v. Holm, 285 U.S. 355, 366 
(1931)). 


The State of California and Governor Wilson contend 
that, while Congress is afforded power to regulate elec- 
tions, the Tenth Amendment prohibits Congress from 
requiring a particular state agency, not otherwise desig- 
nated by the state for registration, to administer a federal 
voter registration scheme. The Tenth Amendment 
reserves to the states those powers not delegated to the 
federal government. The State of California asserts that 
the NVRA violates the Tenth Amendment of the United 
States Constitution because it commandeers state agen- 
cies to administer a federal election program. The State of 
California relies on New York v. United States, 505 U.S. ___ 
112 S.Ct. 2408 (1992) and related cases to support its 
position that Congress exceeded the scope of its enumer- 
ated constitutional powers by requiring a state to expend 
resources to carry out a congressional mandate. 


In New York, the Supreme Court upheld portions of 
the Low Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act (“the Act”) 
as a permissible exercise of congressional power to regu- 
late disposal of radioactive waste under the Commerce 
Clause. Pertinent to the State of California’s argument in 
this case, the Court struck down provisions of the Act 
requiring those states which failed to regulate according 
to the instructions of Congress to “take title” and accept 
ownership of and financial responsibility for the waste. 


App. 18 


The Court observed that these “take title” requirements 
went beyond the authority of Congress to regulate inter- 
state commerce. While Congress could influence state con- 
duct by attaching conditions on the receipt of federal 
funds, it could not commandeer the legislative process of 
the state by directly compelling it to enact a federal 
regulatory program. “Whether one views the take title 
provision as lying outside Congress’ enumerated powers, 
or as infringing upon the core of state sovereignty 
reserved by the Tenth Amendment, the provision is 
inconsistent with the federal structure of our Government 
established by the Constitution.” Id. at 2429. 


Although the principles outlining the constitutional 
boundaries between congressional power and state sover- 
eignty discussed in New York are applicable to this case, 
New York is not controlling here because it involves a 
different constitutional provision. The New York decision 
discussed the limits of congressional power under the 
Commerce Clause. The New York Court held that Con- 
gress had the “authority to regulate private activity 
under the Commerce Clause”, but that it did not have the 
power to require states to regulate its program. Id. at 2424. 


In contrast, Article I, Section 4 specifically states that 
Congress may make or alter state regulations concerning 
the time, place and manner of federal elections. Conse- 
quently, Congress through the NVRA may directly regu- 
late the state’s manner and means of voter registration 
without invading an area reserved to the states. As the 
court noted in United States v. Manning, 215 F. Supp. 272 
(1963): 


Pg 8 


eae 


ge ecspeies 


App. 19 


{NJothing in the language or history of the 
Tenth Amendment gives the State the exclusive 
sovereignty over the election processes against 
the federal government's otherwise constitu- 
tional exercise of a power within the scope of 
Article I, Section 4 of the Constitution and the 
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. In Jus- 
tice Holmes’s phrase, this “is not a controversy 
between equals.” It is necessary at this time to 
say again, and underscore it, that within the area 
of delegated power, express Or implied, the Tenth 
Amendment does not reduce the powers of the 
United States. Instead, notwithstanding its ori- 
gin, the Tenth Amendment reaffirms the reality 
of the nation as a nation. It reaffirms the sover- 
eignty of the federal union when a conflict 
between a state and the United States puts the 
national interest at stake. Id. at 277. 


In the Ninth Circuit, in order to obtain a preliminary 
injunction, the moving party must show a combination of 
probable success on the merits and the possibility of 
irreparable injury or that serious questions are raised and 
the balance of hardships tips sharply in its favor. Atari 
Games Corp. v. Nintendo of America, Inc., 897 F.2d 1572, 
1575 (Fed. Cir. 1990); Vision Sports, Inc. v. Melville Corp., 
888 F.2d 609, 612 (9th Cir. 1989). As set forth above, the 
Court finds that, with respect to the Constitutionality of 
the NVRA, the United States and the Voting Rights Coali- 
tion satisfy these requirements. Therefore, since the trial 
on the merits has been advanced under Rule 65(a)(2), it is 
appropriate to issue a permanent injunction. 


App. 20 


B. Class Certification 


The Voting Rights Coalition and other interested pri- 
vate parties move the Court to certify a class, pursuant to 
Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The 
following class definition was proposed: 


All United States citizens over the age of eigh- 
teen and resident in the State of California who 
are not registered to vote, who have moved 
since their last voter registration, who may 
desire to re-register to vote during the pendency 
of this action, who may be subject to removal of 
their voter registration or who may be denied 
the right to vote in violation of the NVRA. 


Rule 23(a) provides that a class action may be 
brought only if: (1) the class is so numerous that joinder 
of all members is impracticable; (2) there are questions of 
law or fact common to the class; (3) the claims or defenses 
of the representative parties are typical of the claims or 
defenses of the class; and (4) the representative parties 
will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the 
class. The Court finds that these prerequisites have been 
met in this instance. 


The Court further finds that it has been established 
that the State of California has acted or refused to act on 
grounds generally applicable to the class, thereby making 
final injunctive relief appropriate, in compliance with 
Rule 23(b)(2). Therefore, the Court GRANTS the motion 
for class certification. Accordingly, Plaintiffs Stella Domi- 
nquez, Cynthia Moreno and Veronica Moreno are hereby 
certified to represent a Plaintiff Class as defined above, in 
these consolidated actions. Notice is not required for 
absent class members. 


J 
be 
i 
i 


a Ne ag OR METRE TI 


we 


© 
3 


App. 21 


IV. JUDGMENT 


Based upon the foregoing, the Court DENIES the 
State of California’s motion for entry of an injunction and 
GRANTS the Voting Rights Coalition’s motion for entry 
of an injunction. The Court finds that the NVRA is consti- 
tutional and is binding on the State of California. The 
State of California and Governor Wilson are permanently 
enjoined from failing to comply with the provisions of the 
NVRA. 


Within ten (10) days of this Order, the State of Cali- 
fornia and Governor Wilson shall file and serve a pro- 
posed plan for implementing the NVRA. The plan shall 
specify the dates by which the State of California shall be 
in full compliance with the provisions of the NVRA. The 
Court reserves the right to require status reports as to the 
manner and timing of implementation. 


The Court bifurcates and reserves for separate deter- 
mination the claims of the Voting Rights Coalition regard- 
ing past and future conduct by the State of California and 
Governor Wilson with respect to implementing the 
NVRA. 


The Court DENIES the State of California and Gover- 
nor Wilson’s evidentiary objections to the declarations 
which have been submitted by the Voting Rights Coali- 
tion and other interested private parties and the United 
States. The Court finds that the declarations are not rele- 
vant to the determination of the constitutionality of the 
NVRA. 


App. 22 


The Court also DENIES the State of California and 
Governor Wilson’s request for a stay of this Order, pur- 
suant to Rules 27 and 62(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure. 


Based upon the oral motion of the United States, the 
Court DISMISSES without prejudice the FEC and FEC 
Chairman Trevor Potter. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 
DATED: March 2, 1995 


/s/ James Ware 
JAMES WARE 
United States District Judge 


This is to certify that copies of this order have been 
mailed to: 


Robert Rubin 

LAWYERS’ COMMITTEE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS 
OF THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA 

301 Mission Street, Suite 400 

San Francisco, CA 94105 


Mark D. Rosenbaum 

ACLU FOUNDATION OF SOUTHERN 
CALIFORNIA 

1616 Beverly Drive 

Los Angeles, CA 90026 


Alan L. Schlosser 

ACLU FOUNDATION OF NORTHERN 
CALIFORNIA 

1663 Mission Street, Suite 460 

San Francisco, CA 94103 


& 


Riera atts kar car cata dle, Ski ead wail diate eae ET ae 


App. 23 


Kathryn K. Imahara 

ASIAN PACIFIC AMERICAN LEGAL 
CENTER OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA 

1010 South Flower Street, Suite 302 

Los Angeles, CA 90015 


William R. Tamayo 

ASIAN LAW CAUCUS, INC. 
468 Bush Street, Third Floor 
San Francisco, CA 94108 


Joaquin G. Avila 

Voting Rights Attorney 
Parktown Office Building 
1774 Clear Lake Avenue 
Milpitas, CA 95035 


Harry Bremond 

WILSON, SONSINI, GOODRICH & ROSATI 
650 Page Mill Road 

Palo Alto, CA 94304-1050 


David H. Raizman 

WESTERN LAW CENTER FOR 
DISABILITY RIGHTS 

1441 W. Olympic Blvd. 

Los Angeles, CA 90015 


Elaine B. Feingold 

DISABILITY RIGHTS AND EDUCATION 
DEFENSE FUND, INC. 

2212 Sixth Street 

Berkeley, CA 94710 


Cyrus J. Rickards 

OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
1515 K Street 

P.O. Box 944255 

Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 


App. 24 


Pete Wilson 

GOVERNOR OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
Ist Floor, State Capitol 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


Bill Jones 

SECRETARY OF STATE 
1230 J Street, Suite 209 
Sacramento, CA 95814 


Brenda Premo 

DEPARTMENT OF REHABILITATION 
830 K Street, Room 307 

Sacramento, CA 94244 


Frank Zolin 

DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
2415 ist Avenue 

Sacramento, CA 95818 


Eloise Anderson 

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES 
744 P Street 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


Holly Lee Wiseman 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
Civil Rights Division, Voting Section 
P.O. Box 66128 

Washington, D.C. 20035-6128 


Lawrence E. Noble 

FEDERAL ELECTIONS COMMISSION 
999 E Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20463 


Michael J. Yamaguchi 
UNITED STATES ATTORNEY 
450 Golden Gate Avenue 

San Francisco, CA 94102 


Dated: 3/2/95 


App. 25 


CLERK OF COURT 


By: Ronald L. Davis 
Ronald L. Davis 
Deputy Clerk 


App. 26 


NATIONAL VOTER REGISTRATION ACT OF 1993 
(PUBLIC LAW 103-31 — MAY 20, 1993) 
Revised 2/10/95 


An Act 


To establish national voter registration procedures for 
Federal elections, and for other purposes. 


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, 


SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE. 


This Act may be cited as the “National Voter Regis- 
tration Act of 1993”. 


Sec. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES. 
(a) FINDINGS. -— The Congress finds that - 


(1) the right of citizens of the United States to vote 
is a fundamental right; 


(2) it is the duty of the Federal, State, and local 
governments to promote the exercise of that 
right; and 


(3) discriminatory and unfair registration laws and 
procedures can have a direct and damaging 
effect on voter participation in elections for Fed- 
eral office and disproportionately harm voter 
participation by various groups, including 
racial minorities. 


(b) PURPOSES. - The purposes of this Act are - 


(1) to establish procedures that will increase the 
number of eligible citizens who register to vote 
in elections for Federal office; 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


App. 27 


to make it possible for Federal, State, and local 
governments to implement this Act in a manner 
that enhances the participation of eligible citi- 
zens as voters in elections for Federal office; 


to protect the integrity of the electoral process; 
and 


to ensure that accurate and current voter regis- 
tration rolls are maintained. 


SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS 


As used in this Act - 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


the term “election” has the meaning stated in 
section 301(1) of the Federal Election Campaign 
Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(1)); 


the term “Federal office” has the meaning 
stated in section 301(3) of the Federal Election 
Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(3)); 


the term “motor vehicle driver’s license” 
includes any personal identification document 
issued by a State motor vehicle authority; 


the term “State” means a State of the United 
States and the District of Columbia; and 


the term “voter registration agency” means an 
office designated under section 7(a)(1) to per- 
form voter registration activities. 


SEC. 4. NATIONAL PROCEDURES FOR VOTER REGIS- 
TRATION FOR ELECTIONS FOR FEDERAL OFFICE. 


(a) IN GENERAL. - Except as provided in subsection 
(b), notwithstanding any other Federal or State law, 
in addition to any other method of voter registration 


(b) 


I 


App. 28 


provide for under State law, each State shall estab- 


lish 


procedures to register to vote in elections for 


Federal office —- 


(1) 


(2) 
(3) 


by application made simultaneously with an 
application for a motor vehicle driver's license 
pursuant to section 5; 


by mail application pursuant to section 6; and 

by application in person - 

(A) at the appropriate registration site desig- 
nated with respect to the residence of the 
applicant in accordance with State law; 


and 


(B) at a Federal, State, or nongovernmental 
office designated under section 7. 


NONAPPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN STATES. - This 
Act does not apply to a State described in either or 
both of the following paragraphs: 


(1) 


(2) 


A State in which, under law that is in effect 
continuously on and after March 11, 1993, there 
is no voter registration requirement for any 
voter in the State with respect to an election for 
Federal office. 


A State in which, under law that is in effect 
continuously on and after March 11, 1993, or 
that was enacted on or prior to March 11, 1993, 
and by its terms is to come into effect upon the 
enactment of this Act, so long as that law 
remains in effect, all voters in the State may 
register to vote at the polling place at the time 
of voting in a general election for Federal office. 


App. 29 


SEC. 5. SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATION FOR VOTER 
REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION FOR MOTOR 
VEHICLE DRIVER’S LICENSE. 


(a) IN GENERAL. - 


(b) 


(c) 


(1) 


(2) 


Each State motor vehicle driver’s license appli- 
cation (including any renewal application) sub- 
mitted to the appropriate State motor vehicle 
authority under State law shall serve as an 
application for voter registration with respect to 
elections for Federal office unless the applicant 
fails to sign the voter registration application. 


An application for voter registration submitted 
under paragraph (1) shall be considered as 
updating any previous voter registration by the 
applicant. 


LIMITATION ON USE OF INFORMATION. - No 
information relating to the failure of an applicant for 
a State motor vehicle driver’s license to sign a voter 
registration application may be used for any purpose 
other than voter registration. 


FORMS AND PROCEDURES. - 


(1) 


(2) 


Each State shall include a voter registration 
application form for elections for Federal office 
as part of an application for State motor vehicle 
driver’s license. 


The voter registration application portion of an 
application for a State motor vehicle driver's 
license — 


(A) may not require any information that 
duplicates information required in the 
driver’s license portion of the form (other 
than a second signature or other informa- 
tion necessary under subparagraph (C)); 


(B) 


(C) 


(D) 


App. 30 


may require only the minimum amount of 
information necessary to - 


(i) 


(ii) 


shall 
(i) 


(ii) 


(iii) 


prevent duplicate voter registrations; 
and 


enable State election officials to 
assess the eligibility of the applicant 
and to administer voter registration 
and other parts of the election pro- 
cess; 


include a statement that - 


states each eligibility requirement 
(including citizenship); 


contains an attestation that the appli- 
cant meets each such requirement; 
and 


requires the signature of the appli- 
cant, under penalty of perjury; 


shall include, in print that is identical to 
that used in the attestation portion of the 
application - 


(i) 


(ii) 


(iii) 


the information required in section 
8(a)(S) (A) and (B); 


a statement that, if an applicant 
declines to register to vote, the fact 
that the applicant has declined to 
register will remain confidential and 
will be used only for voter registra- 
tion purposes; and 


a statement that if.an applicant does 
register to vote, the office at which 


App. 31 


the applicant submits a voter regis- 
tration application will remain confi- 
dential and will be used only for 
voter registration purposes, and 


(E) shall be made available (as submitted by 
the applicant, or in machine readable or 
other format) to the appropriate State elec- 
tion official as provided by State law. 


(4) CHANGE OF ADDRESS. - Any change of address 


(e) 


form submitted in accordance with State law for 
purposes of a State motor vehicle driver’s license 
shall serve as notification of change of address for 
voter registration with respect to elections for Fed- 
eral office for the registrant involved unless the reg- 
istrant states on the form that the change of address 
is not for voter registration purposes. 


TRANSMITTAL DEADLINE. - 


(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a completed voter reg- 
istration portion of an application for a State 
motor vehicle driver’s license accepted at a 
State motor vehicle authority shall be transmit- 
ted to the appropriate State election office not 
later than 10 days after the date of acceptance. 


(2) If a registration application is accepted within 5 
days before the last day for registration to vote 
in an election, the application shall be transmit- 
ted to the appropriate State election official not 
later than 5 days after the date of acceptance. 


SEC. 6. MAIL REGISTRATION. 
(a) FORM. - 


(1) Each State shall accept and use the mail voter 
registration application form prescribed by the 


(b) 


(c) 


(2) 


(3) 


App. 32 


Federal Election Commission pursuant to sec- 
tion 9(a)(2) for the registration of voters in elec- 
tions for Federal office. 


In addition to accepting and using the form 
described in paragraph (1), a State may develop 
and use a mail voter registration form that 
meets all of the criteria stated in section 9(b) for 
the registration of voters in elections for Federal 
office. 


A form described in paragraph (1) or (2) shall 
be accepted and used for notification of a regis- 
trant’s change of address. 


AVAILABILITY OF FORMS. - The chief State elec- 
tion official of a State shall make the forms described 
in subsection (a) available for distribution through 
governmental and private entities, with particular 
emphasis on making them available for organized 
voter registration programs. 


FIRST TIME VOTERS. - 


(1) 


(2) 


Subject to paragraph (2), a State may by law 
require a person to vote in person if - 


(A) the person was registered to vote in a 
jurisdiction by mail; and 


(B) the person has not previously voted in 
that jurisdiction. 


Paragraph (1) does not apply in the case of a 
person - 


(A) who is entitled to vote by absentee ballot 
under the Uniformed and Overseas Citi- 
zens Absentee Voting Act (42 U.S.C. 
1973ff-1 et seq.); 


(B) who is provided the right to vote other- 
wise than in person under section 


(C) 


App. 33 


3(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Voting Accessibility for 
the Elderly and Handicapped Act (42 
U.S.C. 1973ee-1(b)(2)(B){ii));, or 


who is entitled to vote otherwise than in 
person under any other Federal law. 


(d) UNDELIVERED NOTICES. - If a notice of the dispo- 
sition of a mail voter registration application under 
section 8(a)(2) is sent by nonforwardable mail and is 
returned undelivered, the registrar may proceed in 
accordance with section 8(d). 


SEC. 7. VOTER REGISTRATION AGENCIES. 
(a) DESIGNATION. - 


(1) Each State shall designate agencies for the regis- 
tration of voters in elections for Federal office. 


(2) Each State shall designate as voter registration 
agencies — 


(A) 


(B) 


(3) (A) 


(B) 


all offices in the State that provide public 
assistance; and 


all offices in the State that provide State- 
funded programs primarily engaged in 
providing services to persons with disabil- 
ities. 

In addition to voter registration agencies 
designated under paragraph (2), each State 
shall designate other offices within the 
State as voter registration agencies. 


Voter registration agencies designated 
under subparagraph (A) may include - 


(i) State or local government offices 
such as public libraries, public 
schools, offices of city and county 
clerks (including marriage license 
bureaus), fishing and hunting license 


(4) 


(A) 


(B) 


(ii) 


App. 34 


bureaus, government revenue 
offices, unemployment compensa- 
tion offices, and offices not described 
in paragraph (2)(B) that provide ser- 
vices to persons with disabilities; 
and 


Federal and nongovernmental 
offices, with the agreement of such 
offices. 


At each voter registration agency, the fol- 
lowing services shall be made available: 


(i) 


(ii) 


(iii) 


Distribution of mail voter registra- 
tion application forms in accordance 
with paragraph (6). 


Assistance to applicants in complet- 
ing voter registration application 
forms, unless the applicant refuses 
such assistance. 


Acceptance of completed voter regis- 
tration application forms for trans- 
mittal to the appropriate State 
election official. 


If a voter registration agency designated 
under paragraph (2)(B) provides services 
to a person with a disability at the per- 
son’s home, the agency shall provide the 
services described in subparagraph (A) at 
the person’s home. 


(5) A person who provides service described in 
paragraph (4) shall not - 


(A) seek to influence an applicant's political 
preference or party registration; 


(6) 


(B) 


(C) 


(D) 


App. 35 


display any such political preference OF 
party allegiance; 


make any statement to an applicant or 
take any action the purpose OF effect of 
which is to discourage the applicant from 
registering to vote; or 


make any statement to an applicant or 
take any action the purpose OF effect of 
which is to lead the applicant to believe 
that a decision to register or not to register 
has any bearing on the availability of ser- 
vices or benefits. 


A voter registration agency that is an office that 
provides service oF assistance in addition to 
conducting voter registration shall - 


(A) 


distribute with each application for such ser- 
vice or assistance, and with each recertifica- 
tion, renewal, or change of address form 
relating to such service or assistance — 


(i) the mail voter registration applica- 
tion form described in section 
9(a)(2), including a statement that - 


(I) specifies each eligibility require- 
ment (including citizenship); 


(Il) contains an attestation that the 
applicant meets each such 
requirement; and 


(Ili)requires the signature of the 
applicant, under penalty of per- 
jury; or 

(ii) the office’s own form if it is equiva- 
lent to the form described in section 


App. 36 


9(a)(2), unless the applicant, in writ- 
ing, declines to register to vote; 


(B) provide a form that includes - 


(i) 


(ii) 


(iii) 


(iv) 


(v) 


the question, “If you are not regis- 
tered to vote where you live now, 
would you like to apply to register to 
vote here today?”; 


if the agency provides public assis- 
tance, the statement, “Applying to 
register or declining to register to 
vote will not affect the amount of 
assistance that you will be provided 
by this agency.”; 


boxes for the applicant to check to 
indicate whether the applicant 
would like to register or declines to 
register to vote (failure to check 
either box being deemed to consti- 
tute a declination to register for pur- 
poses of subparagraph (C)), together 
with the statement (in close prox- 
imity to the boxes and in prominent 
type), “IF YOU DO NOT CHECK 
EITHER BOX, YOU WILL BE CON- 
SIDERED TO HAVE DECIDED NOT 
TO REGISTER TO VOTE AT THIS 
TIME.”; 


the statement, “If you would like 
help in filling out the voter registra- 
tion application form, we will help 
you. The decision whether to seek or 
accept help is yours. You may fill out 
the application in private.”; and 


the statement, “If you believe that 
someone has interfered with your 


(b) 


(c) 


App. 37 


right to register or to decline to reg- 
ister to vote, your right to privacy in 
deciding whether to register or in 
applying to register to vote, or your 
right to choose your own political 
party or other political preference, 
you may file a complaint with 

” the blank being filled by 
the name, address, and telephone 
number of the appropriate official to 
whom such a complaint should be 
addressed; and 


(C) provide to each applicant who does not 
decline to register to vote the same degree 
of assistance with regard to the completion 
of the registration application form as is 
provided by the office with regard to the 
completion of its own forms, unless the 
applicant refuses such assistance. 


(7) No information relating to a declination to reg- 
ister to vote in connection with an application 
made at an office described in paragraph (6) 
may be used for any purpose other than voter 
registration. 


FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR 
COOPERATION. - All departments, agencies, and 
other entities of the executive branch of the Federal 
Government shall, to the greatest extent practicable, 
cooperate with the States in carrying out subsection 
(a), and all nongovernmental entities are encouraged 
to do so. 


ARMED FORCES RECRUITMENT OFFICES. - 


(1) Each State and the Secretary of Defense shall 
jointly develop and implement procedures for 


(2) 


App. 38 


persons to apply to register to vote at recruit- 
ment offices of the Armed Forces of the United 
States. 


A recruitment office of the Armed Forces of the 
United States shall be considered to be a voter 
registration agency designated under subsec- 
tion (a)(2) for all purposes of this Act. 


(d) TRANSMITTAL DEADLINE. - 


(1) 


(2) 


subject to paragraph (2), a completed registra- 
tion application accepted at a voter registration 
agency shall be transmitted to the appropriate 
State election official not later than 10 days after 
the date of acceptance. 


If a registration application is accepted within 5 
days before the last day for registration to vote 
in an elections, the application shall be trans- 
mitted to the appropriate State election official! 
not later than 5 days after the date of accep- 
tance. 


SEC. 8. REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO ADMIN- 
ISTRATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION 


IN GENERAL. - In the administration of voter regis- 


tration for elections for Federal office, each State 
shall —- 


(a) 


(1) 


ensure that any eligible applicant is registered 
to vote in an election - 


(A) in the case of registration with a motor 
vehicle application under section 5, if the 
valid voter registration form of the appli- 
cant is submitted to the appropriate State 
motor vehicle authority not later than the 

lesser of 30 days, or the period provided 


(2) 


(3) 


App. 39 


by State law, before the date of the elec- 
tion; 


(B) in the case of registration by mail under 
section 6, if the valid voter registration 
form of the applicant is postmarked not 
later than the lesser of 30 days, or the 
period provided by State law, before the 
date of the election; 


(C) in the case of registration at a voter regis- 
tration agency, if the valid voter registra- 
tion form of the applicant is accepted at 
the voter registration agency not later than 
the lesser of 30 days, or the period pro- 
vided by the State law, before the date of 
the election; and 


(D) in any other case, if the valid voter regis- 
tration form of the applicant is received by 
the appropriate State election official not 
later than the lesser of 30 days, or the 
period provided by State law, before the 
date of the election; 


require that appropriate State election official to 
send notice to each applicant of the disposition 
of the application; 


provide that the name of a registrant may not be 
removed from the official list of eligible voters 
except - 


(A) at the request of the registrant, 


(B) as provided by State law, by reason of 


criminal conviction or mental incapacity; 
or 


(C) as provided under paragraph (4); 


(b) 


(c) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


Apr. 40 


conduct a general program that makes a reason- 
abie effort to remove the names of ineligible 
voters from the official lists of eligible voters by 
reason of - 


(A) the death of a registrant; or 


(B) a change in the residence of the registrant, 
in accordance with subsections (b), (c), 
and (d); 


inform applicants under sections 5, 6, and 7 of - 
(A) voter eligibility requirements; and 


(B) penalties provided by law for submission 
of a false voter registration application; 
and 


ensure that the identity of the voter registration 
agency through which any particular voter is 
registered is not disclosed to the public. 


CONFIRMATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION. - 
Any State program or activity to protect the integrity 
of the electoral process by ensuring the maintenance 
of an accurate and current voter registration roll for 
elections for Federal office - 


(1) 


(2) 


shall be uniform, nondiscriminatory, and in 
compliance with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 
(42 U.S.C. 1973 et seq.); and 


shall not result in the removal of the name of 
any person from the official list of voters regis- 
tered to vote in an election for Federal office by 
reason of the person’s failure to vote. 


VOTER REMOVAL PROGRAMS. - 


(1) 


A State may meet the requirement of subsection 
(a)(4) by establishing a program under which - 


(A) 


(B) 


(2) (A) 


(B) 


App. 41 


change-of-address information supplied 
by the Postal Service through its licensees 
is used to identify registrants whose 
addresses may have changed; and 


if it appears from information provided by 
the Postal Service that - 


(i) a registrant has moved to a different 
residence address in the same regis- 
trar’s jurisdiction in which the regis- 
trant is currently registered, the 
registrar changes the registration 
records to show the new address and 
sends the registrant a notice of the 
change by forwardable mail and a 
postage prepaid preaddressed return 
form by which the registrant may 
verify or correct the address informa- 
tion; or 


(ii) the registrant has moved to a differ- 
ent residence address not in the same 
registrar’s jurisdiction, the registrar 
uses the notice procedure described 
in subsection (d)(2) to confirm the 
change of address. 


A State shall complete, not later than 90 
days prior to the date of a primary or 
general election for Federal office, any 
program the purpose of which is to sys- 
tematically remove the name of ineligible 
voters from the official lists of eligible 
voters. 


Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed 
to preclude - 


(i) the removal of names from official 
lists of voters on a basis described in 


App. 42 


paragraph (3) (A) or (B) or (4)(A) of 
subsection (a); or 


(ii) correction of registration records pur- 
suant to this Act. 


(d) REMOVAL OF NAMES FROM VOTING ROLLS. - 


(1) 


(2) 


A State shall not remove the name of a regis- 
trant from the official list of eligible voters in 
elections for Federal office on the ground that 
the registrant has changed residence unless the 
registrant — 


(A) confirms in writing that the registrant has 
changed residence to a place outside the 
registrar’s jurisdiction in which the regis- 
trant is registered; or 


(B) (i) has failed to respond to a notice 
described in paragraph (2); and 


(ii) has not voted or appeared to vote 
(and, if necessary, correct the regis- 
trar’s record of the registrant’s 
address) in an election during the 
period beginning on the date of the 
notice and ending on the day after 
the date of the second general elec- 
tion for Federal office that occurs 
after the date of the notice. 


A notice is described in this paragraph if it is a 
postage prepaid and pre-addressed return card, 
sent by forwardable mail, on which the regis- 
trant may state his or her current address, 
together with a notice to the following effect: 


(A) If the registrant did not change his or her 
residence, or changed residence but 
remained in the registrar’s jurisdiction, the 


(3) 


App. 43 


registrant should return the card not later 
than the time provided for mail registra- 
tion under subsection (a)(1)(B). If the card 
is not returned, affirmation or confirma- 
tion of the registrant’s address may be 
required before the registrant is permitted 
to vote in a Federal election during the 
period beginning on the date of the notice 
and ending on the day after the date of the 
notice, and if the registrant does not vote 
in an election during that period the regis- 
trant’s name will be removed from the list 
of eligible voters. 


(B) If the registrant has changed residence to a 
place outside the registrar’s jurisdiction in 
which the registrant is registered, informa- 
tion concerning how the registrant can 
continue to be eligible to vote. 


A voting registrar shall correct an official list of 
eligible voters in elections for Federal office in 
accordance with change of residence informa- 
tion obtained in conformance with this subsec- 
tion. 


PROCEDURE FOR VOTING FOLLOWING FAILURE 
TO RETURN CARD. - 


(1) 


A registrant who has moved from an address in 
the area covered by a polling place to an 
address in the same area shall, notwithstanding 
failure to notify the registrar of the change of 
address prior to the date of an election, be per- 
mitted to vote at that polling place upon oral or 
written affirmation by the registrant of the 
change of address before an election official at 
that polling place. 


(2) (A) 


App. 44 


A registrant who has moved from an 
address in the area covered by one polling 
place to an address in an area covered by a 
second polling place within the same reg- 
istrar’s jurisdiction and the same congres- 
sional district and who has failed to notify 
the registrar of the change of address prior 
to the date of an election, at the option of 
the registrant — 


(i) shall be permitted to correct the vot- 
ing records and vote at the regis- 
trant’s former polling place, upon 
oral or written affirmation by the reg- 
istrant of the new address before an 
election official at that polling place; 


or 


(ii) (1) 


(If) 


shall be permitted to correct 
the voting records and vote at 
a central location within the 
same registrar’s jurisdiction 
designated by the registrar 
where a list of eligible voters is 
maintained, upon written affir- 
mation by the registrant of the 
new address on a standard 
form provided by the registrar 
at the central location; or 


shall be permitted to correct 
the voting records for pur- 
poses of voting in future elec- 
tions at the appropriate polling 
place for the current address 
and, if permitted by State law, 
shall be permitted to vote 
in the present election, 


(f) 


(g) 


App. 45 


upon confirmation by the reg- 
istrant of the new address by 
such means as are required by 
law. 


(B) If State law permits the registrant to vote 
in the current election upon oral or written 
affirmation by the registrant of the new 
address at a polling place described in 
subparagraph (A)(i) or (A)(ii)(II), voting at 
the other locations described in subpara- 
graph (A) need not be provided as 
options. 


(3) If the registration records indicate that a regis- 
trant has moved from an address in the area 
covered by a polling place, the registrant shall, 
upon oral or written affirmation by the regis- 
trant before an election official at that polling 
place that the registrant continues to reside at 
the address previously made known to the reg- 
istrar, be permitted to vote at that polling place. 


CHANGE OF VOTING ADDRESS WITHIN A JURIS- 
DICTION. - In the case of a change of address, for 
voting purposes, of a registrant to another address 
within the same registrar’s jurisdiction, the registrar 
shall correct the voting registration list accordingly, 
and the registrant’s name may not be removed from 
the official list of eligible voters by reason of such a 
change of address except as provided in subsection 


(d). 
CONVICTION IN FEDERAL COURT. - 


(1) On the conviction of a person of a felony in a 
district court of the United States, the United 
States attorney shall give written notice of the 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


App. 46 


conviction to the chief State election official des- 
ignated under section 10 of the State of the 
person’s residence. 


A notice given pursuant to paragraph (1) shall 
include - 


(A) the name of the offender; 
(B) the offender’s age and residence address; 
(C) the date of entry of the judgment; 


(D) a description of the offenses of which the 
offender was convicted; and 


(E) the sentence imposed by the court. 


On the request of the chief State election official 
of the State or other State official with respon- 
sibility for determining the effect that a convic- 
tion may have on an offender’s qualification to 
vote, the United States attorney shall provide 
such additional information as the United States 
attorney may have concerning the offender and 
the offense of which the offender was convicted. 


If a conviction of which notice was given pur- 
suant to paragraph (1) is overturned, the United 
States attorney shall give the official to whom 
the notice was given written notice of the vaca- 
tion of the judgment. 


The chief State election official shall notify the 
voter registration officials of the local jurisdic- 
tion in which an offender resides of the infor- 
mation received under this subsection. 


App. 47 


(h) REDUCED POSTAL RATES. - 


(i) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Subchapter II of chapter 36 of title 39, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end 
the following: 


“§ 3629. Reduced rates for voter registration 
purposes 


“The Postal Service shall make available to 
a State or local voting registration official the 
rate for any class of mail that is available to a 
qualified nonprofit organization under section 
3626 for the purpose of making a mailing that 
the official certifies is required or authorized by 
the National Voter Registration Act of 1993.”. 


The first sentence of section 2401(c) of title 39, 
United States Code, is amended by striking out 
“and 3626(a)-(h) and (j)-(k) of this title,” and 
inserting in lieu thereof “3636(a)-(h), 3626(j)-(k), 
and 3629 of this title”. 


Section 3627 of title 39, United States Code, is 
amended by striking out “or 3626 of this title,” 
and inserting in lieu thereof “3626, or 3629 of 
this title”. 

The table of sections for chapter 36 of title 39, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting 


after the item relating to section 3628 the fol- 
lowing item: 


“3629. Reduced rates for voter registration pur- 
poses.”. 


PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF VOTER REGISTRATION 
ACTIVITIES. - 


(1) 


Each State shall maintain for at least 2 years and 
shall make available for public inspection and, 
where available, photocopying at a reasonable 


(j) 


(2) 


App. 48 


cost, all records concerning the implementation 
of programs and activities conducted for the 
purpose of ensuring the accuracy and currency 
of official lists of eligible voters, except to the 
extent that such records relate to a declination 
to register to vote or to the identity of a voter 
registration agency through which any particu- 
lar voter is registered. 


The records maintained pursuant to paragraph 
(1) shall include lists of the names and 
addresses of all persons to whom notices 
described in subsection (d)(2) are sent, and 
information concerning whether or not each 
such person has responded to the notice as of 
the date that inspection of the records is made. 


DEFINITION. —- For the purposes of this section, the 
term “registrar’s jurisdiction” means — 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


an incorporated city, town, borough, or other 
form of municipality; 


if voter registration is maintained by a county, 
parish, or other unit of government that gov- 
erns a larger geographic area than a munici- 
pality, the geographic area governed by that 
unit of government; or 


if voter registration is maintained on a consoli- 
dated basis for more that one municipality or 
other unit of government by an office that per- 
forms all of the functions of a voting registrar, 
the geographic area of the consolidated munici- 
palities or other geographic units. 


App. 49 


SEC. 9. FEDERAL COORDINATION AND REGULA- 
TIONS. 


(a) IN GENERAL. ~ The Federal Election Commission - 


(b) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


in consultation with the chief election officers of 
the States, shall prescribe such regulations as 
are necessary to carry out paragraphs (2) and 


(3); 


in consultation with the chief election officers of 
the States, shall develop a mail voter registra- 
tion application form for elections for Federal 
office; 


not later than June 30 of each odd-numbered 
year, shall submit to the Congress a report 
assessing the impact of this Act on the adminis- 
tration of elections for Federal office during the 
preceding 2-year period and including recom- 
mendations for improvements in Federal and 
State procedures, forms, and other matters 
affected by this Act; and 


shall provide information to the States with 
respect to the responsibilities of the State under 
this Act. 


CONTENTS OF MAIL VOTER REGISTRATION 
FORM. - The mail voter registration form developed 
under subsection (a)(2) - 


(1) 


may require only such identifying information 
(including the signature of the applicant) and 
other information (including data relating to 
previous registration by the applicant), as is 
necessary to enable the appropriate State elec- 
tion official to assess the eligibility of the appli- 
cant and to administer voter registration and 
other parts of the election process; 


App. 50 


(2) shall include a statement that - 


(A) specifies each eligibility requirement 
(including citizenship); 


(B) contains attestation that the applicant 
meets each such requirement; and 


(C) requires the signature of the applicant, 
under penalty of perjury; 


(3) may not include any requirement for notariza- 
tion or other formal authentication; and 


(4) shall include, in print that is identical to that 
used in the attestation portion of the application 


(i) the information required in section 8(a)(5) 
(A) and (B); 


(ii) a statement that, if an applicant declines to 
register to vote, the fact that the applicant 
has declined to register will remain confi- 
dential and will be used only for voter 
registration purposes; and 


(iii) a statement that if an applicant does regis- 
ter to vote, the office at which the appli- 
cant submits a voter registration 
application will remain confidential and 
will be used only for voter registration 
purposes. 


SEC. 10. DESIGNATION OF CHIEF STATE ELECTION 
OFFICIAL. 


Each State shall designate a State officer or employee 
as the chief State election official to be responsible for 
coordination of State responsibilities under this Act. 


App. 51 


SEC. 11. CIVIL ENFORCEMENT AND PRIVATE RIGHT 
OF ACTION. 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


ATTORNEY GENERAL. - The Attorney General may 
bring a civil action in an appropriate district court 
for such declaratory or injunctive relief as is neces- 
sary to carry out this Act. 


PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION. - 


(1) A person who is aggrieved by a violation of this 
Act may provide written notice of the violation 
to the chief election official of the State 
involved. 


(2) If the violation is not corrected within 90 days 
after receipt of a notice under paragraph (1), or 
within 20 days after receipt of the notice if the 
violation occurred within 120 days before the 
date of an election for Federal office, the 
aggrieved person may bring a civil action in an 
appropriate district court for declaratory or 
injunctive relief with respect to the violation. 


(3) If the violation occurred within 30 days before 
the date of an election for Federal office, the 
aggrieved person need not provide notice to the 
chief election official of the State under para- 
graph (1) before bringing a civil action under 
paragraph (2). 

ATTORNEY'S FEES. - In a civil action under this 

section, the court may allow the prevailing party 


(other than the United States) reasonable attorney 
fees, including litigation expenses, and costs. 


(d) RELATION TO OTHER LAWS. - 


(1) The rights and remedies established by this sec- 
tion are in addition to all other rights and 
remedies provided by law, and neither the 


(2) 


App. 52 


rights and remedies established by this section 
nor any other provision of this Act shall super- 
sede, restrict, or limit the application of the 
Voting Right Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 1973 et seq.). 


Nothing in this Act authorizes or requires con- 
duct that is prohibited by the Voting Rights Act 
of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 1973 et seq.). 


SEC. 12. CRIMINAL PENALTIES. 


A person, including an election official, who in any 
election for Fedéral office - 


(1) 


(2) 


knowingly and willfully intimidates, threatens, 
or coerces, or attempts to intimidate, threaten, 
or coerce, any person for — 


(A) registering to vote, or voting, or attempt- 
ing to register to vote; 


(B) urging or aiding any person to register to 
‘vote, to vote, or to attempt to register to 
vote; or 


(C) exercising any right under this Act; or 


knowingly and willfully deprives, defrauds, or 
attempts to deprive or defraud the residents of 
a State of a fair and impartially conducted elec- 
tion process, by - 


(A) the procurement or submission of voter 
registration applications that are known 
by the person to be materially false, ficti- 
tious, or fraudulent under the laws of the 
State in which the election is held; or 


(B) the procurement, casting, or tabulation of 
ballots that are known by the person to be 
materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 


App. 53 


under the laws of the State in which the 
election is held, 


shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States 
Code (which fines shall be paid into the general fund of 
the Treasury, miscellaneous receipts (pursuant to section 
3302 of title 31, United States Code), notwithstanding any 
other law), or imprisoned not more than 5 years or both. 


SEC. 13. EFFECTIVE DATE. 
This Act shall take effect - 


(1) with respect to a State that on the date of enact- 
ment of this Act has a provision in the constitu- 
tion of the State that would preclude 
compliance with this Act unless the State main- 
tained separate Federal and State official lists of 
eligible voters, on the later of - 


(A) January 1, 1996; or 


(B) the date that is 120 days after the date by 
which, under the constitution of the State 
as in effect on the date of enactment of this 
Act, it would be legally possible to adopt 
and place into effect any amendments to 
the constitution of the State that are neces- 
sary to permit such compliance with this 
Act without requiring a special election, 
and 


(2) with respect to any State not described in para- 
graph (1), on January 1, 1995. 


Approved May 20, 1993. 


App. 54 


AMENDMENT XIV 


Citizenship, Representation, and Payment 
of Public Debt 


Citizenship 


Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the 
United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they 
reside. No state shall make or enforce any law which 
shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of 
the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person 
of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; 
nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal 
protection of the laws. 


Apportionment of Representatives 


SECTION 2. Representatives shall be apportioned 
among the several states according to their respective 
numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each 
state, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to 
vote at any election for the choice of electors for President 
and Vice President of the United States, Representatives 
in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of a state, 
or the members of the legislature thereof, is denied to any 
of the male inhabitants of such state, being twenty-one 
years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any 
way abridged, except for participation in rebellion or 
other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be 
reduced in the proportion which the number of such male 
citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens 
twenty-one years of age in such state. 


App. 55 


Disqualification for Public Office 


Section 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representa- 
tive in Congress, or elector of President and Vice Presi- 
dent, or hold any office, civil or military, under the 
United States, or under any state, who, having previously 
taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer 
of the United States, or as a member of any state legisla- 
ture, or as an executive or judicial officer of any state, to 
support the Constitution of the United States, shall have 
engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or 
given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress 
may by a vote of two-thirds of each house, remove such 
disability. 


Public Debt, Guarantee of 


SecTION 4. The validity of the public debt of the United 
Sates, authorized by law, including debts incurred for 
payment of pensions and bounties for services in sup- 
pressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be ques- 
tioned. But neither the United States nor any state shall 
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of 
insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any 
claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all 
such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal 
and void. 


Power of Congress 


Section 5. The Congress shall have power to 
enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this 
article. 


] 


App. 56 


Proposed June 13, 1866; ratified July 9, 1868; certified 
July 28, 1868. 


wns Mirani totes 


App. 57 


AMENDMENT XV 
Elective Franchise 
Right of Citizens to Vote 


SecTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States 
to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United 
States or by any state on account of race, color, or pre- 
vious condition of servitude. 


Power of Congress 


SECTION 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce 
this article by appropriate legislation. 


Proposed February 26, 1869; ratified February 3, 
1870; certified March 30, 1870. 


