ao —_ Court, U.S. 
| 6 ,riLgp 
DEC 21 1995 
No. 95-673 
Tn the a 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
~~ 


PETE WILSON, Governor of California, ef al. , 
Petitioners, 
v. 


VOTING RIGHTS COALITION, et al, 
Respondents. 


a 
4 


PETE WILSON, Governor of California, ef ai. , 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


JANET RENO, U.S. Attorney General, et al., 
Respondents. 


sé 
4 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


vv 


AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF OF PACIFIC LEGAL FOUNDATION 
AND THE STATES OF ARIZONA, IDAHO, NEW HAMPSHIRE, 
AND SOUTH CAROLINA IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


vw 


ALAN G. LANCE *ANTHONY T. CASO 
Idaho Attorney General *Counsel of Record 
P.O. Box 83720 ANNE M. HAWKINS 
Boise, ID 83720-0010 Of Counsel 


Telephone: (208) 334-2400 Pacific Legal Foundation 
2151 River Plaza Drive, 
Suite 305 
Sacramento, CA 95833 
Telephone: (916) 641-8888 
Attorneys for Amici Curiae 
Additional Counsel Continued Inside Cover 


GRANT WOODS 


Arizona Attorney General 
1275 West Washington 
Phoenix, AZ 85007 

CHARLES MOLONY CONDON JEFFREY R. HOWARD 
Attorney General for the State Attorney General for the 

of South Carolina State of New Hampshire 

P.O. Box 11549 33 Capitol Street 
Columbia, SC 29211 Concord, NH 03301 
Telephone: (803) 734-3970 Telephone: (603) 271-3658 


Attorneys for Amici Curiae 


i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES CITED ..............4.. ii 
INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE ........- see eees 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ......-.--eceeceeees 3 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .........----+++++:> 3 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI ............ 5 


I. THIS COURT SHOULD ESTABLISH 
THAT CONGRESS LACKS THE POWER 
TO REQUIRE STATE AGENCIES TO 
CARRY OUT FEDERAL REGULATORY 
oS er ee se eee ee 5 


Il. THIS COURT SHOULD CLARIFY THE 
SCOPE OF CONGRESS’ ARTICLE I, 
SECTION 4, ELECTIONS POWER ............. 9 


Il. THIS COURT SHOULD FURTHER DEFINE 
THE DIVISION BETWEEN STATE AND 
FEDERAL SOVEREIGNTY CLEARLY 
EMBODIED IN THE TENTH AMENDMENT ..... 14 


COD nee se dicoceveseebeceseceses 19 


ii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES CITED 
Page 
CASES 
Addison v. Department of Motor Vehicles, 

69 Cal. App. 34 406 (1977) 0. ccc ccc ccc cre ccceee 8 
Association of Community Organizations for Reform 

Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d 791 (7th Cir. 1995) ......... 10 
Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit 

Authority, 469 U.S. 528 (1985) ...........+.-.. 3,18-19 
Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 

S15 L. Tb. BO GUE wivcc ccc cedsiivecseses 17 
Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining and 

Reclamation Association, Inc., 

453 WB. FO Ce boon 0% 60a 6 wb 8 6 000 Ho ig es 08 2 
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. 

Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) .........-.-220- 13-14 
Kugler v. Yocum, 69 Cal. 2d 371 (1968) ............. 8 
Morris v. Williams, 67 Cal. 3d 733 (1967) ........... 7-8 
New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 

jy Se & Fe ft. ee errr 11,15-16, 18-19 
Smiley v. Holm, 285 U.S. 355 (1932) .........+.+-- 10,12 


U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton, 
514U.S.__, 131 L. Ed. 2d 881 (1995) ......... 11-12 


ET mes OO COOL: 


Page 

Voting Rights Coalition v. Wilson, 60 F.3d 
og ge | Bere 10,13-15,17 

STATUTES 

lw din ks we hs oO 8 ea 5 
DP CACC Ve Cents he ease ee NeR CRO dD ROCK OOS 5 
ehh USCA VES Veins set es oO Were ress 5 
oR ee 8 era ee 9g 
ee cto be tenet eweedees 7 
42 U.S.C. §§ 1973gg-1973gg-10 ...... 2... eee ee eee 5 
A re a eee 5,8 
EEE cre ceeceeeeseceveceseeserens 5 
Bo 5) \ a i aii a iar i 5 
Be er i 6 
DUES oc necccvecesseeseceseseseet 6 
DP MUEEEED vw cccrccceccereeecccceces 7 
DET CoG bese eo eeeveseseretsevese es 6 
DE Sac s ise eee wy eeeee ee ceeeerseues 6 
RS Ge ws Paes Cece dee eeee tee ere ewes 6 


iv 

Page 
GOD ink cbc om ee 6 | 
WIN nc koh eins seakesdueviuvns 4 | 
CU NNN ise Fie as pen tee 6 | 
Bie fo) |) aii 7 | 
Re parm kan a rr eee 7 | 
Bo Serer srs ces er a Tr ee ee ee 8 | 
ND ae os hob oe voc eed eee x | 
NE, 50 c5-o ao vs acne netceen 8 
fo: EP wr. re re ee er ee 8 | 

SPE 6.6 Fee n cscs eee sense eeeeeres 8 
UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION | 
Asticfe I, Gectlem 4 ww ccc cccccccvcececccces passim | 
Teme AMOREEE. oc cc ccnbecwerenteceses passim 

MISCELLANEOUS 
The Federalist No. 59, at 299 (Alexander Hamilton) 
Gh Wee Ges 266 rcatesotensses 5b sseeks ss 11 


No. 95-673 


In the 
Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
~> 


PETE WILSON, Governor of California, et al. , 
Petitioners, 
v. 


VOTING RIGHTS COALITION, ef ai., 
Respondents. 


a 
4 


PETE WILSON, Governor of California, et al. , 
Petitioners, 
v. 


JANET RENO, U.S. Attorney General, et al., 
Respondents. 


sa 
4 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of 
. Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
+ 


AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF OF PACIFIC LEGAL 
FOUNDATION AND THE STATES OF ARIZONA, IDAHO, 
NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND SOUTH CAROLINA 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


+ 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 


Pacific Legal Foundation (PLF) is a nonprofit, tax- 
exempt corporation organized under the laws of the State of 
California for the purpose of litigating in the public interest. 
PLF has nearly 25,000 supporters nationwide. Policy for 


1 


respect to the constitutional and legal issues presented. 
Pursuant to Rule 37.2, written permission from ail parties for 
PLF to file this brief has been lodged with the Clerk of te 
Court. 

Amici, the States of Arizona and Idaho are not involved 
in litigation related to the National Voting Rights Act of 
1993. However, as two of the 50 sovereign states, they have 
a vital interest in having this Court resolve the significant 
state and federal sovereignty issues raised by this appeal. 

Amicus, the State of New Hampshire, is in a position 
to be affected directly by the outcome of this litigation. New 
Hampshire has been named a defendant in an action brought 
by private litigants for its alleged noncompliance with the 
National Voting Rights Act of 1993 despite its having 
adopted an effective, less cumbersome and costly system of 
election day registration. League of Women Voters of New 
Hampshire v. Merrill, Civ. No. 95-232-M (D.N.H. filed 
May 2, 1995). New Hampshire is defending this District 
Court action on grounds which include that the National 


ew gee Senge 


3 


Voting Rights Act violates the division between state and 
federal sovereignty embodied in the Tenth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution and that it exceeds Congress’ 
Article I, Section 4, elections power. 

Amicus, the State of South Carolina, stands to be 
affected directly by the outcome of this litigation. South 
Carolina has challenged the constitutionality of the 
National Voting Rights Act of 1993 in Condon v. Reno, Civ. 
No. 3:95-1992-0 (D.S.C. filed Jan. 24, 1995). The District 
Court recently ruled against South Carolina in that case, and 
South Carolina has appealed to the Court of Appeals for the 
Fourth Circuit, but it is unlikely that the Fourth Circuit will 
rule before the present petition is decided upon. 


&. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Amicus adopts herein petitioner’s Statement of the 
Case. 


—h.. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 
The true “essence” of federalism is that the States 
as States have legitimate interests which the 
national government is bound to respect even 
though its laws are supreme. If federalism so 
conceived and so carefully cultivated is to remain 
meaningful, this Court cannot abdicate its 
constitutional responsibility to oversee the Federal 
Government’s compliance with its duty to respect 
the legitimate interests of the States. 
Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority, 
469 U.S. 528, 581 (1985) (O’Connor, J., dissenting) 
(citation omitted; emphasis in original). This case squarely 
presents the question of whether the federal government may, 


————SESEeee—— 


4 


consistent with federalism principles, conscript state officials 
and order them to spend state funds in a manner different 
from that directed by their sovereign state governments. 


The Ninth Circuit upheld the National Voting Rights 


Act of 1993 (NVRA) against a Tenth Amendment challenge 
by Governor Wilson of California. The court found that 
federalism principles do not prevent Congress from forcing 
state agencies to engage in activities outside the scope of 
state legislation. It further found that the Times, Places and 
Manner power enumerated in Article I, Section 4, of the 
Constitution gives Congress the power to interfere in the 
internal administration of state government for the purpose 
of regulating federal elections, and that Tenth Amendment 
considerations relevant to Congress’ commerce powers do 
not apply in the context of Congress’ election powers. 


The brief opinion does not adequately address the 
sovereignty considerations raised by Governor Wilson, 
instead finding in Article I, Section 4, the equivalent of a 
“plain statement" that the Framers intended the federal 
government to interfere in state government where that 
interference is related to federal elections. Such a cursory 
analysis disserves the Constitution and the careful thought 
and debate that crafted the balance of power between the 
federal government and the states in that document. 

Resolution of this issue by this Court is of vital interest 
to the states. California is not alone among the states in its 
legal challenge to NVRA. To date, amicus is aware that 
Illinois, Michigan, Mississippi, New Hampshire, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Virginia are currently or 
have been involved in litigation related to provisions of 
NVRA. At least four of these states have mounted facial 
challenges to the act. This Court should reinforce the 
principle that states are independent sovereigns, and that no 
federal power, however supreme, can divest them of this | 
attribute. | 


5 


. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


I 


THIS COURT SHOULD ESTABLISH THAT 
CONGRESS LACKS THE POWER TO REQUIRE 
STATE AGENCIES TO CARRY OUT 
FEDERAL REGULATORY PROGRAMS 

Voter registration in California is exceedingly simple. 
One need only fill out a postcard attesting to one’s right to 
vote (Cal. Elec. Code § 500). A fixed address is 
unnecessary, and postcards are freely available to anyone 
who requests one from the county registrar of voters (Section 
507).  Affixing postage to the preaddressed cards is 
unnecessary (Section 510). | During election cycles, 
Californians cannot go to a supermarket or shopping mall 
without being accosted by privately paid individuals or 
volunteers who see it as their duty to register every shopper. 
Apparently dissatisfied that portions of the electorate have 
neglected to exert this minimal amount of effort, Congress 
concluded that voters should be registered despite their 
passivity, and enacted the National Voting Rights Act of 
1993 (42 U.S.C. §§ 1973gg to 1973gg-10). 


NVRA requires that state motor vehicle licensing 
agencies serve as voter registration agencies (42 U.S.C. 
§ 1973gg-3). States are required to modify driver’s license 
applications to serve the dual purpose of voter registration 
(Section 1973gg-3(a)(1)). The voter registration portion of 
the form may not duplicate information requested for the 
driver’s application portion (Section 1973gg-3(c)(2)(A)), and 
it may not require more information than that needed to 
prevent duplicate registration or to assess the applicant’s 


6 


eligibility to vote (Section 1973gg-3(c)(2)(B)); further, the 
form must list voter eligibility requirements, and a signed 
attestation by the applicant that he or she meets such 
requirements (Section 1973gg-3(c)(2)(C)). A change of 
address for a driver’s license must also serve as a change of 
address for voter registration (Section 1973gg-3(@)). The 
registration application to the state election official within ten 
days, or, in some cases, five days (Section 1973gg-3(e)). 


programs 

disabilities (Section 1973gg-5(a}(2)). States must also 
designate additional state agencies of the state’s own 
choosing to serve in this capacity and may also designate 
federal and nongovernmental offices upon their agreement 
(Section 1973gg-5(a)(3)). Not only must all of these 
agencies have at their disposal mail-in registration forms, 


(Section 1973gg-5(a)(6)(A)). All voter registration 
applications must be transmitted to the state election official 
within ten days, or, in some cases, five days. 


delineated in the act (Section 1973gg-4(a)). 


. ee. 


7 


State employees must keep voter registration records 
confidential and not use such records for purposes other than 
voter registration (Sections 1973gg-3(ch(2)(D) and 1973gg- 
5(a)(6)(B)). States are given limited means by which they 
can purge voter registration records (Section 1973gg-6(d)). 


Naturally, NVRA makes it clear that this painstakingly 
detailed voter registration process applies only to federal 
elections, since Congress is admirably sensitive to the fact 
that it may not prescribe procedures for state elections. This 
presumes that, after going to the time, trouble, and expense 
of complying with NVRA, states would deem it prudent to 
prescribe a separate procedure for their own state elections. 

All executive agencies in California, including the 
motor vehicle licensing agency and the welfare agency, were 
created by acts of the Legislature. The statutes creating 
these agencies and defining their powers and duties appear in 
the California codes. For example, in California, the motor 
vehicle licensing agency is the Department of Motor Vehicles 
(DMV), created by statute in 1959 (California Vehicle Code 
§ 1500). Since DMV was created, the Legislature has 
amended and adopted numerous provisions relating to the 
functioning of that agency, but at no time has the California 
State Legislature delegated to DMV the authority to register 
voters. 


California courts have faithfully adhered to the 
principle that administrative agencies are creatures of the 
Legislature that created them. The California Supreme 
Court, in Morris v. Williams, clearly enunciated the 
applicable rule: 

[W]e here discharge our responsibility to 

determine whether the Agency has acted in 

obedience to the mandate of the Legislature or 
has ignored or violated it. ... [Regulations] must 


conform to the legislative will if we are to 
preserve an orderly system of government. 


Morris v. Williams, 67 Cal. 3d 733, 737 (1967). The 
California courts’ adherence to the rules governing 
administrative agencies are not mere pacans to administrative 
form, but inhere in separation of powers principles: an 
executive agency may only exercise those powers that the 
legislative branch delegates to them. See, e.g., Kugler v. 
Yocum, 69 Cal. 2d 371, 375-76 (1968). Incidentally, 
the DMV. Addison v. Department of Motor Vehicles, 
69 Cal. App. 3d 486, 493 (1977). 

Given the framework which the California State 
Legislature has erected over a period of many years to insure 
that these agencies operate within the guidelines established 
by the Legislature, it is clear that, had these agencies 
themselves attempted to promulgate the rules set out under 
Section 1973gg-3 of NVRA, the regulations would be held, 
under California law, void and of no effect. 


If NVRA is to be given full force and effect, its 
practical effect is to act as “super"-enabling legislation, a 
delegation of federal duties under federal law directly to state 
executive agencies. Compliance with NVRA requires these 
agencies to administer a federal program entirely alien to the 
duties delegated to them by the state Legislature that created 
them. 

In addition, NVRA provides for civil and criminal 
enforcement of its provisions (Sections 1973gg-9 and 
1973gg-10). Under the civil right of action, both the United 
States Attorney General and private parties “aggrieved by a 
violation of this subchapter" “may bring a civil action in an 
appropriate district court for declaratory or injunctive relief" 
(Section 1973gg-9(a) and (b)({1) and (2)). This provision 
anticipates that state agencies, such as DMV, may be hailed 


9 


into federal court for violations of NVRA, a forum to which 
state agencies generally have never had to answer for their 
actions in the absence of questions of constitutional stature. 
The California Government Code, in fact, provides that 
actions of DMV (as well as the Department of Social 
Services and other agencies that may be called upon to meet 
the dictates of NVRA (Cal. Gov’t Code § 11501)) are subject 
to state administrative adjudicatory procedures. Not so under 
not merely have to submit to federal legislative power, but 
may be subjected to the entire panoply of federal power as 
exercised through its executive and judicial branches. 


This intrusion by the federal government into the inner 
workings of state administrative bodies is unprecedented. 
The impact caused by NVRA is not merely or even primarily 
its drain on the state fisc. It is an imposition upon the 
citizens of the State of California who will be forced to wait 
in slower and longer lines at DMV, the welfare office, and 
other state agencies, to obtain the services which their elected 
state representatives have labored to provide. This Court 
should resolve whether any Article I power of Congress 
includes the power to force state executive agencies to take 
actions that are outside the scope of the state legislation that 
governs them and to expend for these federal purposes funds 
appropriated by the state Legislature for other state purposes. 


II 
THIS COURT SHOULD CLARIFY THE 
SCOPE OF CONGRESS’ ARTICLE I, 
SECTION 4, ELECTIONS POWER 


Article I, Section 4, of the United States Constitution 


The Times, Places and Manner of holding 
Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall 
be prescribed in each State by the Legislature 


—————————————————————— 


10 


thereof; but the Congress may at any time by 
Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to 
the Places of chusing Senators. 


This Court has interpreted Section 4 broadly, stating 
that it grants Congress the “authority to provide a complete 
code for congressional elections, not only as to times and 
places, but in relation to notices, registration, supervision of 
voters, prevention of fraud, [etc.]." Smiley v. Holm, 
285 U.S. 355, 366 (1932) (emphasis added). The Ninth 
Circuit in this case expands Congress’ election powers 
further still, and in a manner that distinguishes it from 
previous exercises upheld by this Court. Because “no 
previous federal election laws are sufficiently analogous to 
[NVRA] for decisions on their constitutionality to dictate 
the outcome of the present case," Association of Community 
Organizations for Reform Now v. Edgar, 56 F.3d 791, 793 
(7th Cir. 1995), this Court should determine whether Article 
I, Section 4’s Times, Places and Manner clause gives 
Congress the power to enact NVRA. 


Noting that the Times, Places and Manner power 
initially belongs to the states, the Ninth Circuit interprets the 
congressional override provision in Section 4 as giving 
Congress the power to interfere in the state’s allocation of its 
agencies’ responsibilities. It holds that the power to "make 
or alter such Regulations” is a grant to Congress not merely 

to prescribe its own election laws should it choose to occupy 
the field, but rather to invade the state’s sovereign right to 
establish agencies and their governmental responsibilities as 
long as the invasion arose from the Congress’ elections 
powers. Voting Rights Coalition v. Wilson, 60 F.3d 1411, 
1415 (9th Cir. 1995). However superficially appealing such 
a textual argument is, it simply does not comport with the 
structure of the Constitution itself. Despite the Ninth 
Circuit’s acknowledgment that the Tenth Amendment defines ) 
limitations on Congress’ power in accord with this Court’s | 


eee ennenetes 


11 


opinion in New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 120 L. 
Ed. 2d 120 (1992) (Voting Rights, 60 F.3d at 1415), the 
Ninth Circuit finds in Article I, Section 4, a broader grant of 
power to Congress than Congress’ ny power over 
interstate commerce--in a provision that, by its very 


language, is primarily a grant of power to the states. 


After all, Article I, Section 4, grants the power to 
regulate federal elections to the states in the first instance. 
The federal government’s right to “make or alter” such 
regulations was designed as a last resort to protect the federal 
government from state interference with federal elections, not 
allow the federal government to interfere with the states. 


Before ratification of the Constitution, the provision of 
Section 4 allowing Congress to make and alter election 
regulations was opposed as giving the national government 
too much power. Hamilton, however, countered with the 
argument that "an exclusive power of regulating elections for 
the National Government, in the hands of the State 
Legislatures, would leave the existence of the Union entirely 
at their mercy." The Federalist No. 59, at 300. 


Hamilton understood the interests of the states and the 
national government as being frequently at odds, not in 
concert. While acknowledging that the possibility was slight 
that the states would bring about the dissolution of the union, 
Hamilton defended the congressional override provision as 
insuring the continued viability of the union, to be used by 
the national authority “whenever extraordinary circumstances 
might render that interposition necessary to its safety.” Id. 
The constitutional argument centered not around whether the 
states should have the power to regulate elections, but on 
whether the national government should be given any power 
necessary as a check on any tendency of a state government 
to use its Times, Places and Manner power to the detriment 
of the union. Id. at 301. See also U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. 


12 


Thornton, 514 U.S. ___, 131 L. Ed. 2d 881, 903-04 (1995). 
Hamilton framed the issue thus: 


And as it is more consonant to the rules of a just 
theory to intrust the Union with the care of its 
own existence, than to transfer that care to any 
other hands; if abuses of power are to be 
hazarded, on the one side, or on the other, it is 
more rational to hazard them where the power 
would naturally be placed, than where it would 
unnaturally be placed. 


Id. at 300. 


Significantly, Smiley, on which the Ninth Circuit relied 
for its expansive interpretation of Congress’ Article I, 
Section 4, powers, noted the way in which the Times, Places 
and Manner power could be implemented by Congress: 
The phrase “such regulations" plainly refers to 
regulations of the same general character that the 
legislature of the State is authorized to prescribe 
with respect to congressional elections. In 
exercising this power, Congress may supplement 
these State regulations or may substitute its own. 


Smiley, 285 U.S. at 366-67 (emphasis added). However 
broadly the Court interpreted the elections power in Smiley, 
there is no indication that it understood them to allow | 
Congress the power to simply invade the internal workings : 
of state government in any manner whatsoever to regulate 
federal elections. 


It is not insignificant that the final decision reached by 
the Framers was to grant the Times, Places and Manner 
power to the states, in the first instance, and to the national 
government as a last resort. While the Ninth Circuit stated, 
consistent with opinions of this Court, that the purpose for 
Congress’ exercising its election powers need not serve the 


ve ? r j 


13 


narrow purpose conceived of by Hamilton--to insure its own 
preservation (Voting Rights, 60 F.3d at 1414), that does not 
render the Framers’ intentions completely devoid of 
relevance in reviewing Congress’ exercise of its “make and 
alter” power. The Framers set up a federal system vesting 
limited power, via the Constitution, to the national 
government, on the one hand, and reserving all other power 
to the states or the people of the states on the other. After 
further memorializing this structure in the Tenth 
Amendment, it is incomprehensible how the Ninth Circuit 
finds, in the wording of Article I, Section 4’s Times, Places 
and Manner clause, an intent by the Framers to provide to 
Congress the key which would unlock the door to state 
sovereignty. 

However convenient or natural it seems that an 
Organization such as DMV, or other state agencies which 
gather and process records of state residents, be utilized for 
the dual purpose of voter registration, the fact remains that 
the challenge here lodged by Governor Wilson would be 
identical had NVRA designated the state highway patrol as 
the body with which to carry out its mandates. This Court 
has been appropriately sensitive to the structure of the 
Constitution, no less than to its substance: 


[T]he fact that a given law or procedure is 
efficient, convenient, and useful in facilitating 

functions of government, standing alone, will not 

save it if it is contrary to the Constitution. 
Convenience and efficiency are not the primary 

objectives—or the hallmarks-of democratic 

government ... 


... [PJolicy arguments supporting even useful 
“political inventions” are subject to the demands 
of the Constitution which defines powers and, 


4 


with respect to this subject, sets out just how 
those powers are to be exercised. 


Il 
THIS COURT SHOULD FURTHER DEFINE 
THE DIVISION BETWEEN STATE AND 
FEDERAL SOVEREIGNTY CLEARLY 
EMBODIED IN THE TENTH AMENDMENT 


The Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
provides: 
The powers not delegated to the United States 
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the 
States, are reserved to the States respectively, or 
to the people. 


In upholding NVRA, the Ninth Circuit held that the 
Tenth Amendment did not bar Congress from “conscript{ing] 
state agencies to carry out voter registration for the election 
of Representatives and Senators." Voting Rights, 60 F.3d 
at 1415. The court dismissed Governor Wilson’s Tenth 
Amendment challenge, based on New York, determining that 
Congress’ Article I, Section 4, powers were 
distinct from Congress’ commerce power. Voting Rights, 
60 F.3d at 1415. 


15 


Further, it held that the Tenth Amendment had no 


applicability with respect to federal regulation of federal 
elections, however much it intruded into state sovereignty: 


Even though the Act by its terms does not control 
the practices of voter registration for elections of 
state and local officials, its impact on such 
elections probably will be significant. 

It is at this juncture that the sovereignty of 


the State of California under the Tenth 
Amendment becomes a constitutional concern. 


Id. (emphasis added). In so holding, the Ninth Circuit 
construed a limitation upon the Tenth Amendment 
inconsistent with previous holdings of this Court. 


Three years ago, this Court, in New York, held 
unconstitutional the “take title” provision of the Low-Level 
Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985 as 
violating the Tenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. New York, 505 U.S. at 150. In that case, as 
in this, the petitioners did not argue that Congress lacked the 
power to regulate; rather, they “contend[ed] only that the 
Tenth Amendment limits the power of Congress to regulate 
in the way it has chosen." Id. at 140. 


The court below misconstrued the import of New York, 
holding that the limitation iterated there, regarding Congress’ 
commerce powers, did not apply with respect to Congress’ 
Times, Places and Manner power. Voting Rights, 60 F.3d 
at 1415. But the holding in New York relied not so much 
upon an examination of Congress’ commerce powers, or 
even the Tenth Amendment, but on federalism as a 
fundamental principle upon which the United States was 
constituted: 7 

Much of the Constitution is concerned with 

setting forth the form of our government, and the 


solution to the crisis of the day. 


New York, 505 U.S. at 158. Contrary to the Ninth Circuit's 
understanding, New York specifically noted that Congress’ 
Article I powers were limited in the nature of their exercise 
regardless of the particular grant of power under which 
Congress was legislating: "We have always understood that 
even where Congress has the authority under the Constitution 
to pass laws requiring or prohibiting certain acts, it lacks the 
power directly to compel the States to require or prohibit 
those acts." Id. ati44. Specifically, this Court enunciated 
the following principle: 
[NJo Member of the Court has ever suggested 
that [a strong] federal interest would enable 
Congress to command a state government to 
gives Congress the authority to regulate matters 
directly and to pre-empt contrary state regulation. 
Where a federal interest is sufficiently strong to 
cause Congress to legislate, it must do so 
directly; it may not conscript state governments 
as its agents. 


Id. at 151-52. These principles apply equally as well to 
petitioners’ case. Indeed, because New York held that 
federalism concerns were not an incident of any particular 
grant of power under the Constitution, but inhered in the 


the promise of liberty.” Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 
115 L. Ed. 2d 410, 423 (1991). 


The Ninth Circuit’s interpretation of the Tenth 
Amendment displays other flaws which ought to be addressed 


We foresee the possibility in which the district 
court will be asked to determine whether a 
certain implementation of the statute sought by 
the United States ... is properly resisted by the 
state on substantial grounds related to its 
sovereignty. Should such occasions arise, we 
would expect the district court to respond with an 
informed understanding of the duality of 
sovereignty imbedded within the Constitution of 
the United States. 
Voting Rights, 60 F.3d at 1416 (emphasis added). The 
concession displays an underlying mistaken premise that 
sovereignty relies not on the distinction between the powers 
exercisable by the federal or the state government, but on the 
degree to which one power may intrude upon another. In 
adopting this approach, the Ninth Circuit intimates that 
sovereignty considerations amount to nothing more than the 
quantity of state funds being used to implement the federal 


a 


18 


scheme. The Framers could hardly have intended that such 
a vital concept as federalism would be reduced to an 
accounting function. Justice Powell, dissenting from the 
holding in Garcia, was wary that such notions could 
ultimately compromise federalism principles: 


[T]he harm to the States that results from federal 
overreaching under the Commerce Clause is not 
simply a matter of dollars and cents. ... Rather, 
by usurping functions traditionally performed by 
the States, federal overreaching under the 
Commerce Clause undermines the constitutionally 
mandated balance of power between the States 
and the Federal Government, a balance designed 
to protect our fundamental liberties. 


Garcia, 469 U.S. at 572 (Powell, J., dissenting). Although 
Garcia spoke to whether federal funding of a local municipal 
transit system made it subject to federal regulation, Powell’s 
observations are no less apropos to the present case: 
"Regardless of the willingness of the Federal Government to 
provide federal aid, the constitutional question remains the 
same: whether the federal statute violates the sovereign 
powers reserved to the States by the Tenth Amendment." Id. 
at 566 n.10 (Powell, J., dissenting). 


The Ninth Circuit ignores the premise, clearly 
enunciated in New York, that is the essence of the Tenth 
Amendment: States retain their sovereignty despite the 
powers granted to the national government and despite the 
supreme stature of Congress’ laws. By forcing state agencies 
to carry out federal prescriptions as to what constitutes good 
election policy, Congress has ignored the fundamental 
structure of our republic. Having once admonished Congress 
not to “cross{] the line distinguishing encouragement from 
coercion,” New York, 505 U.S. at 149, this Court should not 
hesitate to “assume its constitutional responsibility” “to 


19 
reconcile [federalism] concerns in the final instance." 
Garcia, 469 U.S. at 589 (O’Connor, J., dissenting). 

r’ 


CONCLUSION 


In New York v. United States, this Court stated, 
unequivocally, that 


[s]tates are not mere political subdivisions of the 
‘United States. State governments are neither 
regional offices nor administrative agencies of the 
Federal Government. The positions occupied by 
state officials appear nowhere on the Federal 
Government’s most detailed organizational chart. 
The Constitution instead “leaves to the several 
states a residuary and inviolable sovereignty." 
New York, 505 U.S. at 158 (citation omitted). 


Despite this precedent, the lower court upheld NVRA, 
which requires state agencies to carry out voter registration 
activities for federal elections. This case raises federalism 
concerns in a context as yet unaddressed by this Court. 


The Ninth Circuit determined that Article I, Section 4, 
empowers Congress to “conscript state agencies to carry out 
voter registration for the election of Representatives and 
Senators" (Voting Rights, 60 F.3d at 1415) and rejected the 
argument based on New York that the Tenth Amendment bars 
the means Congress has chosen to implement its policies. Id. 
To the Ninth Circuit, the power granted to Congress under 
Section 4 to “make and alter [election] Regulations” is 
broader than Congress’ Commerce power under Section 8. 


To clarify the scope of Congress” Article I, Section 4, 
power and define the protections afforded to state sovereignty 


20 


under the Tenth Amendment, this Court should grant the 
petition for writ of certiorari. 
DATED: December, 1995. 


Respectfully submitted, 
ALAN G. LANCE * ANTHONY T. Caso 
Idaho Attorney General *Counsel of Record 
P.O. Box 83720 ANNE M. HAWKINS 
Boise, ID 83720-0010 Of Counsel 


Telephone: (208) 334-2400 Pacific Legal Foundation 
2151 River Plaza Drive, 


CHARLES MOLONY CONDON Suite 305 

Attorney General for the Sacramento, CA 95833 — 

State of South Carolina Telephone: (916) 641-8888 

P.O. Box 11549 

Columbia, SC 29211 JEFFREY R. HOWARD 

Telephone: (803) 734-3970 Attorney General for the 

State of New Hampshire 

GRANT Woops 33 Capitol Street 

Arizona Attorney General Concord, NH 03301 

1275 West Washington Telephone: (603) 271-3658 


Phoenix, AZ 85007 
Attorneys for Amici Curiae 


i 
No. 95-673 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


PETE WILSON, GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA, 
ET AL., PETITIONERS 


Vv. 


VOTING RIGHTS COALITION, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE FEDERAL RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solicitor General 


DEVAL L. PATRICK 
Assistant Attorney General 


STEVEN H. ROSENBAUM 
SAMUEL R. BAGENSTOS 


Attorneys 
Department of Justice 
Wa i — 30 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 
(NVRA), 42 U.S.C. 197399 et seg., is a constitutional exercise of 


Congress’s power under the Elections Clause, U.S. Const. Art. I, § 


4, to regulate the manner in which States administer elections for 


~ : ATUr - , : — } , Q 
2 Whether the NVRA is a constitutional exercise of 
Congress’s power to enforce the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 


Amenaments. 


El 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


| OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-673 


PETE WILSON, GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA, 
ET AL., PETITIONERS 


Vv. 


VOTING RIGHTS COALITION, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE FEDERAL RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1-12) is 
reported at 60 F.3d 1411. The opinion of the district court (Pet. 
App. 13-25) is reported at 878 F. Supp. 1324. 

JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 24, 
1995. The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on October 
23, 1995 (a Monday). The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked 
under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 

STATEMENT 


a. This case involves the State of California’s federal 


constitutional challenge to the National Voter Registration Act of 


2 
1993 (NVRA or Act), 42 U.S.C. 1973gg et seq. (Supp. V 1993). The 
Act is designed to "increase the number of eligible citizens who 
register to vote in elections for Federal office." 42 U.S.C. 
1973gg(b) (1) (Supp. V 1993). To that end, it establishes uniform, 
nationwide procedures for registering to vote in federal elections. 

The Act requires States to accept voter registration applica- 
tions "made simultaneously with an application for a motor vehicle 
driver’s license," 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-2(a) (1) (Supp. V 1993), as well 
as with applications submitted at the offices of other state 
agencies, 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-2(a)(3) (Supp. V 1993). The latter 
agencies must include state public-assistance offices, "all offices 
in the State that provide State-funded programs primarily engaged 
in providing services to persons with disabilities," and other 
agencies designated by the State. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-5(a) (Supp. V 
1993). The Act also requires state election officials to accept 
voter registration applications submitted by mail. 42 U.S.C. 
1973gg-4 (Supp. V 1993). 

The Act also contains provisions to ensure the effective 
operation of the registration methods just described. It requires 
the employees of state motor vehicles offices to "include a voter 
registration application form for elections for Federal office as 
part of" every driver’s license application. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg- 
3(c) (1) (Supp. V 1993). That voter registration form must inform 
applicants of the state’s voter eligibility requirements and the 


penalties for submitting a false application; it may not require 


any information that duplicates information already required on the 


3 


driver’s license application. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-3(c) (2) (A) and (D) 
(Supp. V 1993). When applicants return their completed forms, the 
motor vehicles employees must forward the voter registration 
portion of the application to the "appropriate State election 
official" for processing. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-3(e) (Supp. V 1993). 
Employees in the other designated state agencies must also include 
a federal voter registration form along with every application for 
the agency’s benefits or services, and must forward completed 
applications to "the appropriate State election official" for 
processing. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-5(a) (6) and (d) (Supp. 1993). In all 
instances, the relevant state election official determines whether 
the applicant is eligible to vote and makes the ultimate decision 


whether to place the registrant on the voting rolls. See H.R. Rep. 


No. 9, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 8 (1993). 
The NVRA contains several provisions protecting the integrity 
of the voting rolls in federal elections. It requires that voter 


registration forms set forth each eligibility requirement of state 
law and require the applicant to attest, under penalty of perjury, 
that he or she meets each requirement. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg- 
3(c) (2) (C), 1973gg-7(b) (2) (Supp. V 1993). It also requires States 
to "conduct a general program that makes a reasonable effort to 
remove the names of ineligible voters from the official lists of 
eligible voters" because of the death of the registrant or a change 
in the registrant’s residence. 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-6(a) (4) (Supp. V 


1993). In addition, it allows States to conduct a program for 


removing otherwise ineligible voters from the rolls. 42 U.S.C. 


4 


1973gg-6(b) and (c) (2) (A) (Supp. V 1993). Any program to protect 
the integrity of voter registration rolls, however, must be 
“uniform, nondiscriminatory, and in compliance with the Voting 
Rights Act of 1965," 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-6(b) (1) (Supp. V 1993), and 
may not purge voters from the rolls "by reason of the person’s 
failure to vote," 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-6(b) (2) (Supp. V 1993). Finally, 
the Act makes fraudulent registration a federal crime. 42 U.S.C. 
1973gg-10(2) (Supp. V 1993). 

2. The Act became effective in California on January 1, 1995. 
See 42 U.S.C. 1973gg note (Supp. V 1993). On August 12, 1994, the 
Governor of California "order[ed] California state agencies to 
comply with the NVRA only ‘to the extent [that] federal funding is 
made available for such purposes.’" Pet. App. 14. Because no non- 
matching federal funding is provided to implement the Act, the 
Governor’s order required total noncompliance. Id. at 3.’ On 
December 14, 1994, private plaintiffs filed one of the present 
actions in the United States District Court for the Northern 
District of California, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief 
requiring the State to comply with the Act. Ibid.; see 42 U.S.C. 


1973gg-9. Shortly thereafter, the State sued the United States in 


’ The United States Departments of Agriculture and Health 


and Human Services have provided matching funds for the States’ 
costs of implementing the NVRA with respect to applicants for 
benefits under the AFDC, WIC, and food stamps programs. See H.R. 
Rep. No. 9, supra, at 11 (expressing intent that such matching 
funds be provided). In addition, the NVRA provides for reduced 
postal rates for mailings required by the Act. See 39 U.S.C. 3629 
(Supp. V 1993); see also 42 U.S.C. 1973gg-6 note (Supp. V 1993). 
In the absence of state expenditures, however, the Act does not 
provide for federal funding of the NVRA’s implementation. 


Ss 


the same court, seeking a declaration that the Act violates the 
federal Constitution and an injunction barring its enforcement. 
Pet. App. 15. The United States filed a counterclaim in the 


State’s action, seeking an injunction to require the State to 


comply with the Act. Ibid. After the two actions were consolidat- 
ed, the parties moved for preliminary injunctions. Ibid. The 


district court consolidated the preliminary injunction hearing with 
a trial on the merits of the constitutional issues. Ibid.; see 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(a) (2). 

After trial, the district court issued a written decision 
rejecting the State’s constitutional challenges to the Act. Pet. 
App. 13-25. The court held that the NVRA is a valid exercise of 
Congress’s power under the Elections Clause, U.S. Const. Art. I, § 
4, to regulate the "Times, Places and Manner of holding" elections 
for federal office. Pet. App. 16-19. The court also held that the 
Act does not violate the Tenth Amendment since, when acting under 
the Elections Clause, Congress "may directly regulate the state’s 
manner and means of voter registration without invading an area re- 
served to the states." Id. at 18. The court permanently enjoined 
the State from failing to comply with the Act and ordered it to 
come forward with "a proposed plan for implementing the NVRA." Id. 
at 21. 

3. The court of appeals affirmed. Pet. App. 1-12. Relying 
in part on the Seventh Circuit’s decision upholding the Act in 
Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) v. 


Edgar, 56 F.3d 791 (1995), the court determined that Congress’s 


6 


power over the "Times, Places and Manner of holding" elections for 
federal office includes the power to regulate voter registration 
procedures. Pet. App. 5. Based on that determination, the court 
held that "the Act * * *, on its face, fits comfortably within" 
Congress's power under the Elections Clause. Id. at 7. 

The court of appeals rejected the State’s argument that the 


NVRA violates the Tenth Amendment principles articulated in New 


York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144 (1992). The court observed 
that New York held that "Congress could not impose on the states 


the burden of exercising its power under the Constitution to 


regulate interstate commerce." Pet. App. 8. The court determined 
that the State’s reliance on New York was "flaw[ed)]," because, 
"unlike the commerce power in Article I, section 8," the Elections 


Clause "empowers Congress to impose on the states precisely the 
burden at issue." Pet. App. 8. 

The court of appeals emphasized that its decision concerned 
"an as yet unapplied statute." Pet. App. 4. The court assumed 
that "interpretive or constitutional issues that might arise in the 
implementation of the Act do not impair our analysis of the Act’s 
facial constitutionality." Ibid. As had the Seventh Circuit in 
ACORN, the court directed the district court "to approach its task 
of implementation with an ‘adequate sensitivity to the principle of 


federalism.’" Pet. App. 12 (quoting ACORN, 56 F.3d at 798). The 


panel retained jurisdiction to consider any subsequent appeals. 


Pet. App. 12. 


~ 
ARGUMENT 

The court of appeals correctly held that the NVRA is a valid 
exercise of Congress’s power under the Elections Clause (U.S. 
Const. Art. I, § 4) and does not violate the Tenth Amendment. The 
Ninth Circuit’s decision accords with the only other court of 
appeals decision to address the constitutionality of the Act, 
Association of mmuni rganization form Now Vv. 
Edgar, 56 F.3d 791 (7th Cir. 1995), and with all of the district 
court decisions addressing that subject.’ 

1. The court of appeals correctly held that Congress had the 
power to enact the NVRA under the Elections Clause, U.S. Const. 
Art. I, § 4 See Pet. App. 7; accord ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 
793-795. That Clause provides: 

The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for 

Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each 

State by the Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at 

any time by Law make or alter such Regulations, except as 


to the Places of chusing Senators.’ 


A natural reading of the term "Manner of holding Elections" 


* ACORN v. Miller, Nos. 4:95-cv-45, 1:95-cv-184 & 1:95-cv-386 
(W.D. Mich. Dec. 13, 1995); Condon v. Reno, Civ. Nos. 3:95-192-0 & 
3:95-345-0 (D.S.C. Nov. 20, 1995); Virginia v. United States, No. 
3:95CV357 (RLW) (E.D. Va. Oct. 18, 1995); ACORN v. Ridge, Nos. Civ. 
A. 94-7671 & Civ. A. 95-382, 1995 WL 136913 (E.D. Pa. Mar. 30, 
1995); see also Wom V v. Graves, No. 95-2350-KHV 
(D. Kan. Nov. 30, 1995) (granting preliminary injunction requiring 
Kansas to comply with NVRA). 


, The Elections Clause does not refer to presidential 


elections. As the Seventh Circuit observed, however, this Court 
has construed Article II, Section 2, which does address that 
subject, "to grant Congress power over Presidential elections 
coextensive with that which Article I section 4 grants it over 
congressional elections." ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 793 (citing 
Burroughs v. United States, 290 U.S. 534 (1934)); see also Buckley 


v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 13 n.16 (1976). 


8 
includes the process of registering voters. As this Court stated 
in Smiley v. Holm, 285 U.S. 355, 366 (1932): 
(T] hese comprehensive words ["Times, Places and Manner") 
embrace authority to provide a complete code for congres- 
sional elections, not only as to times and places, but in 
relation to notices, registration, supervision of voting, 
protection of voters, prevention of fraud and corrupt 
practices, counting of votes, duties of inspectors and 
canvassers, and making and publication of election 
returns; in short, to enact the numerous requirements as 
to procedure and safeguards which experience shows are 


necessary in order to enforce the fundamental right 
involved. 


See also Ex parte Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) 371, 379-380 (1880) 
(upholding a statute providing for federal supervision of a state’s 
voter registration process as a proper exercise of the "Times, 
Places and Manner" authority); ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 793 
("Times, Places and Manner" includes process of registration). 
Thus, the NVRA’s adoption of uniform, nationwide procedures for 
registering to vote in elections for federal office falls squarely 
within the scope of the Elections Clause. 

By virtue of the Elections Clause, the conduct of federal 


elections is "one of the few areas in which the Constitution 


expressly requires action by the States." U.S. m_ Lim: 
v. Thornton, 115 S. Ct. 1842, 1855 (1995). The Elections Clause 


provides "that the state legislatures ‘shall’ prescribe the details 
necessary to hold congressional elections." Id. at 1883 (Thomas, 
J., dissenting) (quoting U.S. Const. Art. I, § 4); see also 
Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 388 ("It is the duty of the States 


to elect representatives to Congress."). As the court of appeals 


held, that obligation is one that, the Constitution contemplates the 


9 


States will bear at their own expense. Pet. App. 9; accord ACORN 
v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 794. 

Although the States have the initial obligation to set up 
procedures for elections for federal office, Congress has "ultimate 
authority" over federal election procedures. U.S. imits, 115 
S. Ct. at 1899 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Thus, even when States 
prescribe their own procedures, Congress retains "a general 
supervisory power over the whole subject." Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 
Otto) at 387. The Clause expressly empowers Congress "at any time" 
to "make" its own regulations or to "alter" the States’ regula- 
tions. As this Court has explained (Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 
383-384): 

If (Congress) only alters, leaving, as manifest convenience 

requires, the general organization of the polls to the State, 

there results a necessary co-operation of the two governments 
in regulating the subject. But no repugnance in the system of 
regulations can arise thence; for the power of Congress over 
the subject is paramount. It may be exercised as and when 

Congress sees fit to exercise it. 

It is clear that, when Congress "alters" a State’s rules, the state 
officials remain responsible for carrying them out.‘ That is also 
true when Congress makes its own rules, for state officials owe 


duties "as well to the United States as to the State. This 


necessarily follows from the mixed character of the transaction, -- 


* See ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 795: 


The first sentence [of the Elections Clause], remember, 
requires the states to create and operate * * * a system 
(for electing federal officials) and the second authoriz- 
es Congress to alter the state’s system -- but it is 
still the state’s system, manned by state officers and 
hence paid for by the state. 


