10 


State and national." Id. at 388. In the NVRA, Congress made its 
own rules, and those rules "alter" any inconsistent state rules on 
the subject. See ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 795. And, in keeping 
with this Court’s understanding of the Elections Clause, Congress 
required the States to administer those rules. 

The NVRA is not only consistent with this Court’s understand- 
ing of the Elections Clause but also with historical practice. 
Each time Congress has regulated federal elections, it has 
compelled the States to implement those regulations. For example, 
since 1871 Congress has required that all elections for Members of 
Congress be tabulated by written or printed ballot. See 2 U.S.C. 
9. And since 1872 Congress has established a uniform, nationwide 
date on which States must hold elections for federal office. See 
2 U.S.C. 7; 3 U.S.C. 1. Those enactments have required States to 
develop and implement procedures for tabulating, securing, and 
printing ballots, and to provide for polling places on the 
federally mandated election date. They have also put States to the 
choice of either electing state officials by ballot on the federal 
election date or incurring the additional expense and effort of 
administering separate processes for state and federal elections. 
The constitutionality of such federally mandated burdens is firmly 
established. EX parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651, 661 (1884); 
Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 384. This Court has also upheld the 
federal requirement that States establish a mechanism for accepting 
absentee ballots in presidential elections. Oregon v. Mitchell, 


400 U.S. 112, 118-119 (1970) (opinion of Black, J.) (upholding 42 


11 


U.S.C. 1973aa-1(d)). 

Petitioners suggest that the Elections Clause "was solely 
designed to allow Congress to regulate federal elections in 
‘extraordinary circumstances’ to prevent the States from refusing 
to conduct federal elections." Pet. 26 (quoting The Federalist No. 
59, at 363 (Alexander Hamilton) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961)); see 
also Washington Legal Foundation et al. Amicus Br. (WLF Br.) 11-13; 
Pacific Legal Foundation Amicus Br. (PLF Br.) 11-13. One important 
purpose of the Clause was, indeed, to prevent States from destroy- 
ing the Union by refusing to hold elections for federal office. 
See The Federalist No. 59, at 363. But the court of appeals 
correctly determined that the Clause was not limited to that 
purpose. Pet. App. 7-8 & nn.3-4. 


As the Seventh Circuit observed in ACORN v. Edgar, the 


Elections Clause "is broadly worded and has been broadly interpret- 
ed." 56 F.3d at 794. The Clause authorizes Congress to exercise 
its supervisory authority over federal election procedures "at any 
time," U.S. Const. Art. I, § 4, not just when necessary to preserve 
the Union. See Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 392 (Elections 
Clause power may be exercised "whenever Congress deems it expedient 


to interfere merely to alter or add to existing regulations of the 


State"); see also Smiley, 285 U.S. at 366-367. As the Seventh 
Circuit noted (ACORN v. Edgar, 56 F.3d at 794), "[o]ne of the 


unquestioned regulations enacted under the authority of Article I 
section 4 is the fixing of a uniform date for federal elections" -- 


a regulation that can hardly be said to be necessary for the 


12 


preservation of the Union. The NVRA is a valid exercise of 


Congress’s "coordination function." U.S. Term Limits, 115 S. Ct. 


at 1898 (Thomas, J., dissenting). 

2. Relying on New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144 (1992), 
petitioners contend (Pet. 18-23) that the NVRA violates the Tenth 
Amendment by requiring state officials to implement its provisions. 
See also WLF Br. 7-9; PLF Br. 16-20. The court of appeals, like 
all other courts to consider the issue, correctly rejected that 
contention. Pet. App. 8-9. 

In New York, this Court held that the "take title" provision 
of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985, 
Pub. L. No. 99-240, 99 Stat. 1842, violated the Tenth Amendment. 
That provision was enacted pursuant to Congress’s Commerce Clause 
power, and it required States either to enact regulations providing 
for the disposal of all low-level radioactive waste generated 
within their borders or to take title to and possession of that 
waste by January 1, 1996. This Court held that the provision 
violated the principle that "Congress may not simply ‘commandee[r] 
the legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them 
to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program.’" New York, 505 
U.S. at 161 (quoting Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation 
Ass'n, 452 U.S. 264, 288 (1981)). The Court explained that "[t]he 
allocation of power contained in the Commerce Clause, for example, 
authorizes Congress to regulate interstate commerce directly; it 


does not authorize Congress to regulate state governments’ 


regulation of interstate commerce." New York, 505 U.S. at 166. 


13 


The Tenth Amendment principles enunciated in New York are 


inapposite here. The Tenth Amendment provides (U.S. Const. Amend. 
X): 

The powers not delegated to the United States by the 
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are 
reserved to the States respectively, or to the people. 

The Tenth Amendment reserves to the States only "the original 


powers of sovereignty" that they possessed before adoption of the 


Constitution. U.S. Term Limits, 115 S. Ct. at 1854. The power to 


regulate the "Times, Places and Manner" of holding elections for 
Congress and the presidency, however, "exclusively spr[a]ng out of 
the existence of the national government." Ibid. That power, 
moreover, is expressly "delegated to the United States" (U.S. 
Const. Amend X) by the Elections Clause. It is therefore not a 
"power[]" reserved to the States by the Tenth Amendment.° 

The textual allocation to the States of the authority and 
obligation to administer the federal election machinery reflects 
the Framers’ recognition that "manifest convenience requires" 
leaving to the States the general responsibility for conducting 
elections for federal office. Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 383. 
But the Framers also recognized the strong federal interest in 
regulating the conduct of federal elections. See Wesberry v. 


Sanders, 376 U.S. 1, 42 (1964) (Harlan, J., dissenting). Thus, 


5 


Even if the Tenth Amendment did limit Congress’s exercise 
of its Elections Clause authority, the NVRA would fall within those 
limits. Unlike the situation in New York, in the NVRA Congress did 
not force States to exercise a congressional power to regulate 
private conduct. Cf. New York, 505 U.S. at 166. Rather, Congress 
exercised its long-standing authority to supervise the States’ own 
conduct in administering elections for federal office. 


14 
they expressly required state officials to comply with congressio- 
nal regulations in this area. Congress may exercise this power "at 
any time, and to any extent which it deems expedient." Siebold, 
100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 392. 

If petitioners were correct that Congress may not impose 
affirmative obligations on States as part of its power to "make or 
alter" regulations of the federal election process, Congress would 
be required to federalize the entire voter registration process 
whenever it wished to impose some uniform federal requirements on 
that process. Cf. WLF Br. 10. The Court has squarely rejected 
that argument: "We are unable to see why it necessarily follows 


that, if Congress makes any regulations on the subject, it must 


assume exclusive control of the whole subject. The Constitution 
does not say so." Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 383.® While 


Congress has traditionally left "the general organization of the 
polls to the State" (ibid.), it has always retained the "superviso- 
ry and paramount" power that the Framers deemed essential to the 
preservation of the federal government (id. at 386). The decision 


in New York did not purport to change those well-established 


* Petitioners read (Pet. 25) Siebold as standing only for the 
limited proposition that Congress may attach additional penalties 
to voter fraud committed by state officials in federal elections. 
The holding of Siebold is not so limited. Siebold upheld a federal 
statute that provided for the appointment of federal officers to 
supervise state officials in the registration of voters, adminis- 
tration of voting rolls, and staffing of polling places in 
elections for federal office. See Siebold, 100 U.S. (10 Otto) at 
379-382. The Court held that Congress may subject state officials 
to this kind of federal supervision because, in the area of federal 
elections, state officials owe duties to the United States as well 
as the State. Id. at 388. 


15 


principles. 

3. Despite Congress’s broad power to regulate federal 
elections, petitioners contend that the NVRA violates principles of 
federalism because it requires employees of the state Department of 
Motor Vehicles and public assistance agencies "to perform federal 
registration duties wholly outside their usual line of work." Pet. 
22 (internal quotation marks omitted). That contention is 
factually incorrect. Under the Act, it is the "appropriate State 
election official" -- as designated by state law -- who registers 
voters, determines eligibility, and maintains the voter rolls. 42 
U.S.C. 1973gg-3(e), 1973gg-5(d); see also H.R. Rep. No. 9, 103d 
Cong., lst Sess. 8 (1993). The Act imposes only narrow, routine 
duties on employees at other state agencies: They must include 
voter registration forms with the driver’s license or social 
service applications they already distribute, see 42 U.S.C. 1973qg- 
3(c), 1973gg-5(a) (6) (Supp. V 1993); they must provide assistance 
in filling out the forms when asked, see 42 U.S.C. 1973gg- 


S(a)(6)(C) (Supp. V 1993); and they must forward the completed 


forms to the "appropriate State election official," 42 U.S.C. 
1973gg-3(e), 1973gg-5(d) (Supp. V 1993). None of those duties is 
alien to the affected employees’ "usual line of work." They must, 


in all events, distribute forms (for driver’s licenses or other 
state benefits or services) and forward them for processing; at 
most, the Act adds an additional form to the package. 


Those minimal additional duties are closely related to 


Congress’s power under the Elections Clause to adopt uniform 


16 
procedures for electing federal officials. See ACORN v. Edgar, 56 
F.3d at 796 (noting that Congress might exceed its authority under 
the Elections Clause if it sought to use that power "to destroy 
state government, perhaps by constituting all employees of the 
state full-time federal voting registrars," but that the NVRA does 
not impermissibly interfere with state prerogatives) . When it 
enacted the NVRA, Congress acted against a backdrop of voter 
registration procedures that varied widely from State to State. 
For example, only 27 States offered registration by mail. See S. 
Rep. No. 6, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 12 (1993). Twenty-two States 
permitted voter registration at motor vehicles offices, but the 
programs were implemented in different ways. See id. at 7-10. 
State laws allowing voter registration at other state agencies were 
also inconsistent. See id. at 15. Congress decided to make these 
procedures uniform, and it decided to do so in a way that afforded 
broad opportunities to register to vote. See U.S. Term Limits, 115 
S. Ct. at 1858-1859, 1864 (noting that constitutional provisions 
governing federal elections aim at promoting uniformity) . 4 
therefore endorsed the procedures adopted by States that afforded 
such broad opportunities, and adopted those procedures as national 
rules. Doing so requires some employees in some States to assume 
obligations not imposed under current state practice; that, 
however, is a necessary concomitant of Congress’s "coordination 
function" under the Elections Clause. Id. at 1898 (Thomas, J., 


dissenting). 


The present cases entail only a facial challenge to the NVRA. 


17 


Pet. App. 4. The court of appeals recognized that future applica- 
tions of the Act might raise constitutional issues distinct from 
those presented here. Id. at 4, 11. The court also recognized 
that the prospect of such issues arising "dictate[s] that implemen- 
tation of the Act be done sensitively." Id. at 9; accord ACORN v. 
Edgar, 56 F.3d at 798 (implementation of NVRA must "exhibit an 
adequate sensitivity to the principle of federalism"). According- 
ly, the court of appeals specifically directed the district court 
on remand to act "with an informed understanding of the duality of 
sovereignty imbedded within the Constitution of the United States." 
Pet. App. 11. In addition, the panel retained jurisdiction over 
any later appeals involving implementation. Id. at 12. In light 
of those actions, petitioners’ claim that implementation of the Act 
will encroach on state prerogatives does not justify further review 
by this Court at this time. See Watson v. Buck, 313 U.S. 387, 402 
(1941) ("Passing upon the possible significance of the manifold 
provisions of a broad statute in advance of efforts to apply the 
separate provisions is analogous to rendering an advisory opinion 
upon a statute or a declaratory judgment upon a hypothetical 
case."). 

4. Petitioners also urge this Court to grant certiorari to 
consider whether the NVRA is a valid exercise of Congress’s power 
to enforce the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. Pet. 27-29. 
While Congress’s enforcement power under those Amendments provides 


an alternative ground for upholding the judgment below, that issue 


was not decided by the court of appeals. In any event, the Act is 


18 


a proper means of enforcing the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amend- 
ments. 

The enforcement provisions of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments authorize Congress to “use any rational means to 
effectuate the constitutional prohibition of racial discrimination 
in voting." South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301, 324 
(1966); accord Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384 U.S. 641, 651 (1966). In 
the exercise of that authority, Congress may adopt uniform, 
nationwide rules targeting practices with a discriminatory effect. 
See Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. at 132-133 (opinion of Black, J.) 
(upholding nationwide ban on literacy tests); id. at 216 (opinion 
of Harlan, J.) (same); id. at 283-284 (opinion of Stewart, J.) 
(same); see also City of Rome v. United States, 446 U.S. 156 (1980) 
(Congress may take action against practices that are discriminatory 
in effect, even if they lack a discriminatory purpose). 

Under that principle, the NVRA is well within Congress’s 
enforcement authority. Congress enacted the NVRA after nearly 30 
years of experience with the Voting Rights Act and a decade of 
investigating voter registration procedures. See, e.g., Staff of 
Subcomm. on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the House Comm. on 
the Judiciary, 98th Cong., 2d Sess., After the Voting Rights Act: 
Registration Barriers (Comm. Print 1984) (H.R. Ser. No. 18). That 
experience revealed that voter-registration requirements have 
sometimes been administered in a way designed to deprive minorities 


of their right to vote. See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 6, supra, at 3, 18; 


H.R. Ser. No. 18, supra, at 2-5. Congress also considered evidence 


wou Serco eo 


19 


that existing registration practices have had discriminatory 
effects. See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 6, supra, at 17-18. The NVRA 
responds to those problems by enacting uniform, nationwide 
procedures that tend to prevent discriminatory administration of 
registration laws and make it easier to register. Such uniform 
rules can be an effective way to enforce the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Amendments. See Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. at 283-284 
(opinion of Stewart, J.). 
CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied. 
Respectfully submitted. 


DREW S. DAYS, III 


Solicitor General 
DEVAL L. PATRICK 
Assi rne neral 


STEVEN H. ROSENBAUM 
SAMUEL R. BAGENSTOS 


Attorneys 


DECEMBER 1995 


