iy ~~ , rges = =. 
“S "bse - os a’ ; teens QO 
be gtd 9 ey ae) Sel 
. b tet ek * a ee ab 
te a ee ae ‘ ° 
- co be ty “ xf a a 
ps” ‘sa 2 ee ‘* 74 “3% 
» . ey . o Se _ c, % 
4+ Et SS ° ee ~- 
e “F i 7 
<5 , 
a } . 
; ss 
in 
a | i 


i 
: 


Sk : 
i hs Lt - 7 
Im Shits AP ae he 
a. oe i 
“ Ss ~ _ 
as 


fw) 

7) 

Z 

| 
a) 
& 
: 
8 


- 
ww» 


a 
DD. 
| 


7 i 
= y 
we 
ee ae “ 
x . 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
PN: United States Court of Appeals 
Sap" | for the Fourth Circuit 


a Boy 


re oe 

bag 

.. . 
- 


- 


ae ... BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE 

. ).” CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND SOUTHWEST 
Beas os AREAS HEALTH AND WELFARE AND PENSION 
eaeht © FUNDS IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


ae ‘)HOMAS C. NYHAN * 

RR General Counsel 

: TERENCE G, CRAIG 

a i , JAMES P. CONDON 

| ALBERT M. MADDEN 

CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND 
; SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH AND 
ie, WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
#) 9877 Weet Higgins Road 

+ eee Rosemont, Illinois 60018-4938 

“et (708) 518-9800 

Attorneys for Amici Curiae 

* Counsel of Record 


oe 
e ’ 


eactis WILSON - Eras PRINTING Co., Inc) - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


® ai. eo 


ey Bz ‘ = ——_—S -- a ~~ ~— ee a —— - \> 

. Se, ee ) 

Se ae 3 fy V5 at 2 
P J inodl a A. — 4 - Le 


_ 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .... . ii 
INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAB .........2...20..2...2c0c20--0000-00 1 
Central States Pension Fund ....................................-.... 1 
Central States Health and Welfare Fund ..................... 2 
Interests of Central States ..................................2000....... 3 
to) (44 gs fl 0. l,l = 4 
PRE eg ES AR a IRC Se A eo li 7 


I. AN ERISA CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST 
AN ALTER EGO OF AN ERISA DEFEND- 
ANT MAY EMPLOY FEDERAL COMMON 
LAW TO PIERCE THE CORPORATE VEIL... 7 


II. FEDERAL COURTS HAVE JURISDICTION 
UNDER ERISA OVER A POST-JUDGMENT 
LAWSUIT TO IMPOSE ERISA LIABILITY 
ON AN ALTER EGO OF THE JUDGMENT 


ii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 


Anderson v. Abbott, 321 U.S. 349, 64 S.Ct. 581 

| | FREESE RE OR erates Nike. Pee | 9,12 
Central States v. Central Transport, Inc., 472 U.S. 

559, 105 S.Ct. 2888 (1985) 0... 2 
Central States Pension Fund v. Central Transport, 

Inc., 1994 WL 692726 (N.D. Ill. Dec. 1, 1994)... 3 
Central States Pension Fund v. Goldstein, 1995 


WL 221848 (N.D. Ill. April 11, 1995) 000... 3 
Central States Pension Fund v. Minneapolis Van 

Co., 764 F. Supp. 1289 (N.D. Ill. 1991) 0... 3 
Central States Pension Fund v. Sloan, 902 F.2d 

Be. Sue NC aPC ME Rr 3 


Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reich, 490 
U.S. 730, 109 S.Ct. 2166 (1989) 2000. 8 
Franchise Tax Board v. Construction Laborers 
Vacation Trust, 463 U.S: 1, 108 S.Ct. 2841 


bOI aS Nn eae See SMS © 5,8 
Lumpkin v. Envirodyne Industries, Inc., 983 F.2d 
GED Crs Ce. BOD eta 7 
Massachusetts Laborers Health Fund v. Starrett 
Paving Co., 845 F.2d 23 (1st Cir. 1988) ............ x 
Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Darden, —— U.S. 
—, 112 S.Ct. 1844 (1992) 00 8 
Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. Dedeauzx, 481 U.S. 41, 107 
S.Ct. 1551, 95 L.Ed.2d 89 (1987) 2.000. x 
STATUTES 
iP Ri MIE ic cnscnsisicccisntscennlelicicciiiitesmai sites inskidiacad 6, 11, 12 
a NE SIR ik fas sin siesahycrsachnpeonseneovscdinicinnieoaaiiniids nacelle 4 
RN | IRR EE A Me AP 7 
BP Ne TD GED siciincnccicsiccchensocnadedlinbssctamiihelainaina 2,10 
© Fe lati cnidikceceitcinbincisloteidctbidstipsicidananteendiat ane 4,10 
a ee te hia distin iniiccectendledntiinsilindenciesasaibeathiane ds te 10, 11 
Se CIGRS OF IID esiiccininsinereisisneesbccdatdieicinadiainiseghaoen sina 4 
a Oey Oe ND endtresicccsitinsisccrtensand iinidinends teiiainnade. 7,8 


IN THE 


Supreme Count of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1453 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


Jack L. THOMAS, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE 
CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND SOUTHWEST 
AREAS HEALTH AND WELFARE AND PENSION 
FUNDS IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 
Central States Pension Fund 


Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Pension 
Fund is a multiemployer defined benefit pension trust fund 
established in 1955 by affiliates of the International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters and by various employer asso- 
ciations pursuant to section 302(c)(5) of the Labor 
Management Relations Act (LMRA). The Pension Fund 


2 


is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of an equal 
number of union and management appointees (four of 
each). The trustees are plan fiduciaries within the mean- 
ing of Section 3(21)(A) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1002(21)(A). The Pension Fund is administered for 
the exclusive benefit of the participants to whom the 
Trustees owe an undivided duty of loyalty. The purpose 
of the Pension Fund is to pay retirement and certain 
other benefits to participants and their beneficiaries who 
become eligible under the terms of the Central States 
pension plan. Central States Pension Fund is the largest 
multiemployer pension plan in the country. Central States 
v. Central Transport, Inc., 472 U.S. 559, 561, n.1, 105 
S.Ct. 2833, 2386, n.1 (1985). Its current assets exceed 
$12.3 billion and the present value of its liabilities for 
vested benefits is approximately $14.5 billion. Participat- 
ing employers contribute to the Pension Fund pursuant to 
their collective bargaining agreements for work performed 
by their covered (bargaining unit) employees. The Pen- 
sion Fund covers 170,000 retirees presently drawing bene- 
fits and 220,000 active participants of approximately 
5,000 contributing employers. 


Central States Health and Welfare Fund 


. Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Health 
and Welfare Fund was established in 1950. It provides 
health and welfare benefits to eligible employees of con- 
tributing employers that are signatory to collective bar- 
gaining agreements with local unions affiliated with the 
International Brotherhood of Teamsters. Like the Pen- 
sion Fund, the Health and Welfare Fund is governed by 
a Board of Trustees consisting of four management and 
four union-appointed trustees, who are plan fiduciaries 
within the meaning of ERISA.’ The Health and Welfare 


1 The two funds are jointly administered under the direction of 
the same eight-member Board of Trustees. The Funds will here- 
after be referred to collectively as Central States or individually 
as the Pension Fund and the Health and Welfare Fund. 


3 


Fund has net assets of more than $130 million and pro- 
vides benefits to more than 125,000 active participants, 
as well as over 20,000 retirees and their families. 


Interests of Central States 


As of July 31, 1995, Central States’ in-house legal de- 
partment had 137 active delinquent contribution litigation 
files and the Pension Fund had 165 withdrawal liability 
files. To reduce costs, virtually all delinquent contribution 
and withdrawal liability litigation is filed in the District 
Court for the Northern District of Illinois, where Central 
States has its offices, and is handled by attorneys of 
Central States’ law department. Delinquent contribution 
suits filed by Central States resulted in collections 
totalling $11,270,911 in 1993, $15,650,413 in 1994 
and $6,402,343 through July 1995. Withdrawal liability 
cases have resulted in collections totalling $25,687,644 in 
1993, $24,732,359 in 1994 and $8,821,887 through July 
1995. 


In approximately half of the cases filed by Central 
States, all or part of the balance owed is uncollectible 
because the employing entity is insolvent. In these cases, 
Central States invariably attempts to determine whether 
there are any individuals or entities that may also be 
responsible for the liability under various “common law” 
theories, including the piercing the corporate veil involved 
in this case.* If, as the Petitioner contends, these cases 
are governed by state law, the likelihood of prevailing 
will significantly decrease because recovery will depend 
upon the vagaries of state law rather than a uniform 
federal standard. Further, Central States litigation costs 


2 See e.g. Central States Pension Fund v. Sloan, 902 F.2d 593 
(7th Cir. 1990) (labor law alter ego theory) ; Central States Pen- 
sion Fund v. Minneapolis Van Co., 764 F.Supp. 1289 (N.D. II. 
1991); Central States Pension Fund v. Goldstein, 1995 WL 221848 
(N.D. Ill. April 11, 1995) (piercing corporate veil) ; Central States 
Pension Fund v. Central Transport, Inc., 1994 WL 692726 (N.D. Ill. 
Dec. 1, 1994). 


4 


will substantially increase because ERISA’s fee shifting 
provision (29 U.S.C. § 1132(g)) will not apply and 
Central States will be required to retain outside counsel 
in numerous different states to handle such litigation. 


Because all of Central States’ assets are used to provide 
benefits to participants and defray administrative expenses, 
29 U.S.C. § 1104, the burden of these additional costs 
and lost revenue will be borne by participants and bene- 
ficiaries in the form of lower benefit payments and even- 
tually, if benefit levels are to be maintained, upon other 
participating employers. To further the 
goal of protecting the “soundness and stability of plans 
with respect to adequate funds to pay promised benefits,” 
29 U.S.C. § 1001, it is important that a federal forum 
is available to resolve insider liability cases. Since this 
case implicates Central States’ ability to collect amounts 
that it is owed, Central States has a significant interest in 
the result of this case. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


1. Petitioner challenges whether a federal court may 
impose a judgment on an alter ego of an ERISA judgment 
debtor by piercing the corporate veil under federal com- 
mon law. (Question 1.) As a starting proposition, how- 
ever, there is nothing peculiar about a federal cause of 
action that involves piercing a corporate veil. Assuming 
that the federal district court has subject matter jurisdic- 
tion over the cause of action, the veil-piercing aspect of 
the case simply goes to the true identity of the liable en- 
tity. Petitioner argues, however, that under the facts of 
this case this veil piercing is really a state-law question 
and is, in any event, foreclosed by ERISA’s specification 
of remedies against fiduciaries. But this argument is really 
just a threshold for Petitioner’s Question 2, which attacks 
federal jurisdiction. Amici are concerned that the juris- 
dictional question not overshadow and inadvertently ob- 
scure critical ERISA questions, such as whether an 
ERISA plaintiff can plead a federal cause of action against 


5 


an alter ego of an ERISA defendant. Petitioner’s first 
argument would sweep away any remedy against an alter 
ego that is imposed by application of federal common 
law. Such a ruling would cripple ERISA enforcement by 
plans like Amici and would invite fraud by alter egos. 


In an ERISA plan’s action against an employer, the 
question of who is the employer is a federal question. If 
the employer has an alter ego, then the alter ego is the 
employer—the same employer—notwithstanding its adop- 
tion of an alternate identity. The mechanism for reaching 
the alter ego is to “pierce the corporate veil,” a common 
law concept. Should federal courts be barred from “feder- 
alizing” the common law to answer the underlying federal 
question? Not under this Court’s general precedents. 
Franchise Tax Board v. Construction Laborers Vacation 
Trust, 463 U.S. 1, 24, 103 S.Ct. 2841, 2854 n. 26 
(1983). So the question is whether, as a matter of federal 
judicial policy, veil piercing should be treated differently 
and left as a state law matter. The need for uniform 
application of ERISA ought to answer that question. The 
question of the identity of the ERISA employer is one of 
the most common under ERISA, therefore plans should 
not be forced to deal with the disparate common law rules 
of the states to answer this question. If the federal courts 
refuse to consider the question of the true identi.y of a 
party who is responsible for an obligation created under 
federal statute, the courts will be abandoning a large part 
of the judicial function. 


Nor does the fact that ERISA provides remedies against 
fiduciaries some how trump the federal common law. 
Petitioner argues that ERISA provides an exclusive veil 
piercing remedy directly against a fiduciary. This is plainly 
wrong as there is no veil piercing—no determination 
that one party is identical to another—involved in ERISA’s 
fiduciary rules. Corporations or individuals may be fidu- 
ciaries based on objective criteria. The fact that fiduci- 
aries may also be alter egos for another entity does not 


6 


make the ERISA fiduciary rule a veil piercing statute. The 
alter ego status is independent of the fiduciary status. 


In this case, Petitioner was held not to be a direct 
fiduciary under the fiduciary rules. That is, Petitioner’s job 
did not directly involve acting as a fiduciary. But the 
corporation was held a fiduciary under those rules, and 
Petitioner is an alter ego of the corporation. He is thus 
the same entity, for this case, as the corporation and is 
liable as the corporate fiduciary. Petitioner’s argument to 
the contrary is perverse—-that the fiduciary rules should 
shield an individual from liability for his fiduciary breach 
as an alter ego. This is plainly a desperate argument as 
Petitioner stretches to reach his jurisdictional question, 
and this Court should reject it. 


2. Petitioner’s jurisdictional attack must also fail. 
(Question 2.) The court below held that the district court 
had “ancillary” jurisdiction over a second lawsuit to col- 
lect from the alter ego of the judgment debtor in an earlier 
action. It held it had inherent jurisdiction over its own 
judgment and further that the second action arose from 
the same claim as the original action. Petitioner argues 
that as a state law action (assuming it wins on Question 
1), the second case is an independent cause of action to 
pierce a corporate veil. Petitioner misstates the cause of 
action. It is really a cause of action to collect an ERISA 
liability from a fiduciary. The Petitioner is the true 
fiduciary not because he directly assumed a fiduciary 
position, but because he dominated and manipulated the 
corporation that acted as the direct fiduciary. That Peti- 
tioner beceme the liable fiduciary by virtue of his being 
an, alter ego does not change the nature of the cause of 
action as an ERISA claim. Thus the district court had 
original jurisdiction of this case under ERISA and there 
is no need to invoke ancillary jurisdiction. But in any 
event the claim against the corporation and that against 
its alter ego arose out of the same Article III case or 
controversy and thus easily fit within the court’s supple- 
mental jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1367. 


7 


ARGUMENT 


I. AN ERISA CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST AN 
ALTER EGO OF AN ERISA DEFENDANT MAY 
EMPLOY FEDERAL COMMON LAW TO PIERCE 
THE CORPORATE VEIL. 


To the extent that Petitioner argues that any action to 
pierce a corporate veil is a state law cause of action, not 
subject to federal jurisdiction, Petitioner is plainly wrong. 
One of the commonest ERISA causes of action, for ex- 
ample, is one brought by an employee benefit plan—such 
as Central States—to collect contributions owed by an 
employer under 29 U.S.C. § 1145. Section 1145 makes 
the contractual duty to contribute to a multiemployer plan 
a statutory obligation by providing that “[e]very employer 
who is obligated to make contributions to a multiemployer 
plan under the terms of the plan or under the terms of 
a collectively bargained agreement shall . . . make such 
contributions in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of such plan or such agreement.” 29 U.S.C. § 1145. 
Often the employer is a corporation but this is not neces- 
sarily so since ERISA defines the term “employer” 
expansively. 


The term “employer” means any person acting di- 
rectly as an employer, or indirectly in the interest of 
an employer, in relation to an employee benefit plan; 
and includes a group or association of employers 
acting for an employer in such capacity. 
29 U.S.C. § 1002(5). If it is appropriate to pierce the 
corporate veil, the individual shareholder is the ERISA 
“employer” and is obligated under § 1145 to pay the 
contributions. This is an ERISA cause of action.’ 


3 Likewise a participant’s claim against the corporate employer 
for an ERISA benefit may also seek to pierce the corporate veil 
to reach the corporation’s parent. For example, in Lumpkin v. 
Envirodyne Industries, Inc., 9838 F.2d 449 (7th Cir. 1991), the 
court held that beneficiaries stated an ERISA claim by alleging 


[The] Plans fear that a literal reading of § 1145 
would not permit corporate-veil piercing. ... We 
do not think this is so. When state law pierces the 
corporate veil, where the owner is the corporation’s 
alter ego, where state or other relevant federal law 
makes the owner liable, it is fairly easy to say that 
the owner is the corporation. and that the owner 
is therefore an “employer” (under ERISA’s defi- 
nition) “who is obligated” (under state or other 
relevant federal law) “to make contributions to” a 
pension plan. Indeed, in such case he is an em- 
ployer already obligated to make contributions. 


Massachusetts Laborers Health Fund v. Starrett Paving 
Co., 845 F.2d 23, 26 (1st Cir. 1988). This is not simply 
a matter of the application of state law to a federal 
Statute, however. In Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. 
v. Darden, 112 S.Ct. 1344, 1348 (1992), this Court 
noted that because the ERISA definition of the term 
“employer” was “completely circular and explains noth- 
ing,” it was necessary to adopt a common law test based 
upon “the general common law of agency, rather than... . 
the law of any particular State.” Jd. n.3, quoting, Com- 
munity for Creative Non-Violence v. Reich, 490 U.S. 
730, 740, 109 S.Ct. 2166, 2173 (1989). 


Indeed, in enacting ERISA, Congress intended that “a 
body of federal substantive law will be developed by the 
courts to deal with issues involving rights and obligations 
under private welfare and pension plans.” Franchise Tax 
Board v. Construction Laborers Vacation Trust, 463 U.S. 
1, 24 n.26, 103 S.Ct. 2841, 2854 n.26, 77 L.Ed.2d 420 
(1983) quoting 120 Cong. Rec. 22942 (1974) (re 
marks of Sen. Javits); accord Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. 
Dedreaux, 481 U.S. 41, 56, 107 S.Ct. 1551, 1558, 95 
L.Ed.2d 39 (1987). Thus, when a plan seeks to hold an 
individual liable under a piercing the corporate veil 


that the corporate veil of the employer should be pierced and the 
defendant be held liable for unpaid pension benefits. 


9 


theory, federal common law principles must control. Cer- 
tainly the scope of a term defined in a federal statute 
should not turn upon each State’s law. 


Petitioner claims, however, that veil piercing is differ- 
ent and should be left to state law. That may be con- 
venient for Petitioner’s jurisdictional arguments, but it 
makes no sense as ERISA policy, nor does it accord with 
this Court’s decisions. A good starting point (but one 
overlooked by Petitioner) for answering whether federal 
common law encompasses veil piercing is this Court’s 
decision in Anderson v. Abbott, 321 U.S. 349, 64 S.Ct. 
531 (1994). In that case plaintiff obtained a judgment 
against a bank and then sought to collect the balance of 
the judgment from the bank’s stockholders in separate 
lawsuits. Noting that the corporation (the bank) limited 
liability by its form, the Court nonetheless held that fed- 
eral policies could overcome the limitations of this busi- 
ness form. 


It is of course true that Delaware created this corpor- 
ation. But the question of liability for these assess- 
ments is a federal question. The policy underlying 
a federal statute may not be defeated by such an 
assertion of state power. . . . But no state may 
endow its corporate creatures with the power to 
place themselves above the Congress of the United 
States and defeat the federal policy concerning na- 
tional banks which Congress has announced. 


Anderson, 321 U.S. at 365. But this is precisely what 
Petitioner asks this Court now to do in an ERISA con- 
text. As a general principle Petitioner is wrong, and he 
makes no case for an ERISA exception. Veil piercing 
is a federal common law matter where the liability of the 
corporation is created by federal statute. Federal law, 
applied by the courts in light of the pertinent legislation, 
must be used to determine whether one party is in fact 
identical to a party who is directly liable for a federal 
obligation. For example, the traditional state law test 


10 


for piercing the corporate veil has emphasized domina- 
tion and manipulation of the corporation by the share- 
holder. But which corporate functions must be dom- 
inated and manipulated before the corporate veil will be 
pierced? In light of the underlying ERISA policies, dom- 
ination and manipulation of the corporation’s relationship 
with its employees appears to be of special (though by 
no means exclusive) significance. Focusing upon the party 
who in reality dominated the employment relationship 
will further the stated ERISA goal of making the “em- 
ployer” responsible for contributions and withdrawal lia- 
bility owed to an employee benefit plan. State law con- 
cerning the alter ego or veil piercing doctrine cannot be 
counted on to be sensitive to these same concerns. 


Petitioner’s sole real hope for an ERISA exception to 
federal common law veil piercing rests on some rather 
spurious reasoning. Petitioner argues that ERISA itself 
provides a mechanism for piercing the corporate veil by 
imposing fiduciary liability without regard to corporate 
form. We presume that Petitioner means to argue that 
by providing one form of remedy Congress meant to ex- 
clude all others not specifically allowed. Petitioner’s rea- 
soning is flawed. 


ERISA’s fiduciary rules have absolutely nothing to do 


with piercing the corporate veil. The term “fiduciary” is — 


defined in 29 U.S.C. § 1002(21)(A). It is defined objec- 
tively and without reference to corporations or their alter 
egos. Likewise the fiduciary duties specified in 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1104 have nothing to do with piercing a corporate veil. 
ERISA creates these obligations directly, and provides a 
direct remedy for their breach pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1109. There is not the slightest hint that these rules 
might by their silence shield a nominal non-fiduciary from 
liability under another theory. Yet Petitioner would have 
§ 1109 shield individuals from the consequences of their 
ERISA violations if only they are wise enough to set up 
a corporate veil—regardless of whether that shield is 


11 


palpable or legitimate. No legal principle supports such 
a strained reading of ERISA. 


ERISA provides well-defined causes of action. That 
certain individuals may be fiduciaries (or employers) and 
subject to liability under ERISA does not shield them, 
much less other, non-fiduciary individuals from other 
ERISA causes of action. Here Petitioner is nominally 
not a fiduciary (i.e., by virtue of his corporate position 
and duties). But he is an alter ego of the corporate fidu- 
ciary and thus is in his individual right the true (albeit 
indirect) fiduciary—he stands in the shoes of the cor- 
poration. And he is liable on that score under § 1109 
just as was the corporation. 


Il. FEDERAL COURTS HAVE JURISDICTION UNDER 
ERISA OVER A POST-JUDGMENT LAWSUIT TO 
IMPOSE ERISA LIABILITY ON AN ALTER EGO 
OF THE JUDGMENT DEBTOR. 


Petitioner’s Question 2 asks whether the federal courts 
have subject matter jurisdiction over an action that seeks 
to impose liability under ERISA, where the liability was 
previously reduced to judgment against a corporation, 
and the plaintiff is now asserting it against an alter ego 
of the judgment debtor. The court below relied upon 
federal “ancillary” jurisdiction, which is codified at 28 
U.S.C. § 1367 as “supplemental” jurisdiction. That stat- 
ute permits jurisdiction over claims if they are so related 
to a claim over which the federal court has original juris- 
diction that they form part of the same case or contro- 
versy (including claims that involve the joinder of addi- 
tional parties). Had Petitioner been sued as the employer 
by virtue of veil piercing as part of the first action, there 
is no question that the court would have had jurisdiction 
under § 1367 and under ERISA itself. The only real 
question is whether the court loses jurisdiction when it 
enters the first judgment and the alter ego is then sued 
in a second action. Put that way why should timing of 
the—action be the dispositive factor? The court below 


12 


held that the district court had continuing jurisdiction 
over enforcement of its first judgment and that an action 
to impose that judgment on an alter ego of the judgment 
debtor fell within that jurisdiction. Is this, then, jurisdic- 
tion under ERISA (as was the original action), or under 
a court’s “inherent” jurisdiction over its judgments, or 
under ancillary jurisdiction? 

Amici curiae believe that this jurisdiction actually stems 
from the original jurisdiction under ERISA against the 
corporate-fiduciary. There is no cause of action to pierce 
a corporate veil, but rather a cause of action to impose 
ERISA liability on a fiduciary (or employer, depending 
on the ERISA obligation) who happens to be a fiduciary 
solely because of its status as an alter ego of an entity 
that was itself held to be a fiduciary. The alter ego alle- 
gation is, in a sense, “ancillary” because it adds an ele- 
ment not expressly found in the statute, but this does not 
make it an ancillary claim for purposes of § 1367. Of 
course, the ERISA liability had already been established 
against the corporation. Petitioner is wrong, however, to 
characterize the second action solely in terms of the alter 
ego allegations as if this makes it a non-ERISA claim. 
The alter ego case is still an ERISA claim against the 
employer/fiduciary—in its individual (rather than cor- 
porate) form. The already adjudicated ERISA claim was 
a necessary element of the action against the alter ego, 
thus making it an ERISA action. 


Petitioner argues that the alter ego action is just a 
procedural device in aid of execution like a garnishment. 
That is a false analogy. An alter ego action is one to 
clarify the identity of the judgment debtor for purposes 
of execution on a judgment. This is obviously a substan- 
tive part of the ERISA claim (establishing liability against 
an entity), not a collection procedure. See Anderson v. 
Abbott, 321 U.S. 349, 64 S.Ct. 531 (1944). In Anderson, 
jurisdiction over the post-judgment action to pierce the 
corporate veil derived from the federal banking laws. 


13 


Likewise ERISA provides the jurisdiction for a post- 
judgment action to collect ERISA liability from an alter 
ego. 
ie: CONCLUSION 

This Court should affirm the court below. Specifically 
this court should hold that piercing the corporate veil to 
impose ERISA liability on an alter ego is governed by 
federal common law. Further the Court should hold that 
ERISA provides jurisdiction for a post-judgment action 
against an alter ego of an ERISA judgment debtor be- 
cause the liability asserted against the alter ego is the 
same ERISA liability, and the alter ego is (as a matter 
of federal common law veil piercing) the same ERISA 
defendant, as the judgment debtor albeit in individual 
form. 

Respectfully submitted, 


THOMAS C. NYHAN * 
General Counsel 
TERENCE G. CRAIG 
JAMES P. CONDON 
ALBERT M. MADDEN 
CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND 
SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH AND 
WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
9877 West Higgins Road 
Rosemont, Illinois 60018-4938 
(708) 518-9800 


Attorneys for Amici Curiae 
* Counsel of Record 


