, sae 
A Supreme Court of the United States ; 
a OCTOBER TERM, 1995 
i " : 
e : 
a D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
i Petitioner, 
ae v. 
i Jack L. THoMas, ‘° 
. Respondent. 7) 
xe On Writ of Certiorari to the , 
- ie United States Court of Appeals i 
By for the Fourth Circuit 
BRIEF OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR 
z AND CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 
VIRGINIA A. SEITZ 
one 1000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
a Suite 1300 
*' Washington, D.C. 20036 
DAVID M. SILBERMAN 
LAURENCE GOLD 
(Counsel of Record) 
815 16th Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 637-5590 


WILSON - Erase Printine Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WaswineTon, D.C. 20001 


® BPR. v0 


“ BESTAVAILABLE COPY! 


ad. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ................--:cccecsceseecesseeees nell 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ................ semaanpiianmatiiniamadegién 


ARGUMENT ... 


CONCLUSION 


Page 


14 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
Argento v. Village of Melrose Park, 838 F.2d 1488 

| AR hel nL Sa 12 
Bank of the United States v. Halstead, 23 U.S. 51 

CRIED osicsctcunssecenntdesonesibdllirthinientenenenitah’ Uti titaa ID sats 7 
Dewey v. West Fairmont Gas Coal Co., 123 U.S. 

GED CIGD eccctekcveciticstchleteeinnidens teddies 12, 13 
Dugas v. American Surety, 300 U.S. 414 (1987)... 8 
Finley v. United States, 490 U.S. 545 (1989) ........... 12 
First National City Bank v. Banco Para El Comer- 

cio Exterior de Cuba, 462 U.S. 611 (19838) .......... 5 
G.M. Leasing Corp. v. United States, 429 U.S. 338 

0, | EE REE PO OE 6 
Gompers v. ‘Bucks Stove & Range Co., 221 U.S. 418 

CTE cincocesicrsnntitidiitincnsigtislacesniaenieie ee a en 9 


H.C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 217 U.S. 497 (1910)... passim 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Insurance Co. of 


America, —— U.S. , 1148. Ct. 1673 (1994) ..2, 7, 11 
Labette County Commissioners v. United States ex 
rel. Moulton, 112 U.S. 217 (1884) ................... 2, 8,9, 10 
Riggs v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166 
COIIIED cinnsnssascindeiesssnastessataniaupedeamin sitet ena 6 
Root v. Woolworth, 150 U.S. 401 (18938) ................ ® 
Skevofilaz v. Quigley, 810 F.2d 378 (3rd Cir. 1987), 
cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1029 ..... PERRIS NAS A TR 12 
Southport Petroleum Co. v. NLRB, 315 U.S. 100 
(a EI TERI e es HI RS ER SOG 6 
United States v. Kimball Foods, Inc., 440 U.S. 715 
)  , Saree Sper Re Se 13 
Wayman v. Southard, 23 U. S. (10 Wheat.) 1 
CIID ns iaicccisiedenrenccnsundlocsbctnenssaicibansibammipalialaaananana 2 
STATUTES 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA), 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq. —...00000 eee. passim 
MISCELLANEOUS 
W.M. Fletcher, Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of 
Private Corporations (1990) ...... PPR, at A Ets 5 


Wright, Miller & Cooper, Federal Practice and 
PUCCIO COR GE, TOD ~ eccsccntstncicaindstncsssmndiinnds 6,7 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1453 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 


y Petitioner, 


Jack L. THOMAS, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR 
AND CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


The American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations (“AFL-CIO”), a federation of 
79 national and international unions with a total mem- 
bership of approximately 13,000,000 working men and 
women, files this brief amicus curiae with the consent of 
the parties, as provided for in the Rules of this Court. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


A. The threshold issue for decision is whether the dis- 
trict court had jurisdiction to determine whether the judg- 
ment against Tru-Tech, Inc. was enforceable against a 
person not named in that judgment but alleged to be 
the alter ego of the judgment debtor. The generic ques- 
tion of jurisdiction to enforce a federal judgment against 


2 


a closely-related third party may arise in any of the fol- 
lowing contexts: Where a judgment debtor secrets its 
assets in the possession of such a third party; where a 
judgment debtor fraudulently conveys ownership of its 
assets to the third party in order to defeat a federal judg- 
ment; and where, as here, following the entry of a federal 
judgment, a third-party owner disregards the corporate 
form of the judgment debtor and depletes the debtor’s 
assets to frustrate satisfaction of the federal judgment. 
In each of these situations, we submit, a federal court 
that enters a judgment and that has jurisdiction over the 
person of the third party also has ancillary jurisdiction to 
enforce the federal judgment. 


The governing principle is that “[t]he jurisdiction of a 
court is not exhausted by the rendition of its judgment 
but continues until that judgment shall be satisfied.” 
Wayman v. Southard, 23 U.S. (10 Wheat.) 1, 23 (1825). 
This principle has given rise to the doctrine of “ancillary 
jurisdiction” which enables a federal court to “vindicate its 
authority, and effectuate its decrees.” Kokkonen v. Guar- 
dian Life Ins. Co. of America, U.S. ——, 114 S. Ct. 
1673, 1676 (1994). And, this Court has established that, 
“in aid of a jurisdiction previously acquired,” a federal 
court has ancillary jurisdiction “over persons not parties 
to the judgment sought to be enforced.” Labette County 
Commissioners v. United States ex rel. Moulton, 112 U.S. 
217, 219 (1884). Moreover, where as here, a federal 
judgment debtor conspires with a third party to frustrate 
the judgment, a federal court must have the power to act 
in order to “vindicate its authority and effectuate its de- 
crees.” Kokkonen, 114 S. Ct. at 1676. 


‘This Court’s decision in H.C. Cook v. Beecher, 217 
U.S. 497 (1910), is not to the contrary. That case in- 
volved allegations that, prior to the entry of judgment, 
corporate directors had managed the corporation in a 
way that failed to take into account the pendency of the 
lawsuit; it most emphatically did not involve conduct that 
took place after the federal judgment was entered and 
that was intended to avoid that judgment. 


3 


B. The only additional question is whether the courts 
below correctly held that the judgment against Tru-Tech 
could be enforced against Peacock. The court of appeals 
held that “ERISA preempts any state law of veil piercing” 
and provides the rule of decision in proceedings to en- 
force an ERISA judgment against corporate officers or 
directors based on post-judgment conduct. But the ap- 
pellate court immediately acknowledged that “the federal 
common law veil-piercing rule accords with our under- 
standing of the South Carolina rule,” Pet. App. 22a-23a 
n.16. This being so, there is no reason for this Court 
to resolve the choice of law question that petitioner raises. 


ARGUMENT 


A. The decisions below—and the briefs of petitioner 
and his amici in this Court—address a range of issues 
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA), 29 U.S.C. $1001 et seq., including issues 
critical to deciding this case, others not necessary to the 
decision of the case and still others not even raised by the 
case. We therefore begin by defining what this case is— 
and, equally important, is not—about. 


At the threshold, this case does not raise any question 
of substance as to the scope of the ERISA liability of 
“fiduciaries,” as defined by the Act. Where an ERISA 
fiduciary takes the corporate form (and especially the 
form of a closely held corporation), questions can arise 
as to the liability of an individual who controls the fidu- 
Ciary corporation for the corporation's actions. But the 
district court, in the original proceeding here, ruled that 
only Tru-Tech, Inc., and not petitioner Grant Peacock, 
was liable for violating ERISA. That judgment was af- 
firmed on the first appeal, and that ruling forms the law 
of this case. 


The instant proceeding thus has a single cause and a 
single focus: Grant Peacock’s conduct after Tru-Tech 
had violated ERISA and after the entry of the ERISA 


4 


judgment against Tru-Tech. The district court found that 
from the time of judgment in November, 1988, until the 
dissolution of Tru-Tech in May, 1990, Peacock, as the 
sole director of Tru-Tech, “directed the management of 
Tru-Tech’s affairs to defeat the collection of the judgment 
by siphoning off the assets of the corporation to certain 
favored creditors owned or controlled by Peacock.” Pet. 
App. 4la. The district court further found that “it was 
the specific intent of Peacock to defraud the former em- 
ployees of Tru-Tech who were beneficiaries of the Pen- 
sion Plan and to defeat their legitimate attempt to collect 
a lawful judgment.” /d. 42a. Based on these and other 
findings, the district court ruled that the judgment could 
be enforced against Peacock. /d. 


The questions posed here therefore concern the scope of 
a federal court’s authority to enforce its judgments against 
persons not named in the judgment but who are closely 
connected to the judgment debtor. Specifically, the ques- 
tions posed are (i) whether the district court had juris- 
diction to determine whether its judgment in the original 
litigation was enforceable against Peacock; and (ii) if so, 
whether that court correctly decided that the judgment 
was so enforceable. It is to those questions that we now 
turn. 


B. In answering the threshold jurisdictional question, 
it aids analysis, we believe, to consider three generic situ- 
ations in which a federal court in enforcing its judgment 
may be called on to exercise jurisdiction over claims 
regarding persons who were not named in that judgment 
but who nonetheless are linked to the judgment debtor. 


The first class of cases is the one in which a judgment 
debtor is alleged to have secreted the debtor’s assets by 
transferring possession, but not ownership, of these 
assets to a spouse, a child or a business entity controlled 
by the judgment debtor or his family. In these cases, the 
federal court may be called upon to bring the spouse, 
child, or controlled business entity before it in order 


5 


to adjudicate whether the third party is in possession of 
the debtor’s assets, and, if so, to compel the third party 
to transfer the debtor’s assets to the judgment creditor 
in order to satisfy the court’s judgment. 


Second, there are cases in which a judgment debtor 
is alleged not merely to have transferred possession of as- 
sets of the debtor but to have fraudulently conveyed owner- 
ship to a related third party (again, such as a family 
member or a commonly controlled corporation) in order to 
defeat the judgment of a federal court. In these cases, 
the federal court may be called upon to bring the third 
party before it in order to adjudicate the lawfulness of 
the conveyance and, if fraudulent, to compel the third 
party to transfer the assets to the judgment creditor to 
satisfy the court’s judgment. 


Third, and finally, are cases like the instant one in 
which subsequent to the entry of a federal court judgment, 
the controlling owner or officer of a corporate judgment 
debtor is alleged to have disregarded the debtor’s corpo- 
rate form and to have depleted the debtor’s assets to 
frustrate the execution of the court’s judgment. In these 
cases, the federal court may be called upon to bring 
the third party before it to determine wh ther the third 
party has become the alter ego of the judgment debtor 
such that the court’s judgment can be enforced against 
the third party (and all of that party’s assets, whether 
Or not previously owned by the judgment debtor ).’ 


'It is hornbook law that “when the corporation is the mere 
alter ego, or business conduit of a person, it may be disregarded. 
. The rationale behind the alter ego theory is that if the 
charchelders themselves, or the corporations themselves, disregard 
the legal separation, distinct properties, or proper formalities of 
the different corporate enterprises, then the law will likewise 
disregard them so far as is necessary to protect individual and 
corporate creditors”. 1 W.M. Fletcher, Fletcher Cyclopedia of 
the Law of Private Corporations, §41 (1990). See also First 
National City Bank ». Banco Para El Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 
462 U.S. 611, 629 (1983) (“where a corporate entity is so exten- 
sively controlled by its owner that a relationship of principal and 


6 


In each of these situations, the federal court must, of 
course, first acquire jurisdiction over the person before 
the third party can be brought before the court.’ But 
where that is accomplished through proper service of 
process, the question then arises as to whether the 
federal court has subject matter jurisdiction over the pro- 
ceeding so as to enable the court to adjudicate the secre- 
tion, fraudulent conveyance, or alter ego issues. 


C. The principles that govern the answer to that ques- 
tion were stated by Chief Justice Marshall 170 years ago 
in Wayman v. Southard, 23 U.S. (10 Wheat.) 1, 23 
(1825): 


The jurisdiction of a court is not exhausted by the 
rendition of its judgment but continues until that 
judgment shall be satisfied. Many questions arise 
on the process subsequent to the judgment in which 
jurisdiction is to be exercised. . . . Were it even true 
that jurisdiction could technically be said to termi- 
nate with the judgment, an execution would be a 
writ necessary for the perfection of that which was 
previously done, and would, consequently, be neces- 
sary to the beneficial exercise of jurisdiction. 


The Court reaffirmed the teaching of Wayman in Riggs 
v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166, 187 (1867)— 
on which the court below principally relied—adding that: 


agent is created, .. . one may be held liable for the actions of the 
other”) (citing NLRB v. Deena Artware, Inc., 361 U.S. 398, 402-04 
(1960) ). Accord G.M. Leasing Corp. v. United States, 429 U.S. 338, 
345 (1977); Southport Petroleum Co. v. NLRB, 315 U.S. 100 
(1942). 


2 Grant Peacock denies that the federal district court in South 
Carolina properly acquired jurisdiction over him. But that issue 
was not addressed by the court of appeals and is not fairly encom- 
passed in the questions presented by Peacock’s petition for cer- 
tiorari. In any event, it is well established that a court with 
personal jurisdiction over a corporation may also exert personal 
jurisdiction over its alter egos when the latter seek to avoid a 
federal judgment and to benefit themselves. See 4 Wright, Miller 
& Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1069 (Supp. 1984). 


7 


[T]he rule is universal, that if the power is conferred 
to render the judgment or enter the decree, it also 
includes the power to issue proper process to enforce 
such judgment or decree. .. . Process subsequent to 
judgment is as essential to jurisdiction as process 
antecedent to judgment, else the judicial power would 
be incomplete and entirely inadequate to the pur- 
pose for which it was conferred by the Constitution.’ 


These principles have given rise to what we now refer 
to as the federal courts’ “ancillary jurisdiction.” Under 
this rubric, as this Court siated just last Term, the Court 
has “recognize[d] federal courts’ jurisdiction over some 
matters (otherwise beyond their competence) that are in- 
cidental to other matters properly before them.” Kok- 
konen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of America, U.S. 
, 114 S. Ct. 1673, 1676 (1994).* And, one of the 
primary offices of ancillary jurisdiction, as Kokkonen 
states, is “to enable a court to function successfully, that 
is, to manage its proceedings, vindicate its authority, and 
effectuate its decrees.” Id. at 1676 (emphasis added).° 


A federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction to effectuate its 
decrees extends not only to claims against parties to the 


5 See also, e.g., Bank of the United States v. Halstead, 23 U.S. (10 
Wheat.) 51, 53 (1825) (“The authority to carry into complete effect 
the judgments of the Court, necessarily results, by implication, from 
the power to ordain and establish such Courts. The suit does not 
terminate with the judgment, and all proceedings on the execution 
are proceedings in the suit’). 


* See also 6 Wright, Miller & Cooper, Federal Practice and Pro- 
cedure § 1444 (2d ed. 1990) (“Ancillary jurisdiction is “based on 
the premise that a district court acquires jurisdiction over a case 
or controversy in its entirety and, as incident tc the disposition 
of a dispute that is properly before it, may exercise jurisdiction 
to decide other matters raised by the case over which it would not 
have jurisdiction were they independently presented”’) . 


5In Kokkonen, the prior proceeding had been settled and as a 
result of the settlement the district court had entered a judgment 
of dismissal. This Court observed that: 


{I)f the parties’ obligation to comply with the terms of the 
settlement agreement had been made part of the order of 


8 


judgment but to third parties as well. That is the clear 
teaching of Labette County Commissioners v. United 
States ex rel. Moulton, 112 U.S. 217 (1884). 


In Labette County, a plaintiff who had obtained a 
federal court judgment against a Kansas township sought 
to invoke the court’s ancillary jurisdiction to obtain a 
weit of mandamus requiring the county in which the 
township was located to levy taxes to satisfy the judg- 
ment, as required by Kansas law. The County Commis- 
sioners sought to avoid the enforcement of the federal 
judgment as against them, stating that “because they 
are not parties to the judgment against Oswego Township, 
and are not officers of or representatives of that municipal 
corporation, but are officers of the County of Layette, the 
proceeding against them is the exercise of an original 
jurisdiction, which does not belong to that court.” 112 
U.S. at 219. 


This Court rejected that argument. The Court explained 
that while it “is quite true . . . that there is no original 
jurisdiction in the circuit courts in mandamus,” it is 
nonetheless appropriate for the federal court to issue a 
writ “in aid of a jurisdiction previously acquired” and “as 
the only means of executing their judgments.” 112 U.S. 
at 220. And the Court specifically ruled that even though 
“the jurisdiction in mandamus is ancillary,” that jurisdic- 
tion can “be exercised over persons not parties to the 
judgment sought to be enforced.” /d.* 


dismissal—either by separate provisions (such as a provision 
“retaining jurisdiction” over the settlement agreement) or by 
incorporating the terms of the settlement agreement in the 
order, ....a breach of the agreement would be a violation of 
the order, and ancillary jurisdiction to enforce the agreement 
would therefore exist. [Kokkonen, 114 S. Ct. at 1677. | 


*Cf. Root v. Woolworth, 150 U.S. 401, 411 (1893) (a federal 
court has ancillary jurisdiction to enforce a judgment on behalf 
of a party in privity with a party to the judgmént); Dugas v. 
American Surety, 300 U.S. 414, 428 (1987) (same). 


9 


Indeed, the rule could hardly be otherwise. A judg- 
ment issued by a federal court is not idle words on a 
piece of paper, but rather the manifestation of an official 
governmental act intended to have the force and effect of 
law. A judgment would be far less than that if the fed- 
eral courts lack the authority to address and resolve is- 
sues that arise when the party in whose favor the judg- 
ment runs is unable to obtain the benefits of the judgment 
and claims that the party against whom the judgment runs 
has conspired with third parties to engage in conduct 
designed to evade the operation of the judgment. “If a 
party can make himself a judge of the validity of orders 
which have been issued, and by his own act of disobedi- 
ence set them aside, then are the courts impotent, and 
what the Constitution fittingly calls ‘the judicial power of 
the United States’ would be a mere mockery.” Gompers 
v. Bucks Stove & Range Co., 221 U.S. 418, 450 (1911). 


The instant case thus involves nothing more than a 
run-of-the-mine application of a federal court’s ancillary 
jurisdiction to “effectuate its decrees.” Indeed, the instant 
case follows a fortiori from Labette County. There, an- 
cillary jurisdiction was exercised over a claim against 
third parties—the county commissioners—even though no 
Suggestion was made that the commissioners had done 
anything to frustrate the effectuation of the federal court’s 
judgment. Here, in contrast, that is precisely what oc- 
curred. As noted above, respondents here alleged—and 
the district court found—that Grant Peacock, as Tru- 
Tech’s sole director, acted to defeat the district court's 
judgment by “siphoning off the assets of the corporation” 
and transferring those assets to a corporation wholly- 
owned by Peacock and to a trust Peacock established for 
his wife. 


Thus, ancillary jurisdiction is appropriate here not 
merely “in aid of a jurisdiction previously acquired,” 
Labette County, supra, but, moreover, to “vindicate [the 
federal court’s] authority and effectuate its decrees,” 
Kokkonen, supra. If the power to “vindicate its author- 


10 


ity” is to mean anything, it must encompass cases such as 
this. 

Labette County also disposes of Peacock’s contention 
that due process concerns are implicated when a federal 
court extends its ancillary enforcement jurisdiction to a 
third party not named in the judgment. The county 
commissioners in Labette County were strangers to the 
judgment there, yet this Court had no difficulty in hold- 
ing the claim against the commissioners to be within the 
federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction. In Labette County 
it was enough for the Court that the county commission- 
ers were “the parties on whom the law has cast the duty 
of providing for [the judgment’s] satisfaction.” 112 U.S. 
at 220. 


Here, the claim is that Peacock has such a legal duty 
because he acted in such a way as to make himself the 
alter ego of—and thus, legally inseparable from—the 
party already before the court. If the exercise of ancillary 
jurisdiction in Labette County is consistent with due 
process, it again follows a fortiori that the exercise of 
such jurisdiction is proper here. 

D. Grant Peacock’s case thus reduces to the claim that 
the decision below is contrary to H.C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 
217 U.S. 497 (1910), the precedent the court below 
went to great pains to distinguish. Petitioner grossly 
overreads Beecher. 


1. In Beecher, a Connecticut corporation brought a 
patent infringement suit in federal court against a second 
Connecticut corporation, alleging that the defendant was 
selling a product which infringed plaintiff's patent. The 
plaintiff corporation, after prevailing, sought to collect 
its judgment and found that the judgment exceeded the 
assets of the defendant corporation. The plaintiff corpor- 
ation then filed a second suit in federal court against the 
directors of the defendant corporaticn, alleging that the 
directors voted to continue sales during the first lawsuit, 
and voted to expend funds to defend the lawsuit, knowing 


11 


that insolvency “would be the result of a judgment against 
[their corporaion in the first suit], . . . for the purpose 
of increasing the value of their stock in the company, 
and of receiving the profits and dividends that might be 
received from the sale.” 217 U.S. at 498. 


In an opinion whose analysis is contained in just one 
paragraph, this Court construed the suit against the direc- 
tors as “an attempt to make the[m] answerable for the 
judgment already obtained.” 217 U.S. at 498. The Court 
then stated without further expiication that the case did not 
fall within the federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction, con- 
cluding: “If the directors are under obligations by Con- 
necticut to pay a judgment against their corporation, that 
is not a matter than can be litigated between citizens of 
the same State in the Circuit Court of the United States.” 
Id. 


Whatever the reasoning underlying the Court’s conclu- 
sion in Beecher—and the Court’s opinion provides no 
further insight into that reasoning—at least this much is 
clear: Beecher did not involve, and cannot be stretched 
to govern, the federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction to 
“effectuate its decrees.” Kokkonen, 114 S.Ct. at 1676. 


There was no claim in Beecher that the directors had 
done anything subsequent to the entry of judgment to 
frustrate the enforcement of that judgment. Rather, the 
sole claim in Beecher was that because the directors of 
the corporation, prior to the entry of judgment, had man- 
aged the corporation in a way that did not take into 
account the pendency of the lawsuit (but that was not 
otherwise fraudulent or unlawful) the directors had opened 
themselves up to personal liability. 


The question of whether there is federal court ancillary 
jurisdiction over such pre-judgment conduct is a question 
of substance. But it is not a question going to the ex- 
istence of ancillary jurisdiction to effectuate decrees. 
That head of jurisdiction is concerned with conduct that 
takes place after a federal judgment is entered and that 
amounts to an effort to avoid that judgment. 


12 


Beecher’s ruling that the claim against pre-judgment 
conduct there was not cognizable in federal court thus has 
nothing to say about the exercise of ancillary jurisdiction 
in cases like the instant one, where post-judgment conduct 
undermines the federal court’s authority and its judgment. 


2. In drawing the distinction just noted, we do not 
mean to suggest that there is no federal court ancillary 
jurisdiction to adjudicate claims that, by virtue of pre- 
judgment conduct, a third party shou!d be held liable for 
the acts of a defendant wrongdoer. Indeed, this Court 
upheld the exercise of ancillary jurisdiction in just such 
a situation in Dewey v. West Fairmont Gas Coal Co., 
123 U.S. 329 (1887). Dewey was a diversity case in 
which the counterclaim plaintiff was permitted to implead 
a third party—with respect to whom there was no diver- 
sity of citizenship—where the counterclaim defendant was 
alleged to have become insolvent by fraudulently convey- 
ing assets to the third party. And, Dewey's exercise of 
ancillary jurisdiction was cited with approval in Finley v. 
United States, 490 U.S. 545, 551-52 n.4 (1989). 


It is not at all clear whether, and if so how, Dewey and 
Beecher can be harmonized so as to provide a coherent 
basis for defining the scope of ancillary jurisdiction to 
adjudicate claims that a third party’s pre-judgment con- 
duct makes that party liable for the defendant’s wrongs. 
It may well be that Beecher reaches the right result but 
not on jurisdictional grounds.’ The claims against the 
directors in Beecher rested on the extraordinary theory 
that during a lawsuit against a corporation the directors 
must act as trustees for the plaintiff or open themselves 
up to personal liability. We know of no legal support for 
that substantive theory and no basis why the claim should 
not have been dismissed on the merits. 


7Cf. Argento v. Village of Melrose Park, 838 F.2d 1483, 1488 
(7th Cir. 1988) (questioning continuing vitality of Beecher) ; 
Skevofilaz v. Quigley, 810 F.2d 378, 385 n.56 (3rd Cir. 1987) (en 
banc), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1029 (reinterpreting Beecher as a 
statutory, rather than a jurisdictional, decision). 


13 


It is not necessary to decide that question here, how- 
ever, because, as just explained—and as the court of 
appeals concluded, see Pet. App. 15a—the conflict be- 
tween Beecher and Dewey and the question raised by 
those cases simply is not implicated here. For present 
purposes, it is enough to conclude that whatever the rule 
in the Beecher context, the federal courts ancillary juris- 
diction plainly extends to claims that, subsequent to the 
entry of a judgment, the judgment debtor and a closely- 
related third party have colluded to frustrate the effectua- 
tion of that judgment. . 


E. The only remaining question is whether, on the 
merits, the courts below properly held that the judgment 
against Tru-Tech could be enforced against Grant Pea- 
cock. That question turns on the application of hornbook 
veil piercing principles to the facts of this case. As such, 
the question ordinarily would not merit the attention of 
this Court. Peacock therefore seeks to engage the Court’s 
attention by focusing on a choice of law question ad- 
dressed below. 


The court of appeals did reason that because ERISA 
governs the determination of “who is liable for breaches 
of ERISA fiduciary duties, we believe that ERISA pre- 
empts any state law of veil piercing” and states the rule 
for determining when to pierce the corporate veil to en- 
force an ERISA judgment against officers or directors 
based upon their conduct subsequent to the entry of the 
judgment. Pet. App. 20a-21a (emphasis in original). 


But immediately after deciding to apply a “federal com- 
mon law veil-piercing rule,” Pet. App. 21a—trather than 
to incorporate a state law rule into federal law, see United 
States v. Kimball Foods, Inc., 440 U.S. 715, 726 (1979) 
—the court of appeals went on to conclude that the 
“federal common law veil-piercing rule accords with our 
understanding of the South Carolina rule,” Pet. App. 
22a, n.16, viz. with the state-law rule that would be 
incorporated into federal law if the federal common law 
derived from ERISA were not controlling. 


14 


Since, under the decision below, the choice between 
federal law and state law is immaterial to the outcome 
here, this case provides a particularly inappropriate ve- 
hicle for the Court to resolve the choice of law question 
Peacock raises.” 


That being so, we respectfully submit that the Court 
either should dismiss the writ of certiorari with respect to 
the second question raised here or, alternatively, should 
uphold the determination below on the ground that regard- 
less of whether federal common law or state law incor- 
porated into federal law applies, it is proper to enforce 
the judgment against Peacock. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Court 
of Appeals should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


VIRGINIA A, SEITZ 

1000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
~ Suite 1300 

Washington, D.C. 20036 


DAVID M. SILBERMAN 
LAURENCE GOLD 
(Counsel of Record) 
815 16th Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 637-5390 


®* The Court also need not decide whether, as the court below 
assumed, the veil-piercing rule used to determine when a judgment 
may be enforced against a corporate owner is necessarily the same 
as the rule for determining when the owner can be held liable for 
the corporation’s wrong in the first instance since the only issue 
raised here concerns veil-piercing to enforce a judgment. See 
pp. 3-4, supra. 


