Supreme Court of the United States 
| _Opobat Term, 1998 | 


a GRANT PEACOCK, 


Petitioner, 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


Can a federal court pierce the corporate veil to 
impose liability for an ERISA judgment on a person 
found to be the alter ego of the liable corporation? 


Was the action to enforce the ERISA judgment prop- 
erly before the district court? 


ii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF AUTHIORITING . .cccccecccsccctvwvceseyss iii 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED............. 1 
STATERGIINE 0.0 ccs ctbccccvedevis t0tsbies ouvennues 1 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT.............2.-0e000- 5 
AIKAIIIGE casi vvciccisatechcdvensdesseuenennie 5 


1. ERISA PERMITS THE APPLICATION OF FED- 
ERAL COMMON LAW VEIL-PIERCING STAN- 


DARE. onic vd kc ces sctapis eed venuenisseer 5 

a. Mertens Does Not Preclude The ERISA Veil- 
Pierce THOME 6 oie 6 ceiidnesovehebs tueena bere 7 

b. State Courts Would Not Have Proved An 
Appropriate And Adequate Forum ......... 12 

2. THE DISTRICT COURT PROPERLY EXERCISED 
JURISDICTION OVER THIS ACTION .......... 17 

a. The District Court Had Jurisdiction Under 
The Doctrine Of Ancillary Jurisdiction...... 17 

b. The District Court Had Jurisdiction Under 
REID, 5 na so vucuidenovedhs nkiebe hbase 24 
CONCTAIIIOIN ovds conacdivcecsdeueesseteeaelenee 27 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Ag-Chem Equipment Co., Inc v. Daggeri:art, 315 
S.E.2d 379 (S.C. App. 1984)....... Ge 9 
Alessi v. Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc, 451 U.S. 504 
GE TUG aBelds VO 0 GaN 6c cledWsccedeectededss 10 
Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986)........ 15, 16 
Bank of the United States v. Halstead, 23 U.S. (10 
eS can aL te wed ere kveewence ce 19 
Board of County Commissioners of Labette County v. 
United States, 112 U.S. 217 (1884) ................. 20 
Freeman v. Howe, 65 U.S. (24 How.) 450 (1860)....... 19 


H. C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 217 U.S. 497 (1910)..... 22, 23 


Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Insurance Co., 114 S. Ct. 
Es Ore an cecbaccibowsss’ 14, 18, 19, 23, 24 


Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency & Service, 486 
EM Gaede cdcccecenees prvesepene 12, 13, 14 


Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803) .... 19 
Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 (1993) 
New York State Conf. of Blue Cross & Blue Shield 

Plans v. Travelers Ins. Co., 115 S. Ct. 1671 (1995) .... 14 
Reich v. Rowe, 20 F.3d 25 (ist Cir. 1994)........... 9, 10 
Riggs v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166 (1868) .... 24 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
CIOGUD i... vvinwddeecddcen chvden dy tedmpaubababe denn 7, 25 
The Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Marlboro Cotton 
Mills, 278 F. 816 (D.S.C.), modified, 282 F. 811 
(4th Cir. 1922), cert. denied, 260 U.S. 749 (1923) ..... 4 
United States v. Barnette, 376 U.S. 681 (1964)...5, 20, 24 


Watson v. Williams, 36 Miss. 331 (1858)........ 5, 20, 24 


STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 


SO Ch, ries scexsinael 7, 14 
UNE a Sek 1, 6, 25 
50 Ce ik. ois cccuis cual 1, 6, 13, 25, 26 


Ruces or Crvm PROCEDURE 
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 69(a)............... 23 


OTHER AUTHORITIES 
18 C.J.S. Corporations § 12, p. 280...........00e ee eeee 8 


Fletcher Cyclopedia of Corporations, § 41, p. 603 
(Posh, OE, Tees beck CECE cd he CRE Bh ds 8 


13 CHarRLEs A. WriGut, ARTHUR R. MiLter & Epwarp 
H. Cooper, FeperAt PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE 


SG SE Cea: 8p id sa tea neethecdeceuh ckcecvans 17, 18 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


Section 409(a) of ERISA, 28 U.S.C. § 1109(a), provides 
in pertinent part as follows: 


Any person who is a fiduciary with respect to a 
plan who breaches any of the responsibilities, 
obligations, or duties imposed upon fiduciaries 
by this title . . . shall be subject to such other 
equitable or remedial relief as the court may 
deem appropriate... . 


Section 502(f) of ERISA, 28 U.S.C. § 1132(f), provides 
in pertinent part as follows: 


The district courts of the United States shall 
have jurisdiction . . . to grant the relief provided 
for in subsection (a) of this section in any action. 


+ 


STATEMENT 


This case involves two related actions by the Respon- 
dent, Jack L. Thomas (“Thomas”) on behalf of the pension 
plan of Tru-Tech, Inc. (“Tru-Tech”) and its participants. 
The first action established liability on the part of Tru- 
Tech for breach of fiduciary duty. Subsequent to the facts 
which gave rise to that action, the Petitioner, D. Grant 
Peacock, engaged in a course of conduct described in the 
district court’s findings of fact found in the Petition for 
Certiorari on pages 40a through 42a. The findings of fact 
include the following: 


1. The Petitioner “was the controlling share- 
holder and sole director of Tru-Tech” and 
“directed and controlled essentially all of its 
affairs.” [Pet. App. 40a, { 2]. 


ey en Tree ee 


“During the entire period from November 
1986 through its ultimate dissolution in May 
of 1990, there was a failure to observe corpo- 
rate formalities . . . and the corporate shell 
of Tru-Tech was merely a facade for the 
operation of the dominant will of [Peti- 
tioner].” [Pet. App. 40a, { 3]. 


The Petitioner “directed the management of 
Tru-Tech’s affairs to defeat the collection of 
the Thomas judgment by siphoning off the 
assets of the corporation to certain favored 
creditors owned or controlled by [Peti- 
tioner].” [Pet. App. 41a, { 4]. 


The “assets of Tru-Tech were siphoned off 
by [Petitioner] pursuant to a corporate strat- 
egy developed by him. It was the specific 
intent and purpose of this strategy to siphon off 
these assets to favored creditors owned or 
controlled by [Petitioner] and to defeat col- 
lection of the Thomas judgment.” [Pet. App. 
42a, { 7 (emphasis added)]. 


In his efforts to siphon off the assets of Tru- 
Tech, “it was the specific intent of [Petitioner] 
to defraud the former employees of Tru-Tech 
who were beneficiaries of the pension plan 
and to defeat their legitimate attempt to col- 
lect a lawful judgment.” [Pet. App. 42a, { 9 
(emphasis added)]. 


“Under the facts of this case and in light of 
the clear legislative purpose of ERISA, it 
would be inequitable and unfair to allow 
Tru-Tech’s corporate form to be misused for 
the purpose of depriving its employees of 


3 


their anticipated benefits and avoiding law- 
ful financial obligations to an employee ben- 
efit plan under ERISA.” [Pet. App. 42a, 
{ 11). 


Evidence fully supporting all of these findings of fact 
is found in the district court’s order in the Petition for 
Certiorari on pages 3la through 40a. This evidence 
includes two letters of Petitioner’s Pittsburgh attorney 
dated November 28, 1988, and March 13, 1989, document- 
ing the Petitioner’s “settled . . . strategy” to “refrain” 
from payment of the Thomas judgment and keep his cur- 
rent attorneys involved in that appeal process while 
siphoning off the assets of Tru-Tech so as to render them 
judgment-proof. [Pet. App. 34a-35a]. Therefore, under the 
facts of this case, we have a Pennsylvania resident delib- 
erately and successfully undermining the judgment of the 
United States District Court for the District ot South 
Carolina in a way that both the district court and the 
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit found to be 
utterly reprehensible. [See Pet. App. 15a, 24a, 4la and 
42a]. 


The Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court’s deci- 
sion. In a unanimous opinion written by Judge Donald 
Russell and joined by Judge Widener and Senior Judge 
Chapman, the court held that the federal court had sub- 
ject matter jurisdiction over the case because it arose 
under ERISA. Furthermore, the court ruled that the dis- 
trict court did not err by applying a federal common law 
standard for piercing the corporate veil. 


Before tackling the authorities and policy consider- 
ations involved, we do take issue with Petitioner’s char- 
acterization of the second of these two interrelated 


actions as “a separate lawsuit brought for the purpose of 
collecting a prior federal judgment” [Petition for Cer- 
tiorari, p. 2] and a “second, independent lawsuit.” [Pet. 
Br. 2]. The Fourth Circuit rejected this same contention 
“that this suit is one merely to collect an outstanding 
judgment” [Pet. App. 11a] and that “once the plaintiff 
class won its judgment against Tru-Tech, it became a 
judgment creditor like any other.” [Pet. App. 12a]. In 
rejecting this argument, the Fourth Circuit stated: 


We established above that an attempt to pierce 
the corporate veil is a matter of substantive law 
that determines whether a corporate shareholder 
can be held liable for a preexisting judgment entered 
against the corporation. An attempt to pierce the 
corporate veil, therefore, seeks to identify those 
parties against whom the judgment can be satis- 
fied. . . . [I])dentification of those parties who are 
liable is necessarily antecedent to the procedural 
enforcement of the judgment against those par- 
ties. ... 


[Pet. App. 13a (emphasis added)]. This action, therefore, 
is not one to collect a judgment, but one to establish 
liability on the part of the Petitioner. If successful, Thomas 
may then be forced into the federal or state courts of 
Pennsylvania to collect his judgment against Petitioner, 
just as he was in his attempt to collect his judgment 
against Tru-Tech. 


Fe ee eT ee re ee eT me 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The decision of the Fourth Circuit is consistent with 
this Court’s prior holdings and should be affirmed for the 
following reasons: 


First, as held by the Fourth Circuit, liability was 
properly imposed upon the Petitioner under federal com- 
mon law veil-piercing standards as an equitable remedy 
available under ERISA. 


Second, as held by the Fourth Circuit under the doc- 
trine of ancillary jurisdiction, federal courts have the 
inherent power and duty to protect their lawful judg- 
ments from “the assaults of the lawless.” See United States 
v. Barnette, 376 U.S. 681, 699-700 (1964), quoting Watson v. 
Williams, 36 Miss. 331, 341-342 (1858). In addition to ancil- 
lary jurisdiction, the district court had jurisdiction under 
the broad, remedial scope and purposes of ERISA. 


¢ 


ARGUMENT 


1. ERISA PERMITS THE APPLICATION OF FED- 
ERAL COMMON LAW VEIL-PIERCING STAN- 
DARDS. 


The policies of allowing a federal court to enforce its 
own judgments and of protecting the interests of partici- 
pants in ERISA plans are the mainstays of the decisions of 
the district court and the Fourth Circuit. Allowing 
Thomas to pierce the corporate veil of Tru-Tech fits nicely 
into the ERISA remedial scheme. Such a remedy comfort- 
ably falls under the category of “other appropriate equi- 
table relief” under ERISA § 502(a)(3). 29 U.S.C. 


§ 1132(a)(3). In affirming the decision of the district court, 
the Fourth Circuit adopted a common equitable remedy 
which lies well within the bounds of ERISA’s intended 
reach. 


ERISA § 502(a) provides that 
A civil action may be brought - 


* + * 


(2) ... by a participant, beneficiary or 
fiduciary for appropriate relief under Section 
1109 of this title; [or] 


(3) by a participant, beneficiary or 
fiduciary . . . to obtain other appropriate equita- 
ble relief... . 


29 U.S.C. § 1132(a)(2) and (3). The liability that was 
imposed upon the Petitioner by the Fourth Circuit was 
initially the liability of Tru-Tech for its breach of its duties 
as a plan fiduciary pursuant to ERISA § 409, 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1109. The district court and the Fourth Circuit allowed 
Thomas to pierce the corporate veil of Tru-Tech as a 
means of providing “appropriate relief” or “appropriate 
equitable relief” under the terms of ERISA. 


The relief provided to Thomas by the District Court 
and the Fourth Circuit does not broaden ERISA as the 
Petitioner asserts. The corporate veil of Tru-Tech was 
pierced to allow for the appropriate and adequate 
enforcement of the provisions of ERISA. The first section 
of ERISA states as follows: 


It is hereby declared to be the policy of this 
chapter to protect interstate commerce and the 
interests of participants in employee benefit 
plans and their beneficiaries, by requiring the 
disclosure and reporting to participants and 


7 


beneficiaries of financial and other information 
with respect thereto, by establishing standards of 
conduct, responsibility, and obligation for fiduci- 


aries of employment benefit plans, and by providing 
for appropriate remedies, sanctions, and ready access to 
the Federal courts. 


29 U.S.C. § 1001(b) (emphasis added). 


This Court has long acknowledged that “the doctrine of 
corporate entity, recognized generally and for most pur- 
poses, will not be regarded when to do so would work fraud 
or injustice.” Taylor v. Standard Gas & Electric Co., 306 US. 
307, 322 (1939). ERISA was enacted in large part to protect 
employees from being deprived of their benefits, See 29 
U.S.C. § 1001 (1982). ERISA clearly provides for piercing the 
corporate veil in this case where the Petitioner deliberately 
siphoned off Tru-Tech’s assets in an effort to prevent the 
employees from collecting the money due them as a result of 
the first action. Had the Petitioner not been held accountable 
for the liability of Tru-Tech, which had been rendered worth- 
less by his efforts, the enforcement provisions of ERISA 
would have been stripped of any significance. To permit 
such actions to escape scrutiny from the federal courts as a 
matter of law would transmute ERISA to a mere snare and 
illusion effectively eliminating the employee protection 
promised by Congress. 


a. Mertens Does Not Preclude The ERISA Veil-Pierc- 
ing Relief. 


The Petitioner mistakenly believes that Mertens v. 
Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 (1993), would bar the 
veil-piercing relief awarded by the district court and the 
Fourth Circuit. Mertens is clearly distinguishable from 
this action. In Mertens, both the relief sought and the 


defendant’s actions giving rise to the plaintiff’s claim 
were entirely different from this case. 


The plaintiff in Mertens attempted to recover com- 
pensatory damages against a plan actuary for the actu- 
ary’s role in the plan fiduciary’s breach of duty. This 
Court refused to allow a separate cause of action to be 
brought under ERISA against a non-fiduciary for mone- 
tary damages. The relief awarded by the district court 
and the Fourth Circuit in the case at bar, however, did not 
arise from a separate cause of action for monetary dam- 
ages but from an equitable remedy fashioned to further 
the policies of ERISA. “[A]n attempt to pierce the corpo- 
rate veil is not itself a cause of action but rather is a 
means of imposing liability on an underlying cause of 
action, such as a tort or breach of contract.” Fletcher 
Cyclopedia of Corporation § 41, p. 603 (Perm. ed. 1990). 
Unlike Mertens, a new cause of action is not being fash- 
ioned to permit recovery from a party not intended to be 
subject to such liability under ERISA. Thomas is merely 
seeking to keep an ERISA judgment from being rendered 
worthless by the wrongful acts of the Petitioner. 


The holding in Mertens would allow “equitable 
relief” in an action against a nonfiduciary. “The alter ego 
doctrine is based in equity and is remedial in nature.” 18 
C.J.S. Corporations § 12, p. 280. Thomas concedes that the 
relief ordered by the district court and the Fourth Circuit 
would force the Petitioner to pay money to Thomas. 
However, the Petitioner’s liability for such payment 
arises from a disregard for Tru-Tech’s corporate form and 
from his disregard for the authority of the federal courts. 
The relief awarded by the district court and the Fourth 
Circuit does not subject a nonfiduciary to money dam- 
ages. Such relief comes in the form of removing the 


corporate veil to expose the Petitioner as the responsible 
party for Tru-Tech’s judgment liability. The relief granted 
was removal of the veil, not the money damages. 


The procedure followed by Thomas in seeking to 
enforce the ERISA judgment is analogous to another pro- 
cedure available to enforce judgments commonly referred 
to as supplementary proceedings. “Supplementary pro- 
ceedings are equitable in nature.” Ag-Chem Equipment Co., 
Inc. v. Daggerhart, 315 S.E.2d 379, 381 (S.C. App. 1984), 
citing The Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Marlboro Cotton 
Mills, 278 F. 816 (D.S.C.), modified, 282 F. 811 (4th Cir. 
1922), cert. denied, 260 U.S. 749 (1923). Thus, there is no 
doubt this action involves “relief that [is] typically avail- 
able in equity.” Mertens, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 2069. 


Another typical form of equitable relief mentioned by 
the Court in Mertens is restitution. While money damages 
may be exchanged as a result of a judgment for restitu- 
tion, the remedy is nonetheless equitable. Here, the relief 
granted Thomas merely removes the corporate impedi- 
ment, thereby necessitating a payment of money. 


The Petitioner cites Reich v. Rowe, 20 F.3d 25 (ist Cir. 
1995) as authority for his contention that “[e]ven if this 
action could be viewed as seeking equitable relief, it 
could not be maintained under ERISA .. . [because] there 
is no allegation of any violation of ERISA or an ERISA 
plan.” [Pet. Br. 17, n. 8]. Distinguishable on its facts, Reich 
involves a claim against a financial consultant who pro- 
vided services to an ERISA plan. Reich actually supports 
Thomas’ claim. In Reich, the First Circuit explains: 


10 


We are more willing to create common law 
remedies that are directed toward undoing spec- 
ific transactions or recovering assets of an 
ERISA plan. In those situations, the parties are 
more likely to be in control of plan assets and 
thus functionally more likely fiduciaries. 


Reich, supra, 20 F.3d at 33. The actions of the Petitioner in 
siphoning off assets of Tru-Tech should subject him to 
liability under the form of equitable relief fashioned by 
the Fourth Circuit. 


In Mertens, this Court was concerned about disturb- 
ing the balance “between the primary [ERISA] goal of 
benefitting employees and the subsidiary goal of contain- 
ing pension costs” provided by the ERISA civil enforce- 
ment provisions. Mertens, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 2072, quoting 
Alessi v. Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc., 101 S. Ct. 1895, 1902 
(1981). In this action, there is no danger that pension 
costs will rise if the Petitioner is held liable for the Tru- 
Tech judgment. The relief awarded by the district court 
and the Fourth Circuit will not “impose high insurance 
costs upon persons who regularly deal with and offer 
advice to ERISA plans, and hence upon ERISA plans 
themselves.” Mertens, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 2072. It is 
extremely doubtful that an insurance product is available 
to cover a person for intentionally siphoning off assets 
from his alter ego corporation. Imposing liability on the 
Petitioner may actually lower pension costs by allowing 
recovery against persons “functionally more like fiduci- 
aries.” Reich, supra, 20 F.3d at 33. 


A final distinction between Mertens and the case cur- 
rently before the Court involves the actions of the respec- 
tive defendants. In Mertens, the plaintiffs, former 


11 


employees entitled to benefits under their employer’s 
pension plan, attempted to hold the actuary for their 
pension plan liable after the actuary failed to provide 
accurate actuarial assumptions to the employer. As a 
result, the employer did not adequately fund the plan, 
and the employees were denied their full pensions. The 
actuary’s shortcomings, however, pale in comparison 
with the dishonest, deceitful behavior of the Petitioner 
who masterminded and executed a scheme to “defeat the 
collection of the Thomas judgment by syphoning off the 
assets of the corporation. ...” [Pet. App. 41a, { 4]. Not 
only was it the specific intent of the Petitioner to 
“defraud the former employees of Tru-Tech,” [Pet. App. 
42a, { 9], it was also his intent to scoff at the rulings of 
the federal courts. Petitioner’s egregious and reprehens- 
ible behavior dwarfs the failures of the actuary in Mer- 
tens. 


The Petitioner argues that relief in the form of pierc- 
ing the corporate veil should not be available because 
ERISA already contains a standard for reaching beyond 
the corporation by way of ERISA’s definition of “fiduci- 
ary.” The actions of the Petitioner which exposed him to 
liability for the Tru-Tech judgment did not occur with 
respect to the administration or operation of the plan. The 
Petitioner’s culpable behavior occurred after the breach 
of fiduciary duty from which the Tru-Tech liability arose. 
Therefore, the relief the Petitioner suggests as available to 
Thomas would not be available in this case. The only 
appropriate and adequate relief available to Thomas was 
that awarded by the district court and the Fourth Circuit. 


12 


b. State Courts Would Not Have Proved An Appro- 
priate And Adequate Forum. 


The Petitioner cites Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency 
& Service, 486 U.S. 825 (1988), for authority that ERISA 
does not provide a means of enforcing ERISA judgments. 
This is not a fair representation of Mackey. 


Mackey involved an action instituted in a state court 
of Georgia by a collection agency seeking to garnish the 
benefits of the members of an ERISA welfare benefits 
plan. The case also turned on the applicability of a Geor- 
gia state law prohibiting the garnishment of plan benefits 
covered by ERISA. In Mackey, this Court held that ERISA 
preempted the state garnishment procedure thereby set- 
ting aside the anti-garnishment provision, and, because 
ERISA did not provide a procedure for collecting judg- 
ments against plan participants, the judgment creditor 
was allowed to proceed against the plan assets. 


The Petitioner enthusiastically embraces and relies 
upon this Court’s statement in Mackey that “ERISA does 
not provide an enforcement mechanism for collecting 
judgments won... . ” Id. at 833. The Fourth Circuit's 
decision, however, does not conflict with Mackey. The 
Petitioner’s reliance upon this statement is misplaced. 
Mackey does not preclude the application of a federal 
common law veil-piercing rule in actions under ERISA. 
An attempt to pierce the corporate veil is not a means of 
collecting a judgment; it is a means of imposing liability. 
Applying the general purposes and principles of ERISA, 
Thomas seeks to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil in order 
to hold the Petitioner liable for the actions of his sham 


13 


corporation. This action clearly cannot be a mere collec- 
tion action because Thomas may yet have to bring a 
collection action under state law to collect the judgment 
against the Petitioner if this Court affirms the Fourth 
Circuit’s decision. 


Mackey simply did not involve a judgment creditor 
seeking enforcement of an ERISA judgment. There is a 
definite distinction between a holding that ERISA does 
not provide a mechanism to enforce judgments against an 
ERISA plan and the assertion that ERISA does not pro- 
vide an enforcement mechanism to enforce ERISA judg- 
ments. 


Petitioner argues that ERISA does not preempt state 
laws regarding piercing the corporate veil and then leaps 
to the conclusion that, since ERISA does not preempt 
state law regarding piercing the corporate veil, suits such 
as this one are not covered by ERISA and must be 
brought under state law. As discussed above, Thomas’ 
action to pierce the corporate veil of Tru-Tech is not a 
separate cause of action but simply a supplemental pro- 
ceeding to impose liability for an ERISA judgment on a 
sham corporation’s alter ego. Thomas is pursuing “other 
appropriate equitable relief.” 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a)(3). Any 
state statute or state court decision that attempts to regu- 
late the availability of the veil-piercing remedy for ERISA 
judgments would be preempted. In Mackey, the Court 
stated as follows: 


Consequently, adhering to our precedents in 
this area, we hold that Ga. Code Ann. 
§ 18-4-22.1, which singles out ERISA employee 
welfare benefit plans for different treatment 
under state garnishment procedures, is pre- 
empted under § 514(a). The state statute's 


14 


express reference to ERISA plans suffices to 
bring it within the federal law’s pre-emptive 
reach. 


Mackey, supra, 486 U.S. at 830. 


The Petitioner argues that “[a]llowing the states to 
maintain their traditional standards for veil-piercing 
would do nothing to undermine a ‘uniform body of bene- 
fits laws.’ ” [Pet. Br. 24]. A federal court must be able to 
“ .. . vindicate its authority, and effectuate its decrees 
....” Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of America, 114 S. 
Ct. 1673, 1675-1676 (1994). As the Fourth Circuit 
explained: 


[A]n attempt to pierce the corporate veil is nec- 
essarily subsidiary to some primary cause of 
action, it is not simply an attempt to collect a 
preexisting liability against an entity already 
found liable under the relevant substantive law; 
it is, rather, an attempt to impose such a preex- 
isting liability upon an entity not otherwise liable. 


[Pet. App. 12a]. 


The policy of protecting “the interests of participants 
in employee benefit plans” must be uniformly upheld. 29 
U.S.C. § 1001(b). Such uniformity cannot be accomplished 
by forcing participants to resort to state law in instances 
such as the present action where the Petitioner has made 
a mockery of an ERISA judgment. If this Court holds that 
an action to pierce the corporate veil may only be brought 
under state law and not under a federal common iaw 
fashioned under ERISA, it would undermine the “uni- 
form body of benefits law.” New York State Conf. of Blue 
Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Ins. Co., 115 S. Ct. 
1671, 1677 (1995). If the standards for enforcing an ERISA 


15 


judgment become a matter of state law, uniformity will 
effectively be written out of ERISA. By applying the 
federal veil-piercing standard enunciated by the First 
Circuit in Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986), the 
Fourth Circuit has not extended the causes of action 
available under ERISA, but has merely reinforced the 
remedies currently available under ERISA. 


The ability of ordinary creditors of a corporation to 
look beyond the corporate veil for recovery is limited 
since such parties knowingly deal with an entity with 
limited liability. An ERISA plan participant, however, has 
a higher degree of expectation for recovery because the 
plan represents that a contribution will be made and 
administered pursuant to a fiduciary obligation. Such an 
expectation must be given preference over ordinary cred- 
itors. Such a preference can only be provided by a uni- 
form enforcement procedure for ERISA judgments that 
would include a remedy allowing piercing of the corpo- 
rate veil. 


The Petitioner argues that piercing the corporate veil 
is a matter that should be left for adjudication by the 
states. Had this been a traditional state law contract or 
tort cause of action resulting in a judgment against the 
corporation by a federal court, the Petitioner’s argument 
would be more persuasive. Because the veil-piercing rem- 
edy is sought as a result of an ERISA judgment, however, 
the mandates of ERISA demand an ERISA action to pierce 
the corporate veil. 


In explaining the standard for piercing the corporate 
veil, which was later adopted by the Fourth Circuit in this 
case, the First Circuit in Alman v. Danin concluded: 


16 


ERISA, the statute sought to be enforced 
here, cannot be said to attach great weight to 
corporate form. Indeed, deferring too readily to 
the corporate identity may run contrary to the 
explicit purposes of the Act. Congress enacted 
ERISA in part because many employees were 
being deprived of anticipated benefits, which 
not only reduced the financial resources of indi- 
vidual employees and their dependents but also 
undermined the stability of industrial relations 
generally . . . allowing the shareholders of a 
marginal corporation to invoke the corporate 
shield in circumstances where it is inequitable 
for them to do so and thereby avoid financial 
obligations to employee benefit plans, would 
seem to be precisely the type of conduct that 
Congress wanted to prevent. 


801 F.2d at 3-4. If federal common law relating to piercing 
the corporate veil is not applied in situations such as the 
one before this Court, not only will the uniformity envi- 
sioned by ERISA be destroyed but plan participants will 
be denied the protection ERISA was designed to provide. 


The Petitioner expresses concern that applying a fed- 
eral common law doctrine of veil-piercing “would free 
federal courts to impose ERISA liability on corporate 
officers and shareholders whenever such a result is 
deemed consistent with the policy ensuring full collection 
of all ERISA judgments.” [Pet. Br. 28]. It is simply unbe- 
lievable that this Court’s decision affirming the Fourth 
Circuit would send shockwaves through the retirement 
plan industry. Liability has been imposed upon the Peti- 
tioner as a result of his willful acts designed to frustrate 
Thomas’ collection of an ERISA judgment. Petitioner’s 
actions could easily become the basis for a “How To” 


17 


manual on defeating ERISA judgments. Uniform stan- 
dards for piercing the corporate veil which are aimed at 
preventing such actions would only affect parties with a 
similar blatant disregard for the federal courts and the 
policies and goals behind ERISA. In short, state law can- 
not adequately provide the necessary uniform remedy. 


2. THE DISTRICT COURT PROPERLY EXERCISED 
JURISDICTION OVER THIS ACTION. 


a. The District Court Had Jurisdiction Under the 
Doctrine of Ancillary Jurisdiction. 


The doctrine of ancillary jurisdiction is described in 
13 CHartes A. Wricut, ArtHuR R. Miter & Epwarp H. 
Cooper, FeperAt Practice AND Procepure § 3523 (1984) as 
follows: 


The most important instance in which the fed- 
eral courts hear cases over which no subject 
matter jurisdiction is expressly conferred on 
them by the Constitution, or by federal statute, 
is when the ill-defined concept of “ancillary 
jurisdiction” is invoked. According to this con- 
cept, a district court acquires jurisdiction of a 
case or controversy in its entirety, and, as an 
incident to the disposition of the matter prop- 
erly before it, it may decide other matters raised 
by the case of which it could not take cogni- 
zance were they independently presented. Thus, 
if the federal court has jurisdiction of the princi- 
pal action, it also may hear any ancillary pro- 
ceeding therein, regardless of the citizenship of 
the parties, the amount in controversy, or any 
other factor that normally would determine sub- 
ject matter jurisdiction. .. . 


18 


As to the basic underlying purpose of ancillary juris- 
diction, the treatise states further: 


Ancillary jurisdiction exists because without it 
the federal court neither could dispose of the 
principal case effectively nor do complete justice 
in the dispute that is before the tribunal. Viewed 
from this perspective then, the concept is a com- 
mon-sense solution to the problems of piece- 
meal litigation that otherwise would arise by 
virtue of the limited jurisdiction of the federal 
courts prescribed in Article III and the complex- 
ity of many modern lawsuits. 


Id. (emphasis added). 


As to the scope of ancillary jurisdiction: 


The concept also is broad enough to include 
those acts that the federal court must take in 
order properly to carry out its judgment on a 
matter as to which it has jurisdiction. This gen- 
eral principle is one of broad application, although 
of rather uncertain limits. For example, it has 
been held that mandamus or scire facias will lie to 
effectuate relief granted in the main action... . 


19 


varying respects and degrees, factually interde- 
pendent . . . ; and (2) to enable a court to function 
successfully, that is, to manage its proceedings, 
vindicate its authority, and effectuate its decrees. . . . 


114 S. Ct. at 1675-1676 (emphasis added). 


The concern of the federal courts for the vindication 
of their authority and the effectuation of their decrees is 
not a novel or recent phenomenon. Jt appears to have 
been foremost in the mind of Chief Justice Marshall in 
Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803), and has 
been a concern of this Court ever since. 


As this Court noted in Bank of the United States v. 
Halstead, 23 U.S. (10 Wheat.) 51 (1825): 


The judicial power would be incomplete, and 
entirely inadequate to the purposes for which it 
was intended, if after judgment, it could be 
arrested in its progress, and denied the right of 
enforcing satisfaction in any manner which shall 
be prescribed by the laws of the United States. 
The authority to carry into complete effect the 
judgments of the Courts, necessarily results, by 
implication, from the power to ordain and estab- 
lish such Courts. 


Id. (emphasis added). Id. at 53. This Court’s decision in Freeman v. Howe, 65 U.S. 
(24 How.) 450 (1860), further emphasizes the jurisdiction 
In Kokkonen, supra, this Court described the “two of the federal courts over supplemental matters: 
separate, though sometimes related, purposes” of ancil- The principle is, that a bill filed on the equity 
lary jurisdiction as follows: side of the court to retrain or regulate judgments 
or suits at law in the same court, and thereby 
.. . Generally speaking, we have asserted ancil- prevent injustice, or an inequitable advantage 
lary jurisdiction . . . for two separate, though under mesne or final process, is not an original 
sometimes related, purposes: (1) to permit dis- suit, but ancillary and dependent, supplemen- 


position by a single court of claims that are, in tary merely to the original suit, out of which it 


20 


had arisen, and is maintained without reference 
to a citizenship or residents of the parties. 


Id. at 460. 


In Barnette, supra, 376 U.S. at 699-700, when the 
authority of the federal judiciary was challenged and 
undermined by the Governor and Lieutenant Governor of 
Mississippi, this Court stressed the importance of enforc- 
ing the authority of the federal courts. The opinion by 
Justice Clark quoted with approval “the statement of the 
High Court of Errors and Appeals of Mississippi 105 
years ago in Watson v. Williams, [36 Miss. 331 (1858)].” 
The Court referred to Watson as “a celebrated case that 
has been cited with approval in many state jurisdictions 
as well as cases in this Court,” Barnette, supra, 376 U.S. at 
695, and described the following quotation “as true and 
perhaps even more urgent today”: 


A court without the power effectually to protect 
itself against the assaults of the lawless, or to 
enforce its orders, judgments, or decrees against 
the recusant parties before it, would be a dis- 
grace to the legislation, and a stigma upon the 
age which invented it. . . . The power to compel 
the lawless offender, against decency and pro- 
priety, to respect the laws of its country, and to 
submit to their authority (a duty to which the 
good citizen yields hearty obedience, without 
compulsion) must exist, or courts and laws 
operate at last as a restraint upon the upright, 
who need no restraint, and a license to the 
offenders, whom they are made to subdue. 


Certainly, a less persuasive case for the exercise of 
ancillary jurisdiction is found in Board of County Commis- 
sioners of Labette County v. United States, 112 U.S. 217 


21 


(1884). In that case, a judgment had been obtained in the 
Circuit Court of the United States for the District of 
Kansas against the Township of Oswego. The judgment 
against Oswego, like the Thomas judgment, remained 
unpaid. A Writ of Mandamus was then issued by that 
court directed to the Board of County Commissioners of 
Labette County requiring them to levy and collect suffi- 
cient taxes to satisfy the judgment. They demurred to the 
writ on the grounds that “the court has no jurisdiction of 
the persons of the respondents or the subject of the 
action.” In rejecting that contention, in an opinion by 
Justice Matthews, this Court stated: 


The objection that the circuit court had no juris- 
diction to issue its mandamus to the plaintiffs in 
error is based upon the supposition that, 
because they are not parties to the judgment 
against Oswego township, and are not officers 
of or representatives of that municipal corpora- 
tion, but are officers of the county of Labette, 
the proceeding against them is the exercise of an 
original jurisdiction, which does not belong to 
that court. It is quite true, as it is familiar, that 
there is no original jurisdiction in the circuit 
courts in mandamus, and that the writ issues out 
of them only in aid of a jurisdiction previously 
acquired, as is justified in such cases as the present 
as the only means of executing their judgments. But 
it does not follow because the jurisdiction in 
mandamus is ancillary merely that it cannot be 
exercised over persons not parties to the judgment 
sought to be enforced... . 


The question is whether the respondents, to 
whom the writ is addressed, have the legal duty 
to perform, which is required of them, and 


22 


whether the relator has a legal right to its per- 
formance from them, by virtue of the judgment 
he has already obtained. If so, then they are, as 
here, the legal representatives of the defendant in 
that judgment, as being the parties on whom the law 
has cast the duty of providing for its satisfaction. 
They are not strangers to it, as being new par- 
ties, on whom an original obligation is sought to 
be charged, but are bound by it, as its stands, 
without the right to question it, and under a legal 
duty to take those steps which the law has prescribed 
as the only mode of providing means for its payment. 


Id. at 220-221 (emphasis added). 


The respondents in that case became “the parties on 
whom the law has cast the duty of providing for [the] 
satisfaction” of that outstanding judgment by virtue of 
their office. Here, the Petitioner has made himself respon- 
sible for this judgment by his unlawful action in siphon- 
ing off the assets of Tru-Tech “to defeat collection of the 
Thomas judgment” and to undermine the lawful authority 
of the district court. 


Petitioner erroneously asserts that H.C. Cook Co. v. 
Beecher, 217 U.S. 497 (1910) requires reversal of the Fourth 
Circuit’s decision. Petitioner makes the astounding asser- 
tion that “the only link between this case and Tru-Tech is 
that Respondent’s purpose is to obtain payment on the 
Tru-Tech judgment from someone. ... ” [Pet. Br. 13]. 
Thomas is not merely seeking payment from someone; he 
is seeking to impose liability on the sham corporation’s 
alter ego — the Petitioner. The Fourth Circuit’s decision is 
not in conflict with Beecher. Beecher addresses litigation 
which is truly independent from pricr actions. Thomas’ 
effort to pierce the corporate veil is not independent of 


23 


his prior litigation. As the Fourth Circuit indicated, “an 
attempt to pierce the corporate veil is necessarily subsid- 
iary to some primary cause of action.” [Pet. App. 12a]. 


It is also important to note that Beecher was decided 
before Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 69(a) was adopted. 
Rule 69(a) provides in pertinent part: 


Process to enforce a judgment for the payment 
of money shall be a writ of execution, unless the 
court directs otherwise. The procedure on exe- 
cution, in proceedings supplementary to and in 
aid of a judgment, and in proceedings on and in 
aid of execution shall be in accordance with the 
practice and procedure of the state in which the 
district court is held, existing at the time the 
remedy is sought... . 


Thus, Rule 69(a) provides a procedural mechanism for a 
court’s exercise of its inherent jurisdiction to enforce its 
judgments in supplemental proceedings. 


The Fourth Circuit’s decision is also in keeping with 
Kokkonen, supra. Although this Court in Kokkonen, as 
pointed out by the Petitioner [Pet. Br. 13], declined to 
extend the concept of ancillary jurisdiction to “a claim for 
breach of contract” arising out of a settlement agreement, 
there was no suggestion there, as here, that such action 
was necessary “to enable a court to function successfully” 
or to “vindicate its authority, and effectuate its decrees.” 
Kokkonen, supra, 114 S. Ct. at 1675-1676. 


The federal courts have inherent jurisdiction to 
enforce their judgments in supplemental proceedings. 
[I]f the power is conferred to render the judg- 


ment or enter the decree, it also includes the 
power to issue proper process to enforce such 


24 


judgment or decree. . . . [T]he jurisdiction of a 
court is not exhausted by the rendition of the 
judgment, but continues until that judgment 
shall be satisfied. 


Riggs v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166, 187 (1867). 


Just as clearly as the Governor and Lieutenant Gover- 
nor of Mississippi sought to undermine the lawful orders 
of the district court and Court of Appeals in United States 
v. Barnette, supra, Petitioner has thus far successfully 
undermined the lawful orders of the district court and 
the Court of Appeals. This has been accomplished by 
what the district court characterized as “the specific 
intent and purpose of [Petitioner’s] strategy to siphon off 
[the] assets [of the judgment debtor] to favored creditors 
owned or controlled by [Petitioner] and to defeat collec- 
tion of the Thomas judgment.” [See Pet. App. 42a, 7]. 


If the district court cannot “vindicate its authority 
and effectuate its decrees,” Kokkonen, supra, through the 
doctrine of ancillary jurisdiction, then it will become, in 
the colorful language of Watson v. Williams, supra, “a 
disgrace to the legislation” that created it, “and a stigma 
upon the age which invented it.” 


b. The District Court Had Jurisdiction Under 
ERISA. 


As discussed at length in Part 1, this is an action 
brought under the enforcement provisions of ERISA to 
enforce an ERISA judgment, not a separate cause of 
action. Although the doctrine of ancillary jurisdiction 
supports the district court’s jurisdiction over this matter, 
jurisdiction is also provided by the provisions of ERISA. 


25 


The complaint in the first action invoked the court's 
equitable jurisdiction under ERISA by seeking relief both 
under ERISA § 409(a) and § 502(a). Under ERISA § 409(a), 
the court may grant “such other equitable or remedial 
relief as the court may deem appropriate.” 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1109(a). Under ERISA § 502(a), a plan participant may 
“obtain other appropriate equitable relief.” 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1132(a)(3). 


The complaint in the present action incorporated the 
original complaint by reference in $5 [J.A. 44-45], speci- 
fically invoked the court’s power to pierce the corporate 
veil “under ERISA and applicable federal law” [J.A. 
49-50] and sought “such other relief as may be appropri- 
ate.” As argued above, “applicable federal law” would 
include the doctrine of ancillary jurisdiction. Further- 
more, under the broad remedial purposes of ERISA, 
appropriate equitable relief must be available to protect 
the interests of plan participants or ERISA itself becomes 
a toothless dragon offering no protection to vulnerable 
employees. 


Furthermore, this action is not an independent action 
for monetary damages. The purpose of piercing the cor- 
porate veil is to prevent fraud or injustice. See Taylor v. 
Standard Gas Co., supra, 306 U.S. at 322. One would be 
hard pressed to imagine a more shocking example of 
injustice to plan beneficiaries than the Petitioner’s efforts 
to subvert the authority of the federal courts by defeating 
the collection of a lawful judgment. Thomas does not 
bring an independent action for monetary damages; he 
brings an equitable action to satisfy a lawful judgment 
and thereby defend the authority of the court which 
issued it. 


26 


Public policy and the ends of justice support the 
extension of jurisdiction under ERISA to pierce the corpo- 
rate veil and to impose liability upon those who would 
undermine the authority of our federal courts. Section 
502(f) of ERISA provides that “district courts of the 
United States shall have jurisdiction . . . to grant the relief 
provided for in subsection (a) of this section in any 
action.” 29 U.S.C. § 1132(f). As previously discussed, this 
action involves an attempt by a plan participant to 
enforce plan provisions by seeking to impose liability for 
an ERISA judgment on the Petitioner. This is a continua- 
tion of an ERISA action and, as such, is covered by the 
original jurisdiction afforded the action by ERISA. 


Finally, under both the doctrine of ancillary jurisdic- 
tion and under ERISA, the provisions for nationwide 
service of process under ERISA are available to Thomas 
to allow him to enforce the ERISA judgment effectively 
and thus prevent Petitioner from rendering the ERISA 
civil enforcement provisions impotent. Pursuant to 29 
U.S.C. § 1132(e)(2), “process may be served in any other 
district where a defendant resides or may be found.” 
Thus, ERISA provides for nation-wide service of process. 


¢ 


27 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, the judgment of the 
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


J. KENDALL Few 

James R. GILREATH 

Joun C. Few 

Marcaret A. CHAMBERLAIN 

STEPHEN G. Ports 

Attorneys for Respondent 
September 6, 1995 


