js 
941453 MAR 11995 


NO.—orrIre OF THE CLERK 
j ——____E_TOSYNrL__£€__€__ _____—_——_ ___ 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


JACK L. THOMAS, 
Respondent, 


V. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Petitioner. 


Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


DAVID L. FREEMAN 
(Counsel of Record) 
J. THEODORE GENTRY 


WYCHE, BURGESS, FREEMAN 
& PARHAM, P.A. 

Post Office Box 728 

44 East Camperdown Way 

Greenville, SC 29602 

(803) 242-8200 

Attorneys for Petitioner 
D. Grant Peacock 


WILSON - Eres Printinc Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


iT \ L.. 2aJ 


————— —_ 


QUESTIONS‘ PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


1. Whether, consistent with Article III of the Constitu- 


tion and the decision of this Court in H.C. Cook Co. 
v. Beecher, 217 U.S. 497, 30 S. Ct. 601 (1910), a 
federal court may automatically assert “ancillary” ju- 
risdiction over a separate lawsuit, involving separate 
facts, filed for the purpose of collecting a prior fed- 
eral judgment from a party other than the judgment 
debtor. 


. Whether, under this Court’s holdings in Mertens v. 


Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 (1993), and 
Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency & Service, 486 
U.S. 825, 108 S. Ct. 2182 (1988), a court may derive 
from ERISA, and impose on a nonfiduciary, a sub- 
stantive ERISA remedy for the collection of a judg- 
ment entered pursuant to ERISA in a prior lawsuit. 


(i) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


II Rieetheditilnsiinreticbicinipsctecteeamentvoutencesmasrsiies 
IIT cllaidhdicsclsteiandterentindoubtennnincastaintecabowanicians 


SE SE re 
C. Proceedings Below in the Instant Case ................. 
1. Before the District Court....... SEES A 
2. In the Court of Appeals .2....................cees-eneee 


II. THE DECISION BELOW IS IN CONFLICT 
WITH THIS COURT’S DECISIONS IN 
BEECHER AND KOKKONEN AND WITH 
DECISIONS OF SEVERAL OTHER CIR- 
CUITS. IT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO 
GREATLY EXPAND THE SCOPE OF FED- 
SUROUED PUPP IO oasncsscccscecccsescccecenssvcesesncsee 


A. This Court Should Grant Certiorari to Re- 
affirm the Validity of its Controlling Opinion 
in Beecher, Which Has Come into Question... 


B. The Decision Below Broadens a Substantial 
Split of Authority Over the Scope of Fed- 
eral Ancillary Jurisdiction .............................. 


1. Cases Disagreeing with the Fourth Cir- 
Cee htew ions 


2. Cases Agreeing with the Fourth Circuit.. 
(iii) 


nonaowwTs- &*-§ © wb we Ww 


10 


13 


13 
16 


iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


Ill. THE DECISION BELOW, BY FASHIONING 
AN ERISA REMEDY FOR ENFORCEMENT 
OF AN ERISA JUDGMENT, AND IMPOSING 
IT ON ONE HELD NOT TO BE A FIDUCI- 
ARY, CONFLICTS WITH THIS COURT’S 
RECENT DECISIONS INTERPRETING 


A. In Mertens, This Court Held That Courts 
Should Not Fashion ERISA Remedies Not 
Expressly Created by Congress. The Court 
Below Derived Just Such a Remedy from 
EID cnnscisionsieciitbtiiiniliniicin Rete pint Bee = 


B. Mertens is Also Violated by the Imposition 
of a Substantive ERISA Remedy Against a 
Person Adjudged Not to be a Fiduciary........ 


C. By Fashioning a Separate, Substantive 
ERISA Remedy for the Enforcement of 
ERISA Judgments, the Fourth Circuit also 
Violated this Court’s Decision in Mackey.... 


D. The Decision Below Contributes to a Broad 
and Continuing Confusion over the Respect 
to be Accorded the Corporate Veil in ERISA 
Litigation. The Court’s Guidance is Needed 
ke eee eee eae 


CONCLUSION 


FEET EEE TTT TOTS SOSH ERR eee’ 


p EELY I EES eet ee 


SED tiadescciithicesstisttihiciiiilininstetaedit rls eine ee eS 
ON icttcncitiiteiciiiticmaiititae ee a 


Appendix D 


FEE EEE EEE EEE EE EEE EEE ETT SEEKS H eee renee eeeeeee 


Appendix E 


SOOTHES EH ES TEESE SESESE EE SEEE SE EEEE SESEEESESSS SSE SES ESESS 


Appendix F 


FOTOS SELLE SEH SEE ES SSOS SO SSEESSSSEESE SS EESS SEEESS COE ESS COS SeCoeee 


Page 


18 


18 


19 


21 


Vv 


‘ 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 


Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986) ......... ao 
Argento v. Village of Melrose Park, 838 F.2d 1483 
(7th Cir. 1988) .............. 10-13, 16 
Berry v. McLemore, 795 F.2d 452 (5th Cir. 1986)... 6, 9, 
13, 14, 15 
Blackburn Truck Lines v. Francis, 723 F.2d 730 
Cy Gh ID ehccd ible centittncptnbtiicctentititncnevesitictiniatibit 10, 17 
Connors v. P&M Coal Co., 801 F.2d 1373 (D.C. Cir. 
RSET CS RT Lh ss 9 23 
Fidelity & Casualty Co. v. Reserve Ins. Co., 596 
F.2d 914 (9th Cir. 1979) ............ S ad 
H. C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 217 U.S. 497, 30 S. Ct. 
Re PT SE ee 6, passim 
International Bhd. of Painters v. George A. 
Kracher, Inc., 856 F.2d 1546 (D.C. Cir. 1988) .... 23 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Insurance Co., 114 


9, 16 


A EE LTTE a ce ee 8-13 
Lowen v. Tower Asset Management, Inc., 829 F.2d 

By I iia ici ceiiintiasinrdlinns 22 
Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency & Service, 

486 U.S. 825, 108 S. Ct. 2182 (1988) ...... 7, 8, 18, 21, 22 
Manway Constr. Co. v. Housing Auth. of the City 

of Hartford, 711 F.2d 501 (2d Cir. 1983) .......... 10, 15 
Massachusetts Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473 

U.S. 134, 105 S. Ct. 3085 (1985) ..........00000..0....... 19 
Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 

a a a al 8, 18, 19, 20, 22 
National Westminster Bank U.S.A. v. Cheng, 751 

F. Supp. 1158 (S.D.N.Y. 1990) ........000000000..... 10, 14, 15 
Operating Engineers Pension Trust v. Reed, 726 

ee ceusinessennens 23 
Owen Equipment & Erection Co. v. Kroger, 437 

U.S. 365, 98 S. Ct. 2396 (1978) 0.00.00. 11,13 
Redding Ford v. California State Bd. of Equaliza- 

tion, 722 F.2d 496 (9th Cir. 1983) ......000002000.. 9, 16 
Riggs v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166 

4 ASS EEE Re, aa eee nr 5, 14 
Sandlin v. Corporate Interiors, Inc., 972 F.2d 1212 

ERI RETO ERS a 6, 9, 14, 15 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 
Page 


Sederquist v. Court, 861 F.2d 554 (9th Cir. 1988).. 9,16 
Skevofilaz v. Quigley, 810 F.2d 378 (3d Cir. 1987) 


I CRI cccuicstnssercestintianntanintnietine dae 10, 12, 18, 16 
Sullivan v. Hochfelder, 834 F. Supp. 1036 (N.D. 
| ERR ER Mtr Os Mets A is al 10 


Thomas v. Peacock, 39 F.3d 493 (4th Cir. 1994) ..5, passim 
Thomas v. Tru-Tech, Inc., 900 F.2d 256 (table 


Statutes 


only), 1990 WL 48865 (4th Cir. Apr. 3, 1990) .... 4 
dS oe 2 |: | nano ee marr es 2 
SD ey Oe I hethhtetttnciccntcstsinclassinicnimitnondiinatebatied 2,11, 73a 
BP ae OO CAD cceccctcsstsonsersnevtntenssisclaiithennitten 20 
BP Ns Op Si iicceuncshtcithntemndinaniamiiineslide 2, 7,9, 21, 7la 


f 


(In THE 
Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 


JACK L. THOMAS, 
. Respondent, 
D. GRANT PEACOCK, 

Petitioner. 


Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


D. Grant Peacock respectfully petitions for a writ of 
certiorari to review the judgment of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in this case. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals, App., infra, at 1a, 
is reported at 39 F.3d 493. The opinions of the district 
court are unreported. App., infra, at 30a, 54a. 


JURISDICTION 


The court of appeals entered its judgment on Novem- 
ber 4, 1994. Petitioner timely sought rehearing by the 
Fourth Circuit, and that request was denied on December 


2 


2, 1994. This Court’s jurisdiction is invoked pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


Section 502(a) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act (“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a), enumer- 
ates the private causes of action available under ERISA. 
Its text is set forth in the Appendix, infra, at 71a. 


Section 502(e)(2) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. § 1132 
(e)(2), ERISA’s nationwide service of process provision, 
provides: 


“Where an action under this title is brought in a dis- 
trict court of the United States, . . . process may be 
served in any other district where a defendant resides 
or may be found.” 


28 U.S.C. § 1367 codifies the law of ancillary and 
pendent federal court jurisdiction. Its text is set forth in 
the Appendix, infra, at 73a. 


STATEMENT 
A. Overview. 


This is a collection action, filed in federal court against 
Petitioner for the purpose of collecting a judgment ob- 
tained against a corporation, Tru-Tech, Inc., in a previous 
lawsuit in federal court. Petitioner Grant Peacock asserted 
that the action should be dismissed, among other reasons, 
because the district court lacked jurisdiction over the dis- 
pute. The opinion below observed that there is no diver- 
sity jurisdiction here, and that the only potential basis 
for federal jurisdiction is that the action seeks to enforce 
a prior federal court judgment. 


The Fourth Circuit held that this jurisdictional basis 
is sufficient—that a federal court has “ancillary jurisdic- 
tion” over a separate lawsuit brought for the purpose of 
collecting a prior federal judgment from a person other 


Tech’s corporate veil. By thus imposing liability on a 
nonfiduciary, and finding in ERISA an extrastatutory 
mechanism for the enforcement of ERISA judgments, the 
decision below came into conflict with this Court’s recent 
ERISA jurisprudence. 

B. The Prior Lawsuit. 


The scene for this case cannot be set without brief 
reference to the prior related case, Thomas v. Tru-Tech, 
Inc. (“Tru-Tech”), the ERISA case in which liability 
was imposed upon Tru-Tech as a plan fiduciary, but Pe- 
titioner Grant Peacock was absolved of liability and ex- 
pressly held not to be a fiduciary. The instant case is 
essentially an effort by Respondent Thomas to find a 
solvent defendant to pay the judgment rendered in Tru- 
Tech. 


On the question of Petitioner Peacock’s fiduciary status, 
the Fourth Circuit upheld the district court’s conclusion 
that he was not: 


[T]he district court held that Peacock acted solely in 
his capacity as Chairman of the Board of Tru-Tech, 
not as a fiduciary of the Plan. Indeed, the record re- 
veals that Tru-Tech’s Board of Directors resolved in 
a meeting on October 11, 1984, to retain the ten-year 
cliff vesting schedule. Conceding this, Thomas insists 


4 


that Peacock, as the principal investor, dominated the 
Board and had de facto power to make these decisions 
concerning the Plan. But this influence has scant evi- 
dentiary support and does not contradict the finding 
that these decisions were made by the Board, not Pea- 
cock acting unilaterally. 


Thomas v. Tru-Tech, Inc., 900 F.2d 256 (table only), 
1990 WL 48865 at **3 (4th Cir. Apr. 3, 1990) (un- 
published; emphasis added). 


C. Proceedings Below in the Instant Case. 


1. Before the District Court. 


Thus, at the conclusion of Tru-Tech, Petitioner Pea- 
cock was no longer within the jurisdiction of the federal 
court. Respondent Thomas filed the instant proceeding 
against Petitioner—an entirely new lawsuit, with a new 
caption, a new file number, and entirely different factual 
allegations—to force Petitioner to pay the judgment en- 
tered against Tru-Tech. The Complaint attempted this 
through a cause of action styled “Piercing the Corporate 
Veil Under ERISA and Applicable Federal Law.” The 
issue for trial was whether Petitioner Peacock, in his 
dealings with Tru-Tech after the entry of judgment, en- 
gaged in activities that improperly removed assets from 
Tru-Tech. 


The district court rejected Petitioner’s argument that 
ERISA does not provide such an independent cause of 
action as “piercing the corporate veil” (and thus, that 
ERISA cannot be relied on either for subject matter juris- 
diction or for personal jurisdiction by virtue of ERISA’s 
nationwide service of process). App. infra, at 50a, 65a. 


Instead, the district court accepted the theory that 
ERISA provides a cause of action for piercing the cor- 
porate veil of an ERISA fiduciary to reach its non- 
fiduciary shareholders. App., infra, at 43a-50a. It also held 
that the corporate veil should not be accorded great sig- 


5 


nificance in an ERISA case, given the “broad, remedial 
scope” of ERISA. App., infra, at 50a. “The congres- 
sional intent of ERISA,” the district court concluded, “is 
to hold employers responsible for pension benefits, so 
that when the corporate form poses a bar to liability, 
concerns for corporate separateness are secondary to the 
mandate of ERISA.” App., infra, at 52a. On this basis, 
the district court imposed personal liability on Petitioner 
Peacock for the prior judgment against Tru-Tech. 


2. In the Court of Appeals. 


The Fourth Circuit affirmed, but not on the ERISA- 
specific grounds of the district court. Instead, the court 
of appeals held that an action to pierce the corporate veil 
of a judgment debtor falls within a federal court’s “an- 
cillary jurisdiction”—even if the action is commenced as 
an entirely separate lawsuit. This conclusion is in direct 
conflict with an opinion of this Court, as well as recent 
decisions in several circuits, regarding the extent of a 
federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction. 

On the issue of federal jurisdiction, the Fourth Circuit 
did note that there was no diversity jurisdiction in this 
case, and “that there is no basis for federal question juris- 
diction other than the fact that the suit seeks to enforce 
a judgment obtained pursuant to ERISA.” 39 F.3d at 
499 n.6, App., infra, at lla. This one fact was held 
sufficient, however; the court affirmed, on the basis that 
this separate suit to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil and 
impose liability on Petitioner was “ancillary” to the federal 
district court’s jurisdiction over the previous lawsuit, Tru- 
Tech. In so holding, the Fourth Circuit relied primarily 
on this Court’s 1867 opinion in Riggs v. Johnson County, 
73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166 (1867). 39 F.3d at 500, App., 
infra, at 13a. Riggs does not deal directly with the issue 
presented here, but states the proposition that some “proc- 


6 


ess subsequent to judgment” is a part of the federal court’s 
power. 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) at 187.’ 


The court of appeals acknowledged to varying degrees 
three cases that are in direct conflict with its application 
of ancillary jurisdiction. In H.C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 
217 U.S. 497, 30 S. Ct. 601 (1910), which the Fourth 
Circuit sought to distinguish, this Court held squarely that 
a case such as this one does not fall within a federal 
court’s ancillary jurisdiction. 39 F.3d at 500, App., infra, 
at 13a. The Fourth Circuit also made passing mention 
of, but did not analyze, decisions in two other circuits 
that reach the opposite result from the instant case. 39 
F.3d at 501, App., infra, at 15a; see Sandlin v. Corporate 
Interiors Inc., 972 F.2d 1212, 1217 (10th Cir. 1992); 
Berry v. McLemore, 795 F.2d 452, 455 (Sth Cir. 1986). 


The Fourth Circuit’s stated test for the propriety of 
exercising ancillary jurisdiction was whether the subse- 
quent action is “truly independent” of the prior action. 
The court gave no weight to the fact that the veil-piercing 
action is entirely separate from the prior lawsuit on which 
federal jurisdiction is dependent: 


Without defining the precise contours of when a 
subsequent litigation is “independent” of a former liti- 
gation and judgment, we believe that [Respondent] 
Thomas’ attempt to pierce the corporate veil is not 

“independent” of the initial litigation herein. As noted 
above, an attempt to pierce the corporate veil is nec- 
essarily subsidiary to some primary cause of action. 
That Thomas opted to file a separate action to pierce 


1 The full text quoted by the Fourth Circuit states: 
It is black letter law that 


the jurisdiction of a court is not exhausted by the rendition 
of the judgment, but continues until that judgment shall be 
satisfied. . . . Process subsequent to judgment is as essential 
to jurisdiction as process antecedent to judgment, else the 
judicial power would be incomplete and entirely inadequate 
to the purposes for which it was conferred by the Constitution. 


7 

Tru-Tech’s corporate veil is irrelevant: the court’s 
subject matter jurisdiction does not turn on whether 
Thomas pursued the procedurally proper route... . 
[This is, at bottom, a proceeding the goal of which 
is to collect the judgment earlier obtained by the plain- 
tiff class. There is, in short, simply no practical rea- 
son to treat this litigation as separate from the initial 
litigation. 


39 F.3d at 501-02, App., infra, at 16a (citations and 
footnotes omitted; emphasis added). In other words, the 
court below concluded that the instant action was not 
“independent,” and that ancillary jurisdiction was there- 
fore proper, for the simple reason that the goal of this 
action “is to collect the judgment” from the prior action. 


After concluding that federal jurisdiction was proper, 
the Fourth Circuit proceeded to fashion an ERISA 
remedy for piercing the corporate veil. Having noted that 
veil piercing is “substantive” law, 39 F.3d at 499, App., 
infra, at 12a, the court held that “ERISA preempts any 
state law of veil-piercing,” 39 F.3d at 503, App., infra, 
at 20a. It expressly rejected Petitioner’s argument that 
Mackey means there is no ERISA remedy for judgment 
enforcement, id., (although there may be one under state 
law) and thus that ERISA’s nationwide service of process 
provision, 29 U.S.C. § 1132(e)(2), could not be used to 
reach Petitioner. The prior judgment was accordingly 
imposed on Petitioner under the auspices of ERISA. The 
court “adopt[ed] the liberal veil-piercing standard enun- 
ciated by the First Circuit in Alman [v. Danin, 801 F.2d 
1 (1st Cir. 1986)] for use in ERISA actions.” 39 F.3d 
at 504, App., infra, at 23a. It quoted with approval a 
long passage from Alman, which states among other 
things that ERISA “cannot be said to attach great weight 
to corporate form.” 39 F.3d at 504, App., infra, at 21a. 


8 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


I. SUMMARY. 


In the broadest terms, there are two reasons for the 
Court to take this case. First, it is in direct conflict with 
this Court’s decisions in Beecher and in Kokkonen v. 
Guardian Life Insurance Co., 114 S. Ct. 1673 (1994) 
over the scope of federal ancillary jurisdiction. It also 
broadens an existing conflict among a number of cir- 
cuits over the same point; notably, some of the circuit 
courts agreeing with the Fourth Circuit have reached their 
decisions by expressly declining to follow Beecher. The 
issues presented are important ones; the decision below 
has the potential to expand federal court jurisdiction 
dramatically in all areas. It would open the federal courts 
to any separate lawsuit filed for the purpose of collecting 
a prior federal judgment. The issues giving rise to these 
conflicts are cleanly presented here, and the Court should 
resolve this important question of federal jurisdiction and 
reaffirm the vitality of Beecher. 


Second, the decision below reaches a result that is 
contrary to this Court’s decisions in two ERISA cases, 
Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 (1993), 
and Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency & Service, 486 
U.S. 825, 108 S. Ct. 2182 (1988). Taken together, these 
cases make it clear that ERISA does not provide a spe- 
cific remedy for the collection of ERISA judgments, and 
that ERISA is in general a “comprehensive and reticu- 
lated statute,” Mertens, 113 S. Ct. at 2066, and accord- 
ingly that theories of liability not included in the statute 
should not be created by the judiciary, 113 S. Ct. at 2071- 
72. Yet the decision below does precisely what these deci- 
sions forbid. It derives from ERISA a means for the 
enforcement of an ERISA judgment on a theory of re- 
covery not spelled out in ERISA, against a person not 
identified by ERISA as liable. (Indeed, against a person 
previously held not to be liable under ERISA.) Because 


9 
personal jurisdiction could be had only. pursuant to 


ERISA’s nationwide service of process provision, 29 U.S.C. 


§ 1132(e)(2), treatment of the remedy as arising under 
ERISA was indispensable to the result below. This result 
contributes to the existing confusion among the circuit 
courts of the respect to be paid to the corporate form in 
ERISA cases. The Court should bring this matter back in 
line with its precedents and the statutory balance struck 


by Congress. 


Il. THE DECISION BELOW IS IN CONFLICT WITH 
THIS COURT'S DECISIONS IN BEECHER AND 
KOKKONEN AND WITH DECISIONS OF SEVERAL 
OTHER CIRCUITS. IT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO 
GREATLY EXPAND THE SCOPE OF FEDERAL 
JURISDICTION. 


The fundamental question of federal jurisdiction pre- 
sented here is the availability of ancillary jurisdiction over 
a separate lawsuit, involving new facts, filed to collect a 
prior federal court judgment from a party other than the 
judgment debtor.? Review is appropriate because there 
is a substantial split of authority on this point, which has 
called into question one of this Court’s precedents. 


The lower court cases that have held that ancillary 
jurisdiction does not exist in such a circumstance, or which 
have enunciated principles plainly precluding such an ac- 
tion, include Sandlin, 972 F.2d 1212, 1217 (10th Cir. 
1992); Berry, 795 F.2d 452, 455 (Sth Cir. 1986); Seder- 
quist v. Court, 861 F.2d 554, 557-58 (9th Cir. 1988); 
Redding Ford v. California State Board of Equalization, 
722 F.2d 496, 498 (9th Cir. 1983); Fidelity & Casualty 
Company v. Reserve Ins. Co., 596 F.2d 914, 918 (9th 


2 There is no alternative basis for jurisdiction here. As the court 
below noted, it is “undisputed that there is.no diversity of citizen- 
ship in this action, and that there is no basis for federal question 
jurisdiction other than the fact that the suit seeks to enforce a 
judgment obtained pursuant to ERISA.” 39 F.3d at 499 n.6; App., 
infra, at lla n.6. 


10 


Cir. 1979); National Westminster Bank U.S.A. v. Cheng, 
751 F. Supp. 1158, 1160 (S.D.N.Y. 1990) (relying on 
Manway Constr. Co. v. Housing Auth. of the City of 
Hartford, 711 F.2d 501, 504 (2d Cir. 1983)). 


Other circuits have disagreed, holding or implying that 
ancillary jurisdiction does exist in such a case. Argento v. 
Village of Melrose Park, 838 F.2d 1483, 1487-90 (7th 
Cir. 1988) (followed in Sullivan v. Hochfelder, 834 F. 
Supp. 1036, 1038 (N.D. Ill. 1993), albeit with mention 
of the problem of exercising ancillary jurisdiction in a 
separate action); Skevofilax v. Quigley, 810 F.2d 378, 
383-85 (3d Cir. 1987) (en banc); Blackburn Truck 
Lines v. Francis, 723 F.2d 730, 732 (9th Cir. 1984). 


The appropriateness of review is heightened because the 
decision below is in direct conflict with this Court’s deci- 
sion in H.C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 217 U.S. 497, 30 
S. Ct. 601 (1910). Moreover, two of the circuits agreeing 
with the Fourth Circuit have directly questioned the con- 
tinuing vitality of Beecher. Before describing the circuit 
split, we therefore turn to Beecher, and to this Court’s 
recent decision in Kokkonen, which also directs a different 
result from the one reached below. 


A. This Court Should Grant Certiorari to Reaffirm the 
Validity of its Controlling Opinion in Beecher, 
Which Has Come into Question. 


In Beecher, a judgment creditor brought an action to 
impose liability for a prior patent judgment on the direc- 
tors of the corporate judgment debtor. The creditor ac- 
cused the directors of taking actions with the purpose and 
effect of rendering the company insolvent in the event of 
a judgment against it. In his opinion for the Court, Justice 
Holmes was careful to emphasize that the second action 
did not deal with the patent (just as the instant case does 
not contain any allegations regarding the ERISA plan) 
but had to do only with the existence of the judgment. 


. i 


Accordingly, the Court ruled that the attempt to impose 
liability on the directors was “of course” not “ancillary 
to the judgment in the former suit.” 217 U.S. 497, 30 
S. Ct. at 602. 


Beecher is plainly controlling here. The allegations and 
issues are the same below and in Beecher. The court 
below sought to distinguish Beecher on the timing of 
the alleged wrongs by the individual defendants in the two 
cases, but the net effect of this is to emphasize that Peti- 
tioner Peacock’s asserted wrongdoing was entirely divorced 
in time from the ERISA wrong for which Tru-Tech was 
held liable. 39 F.3d at 501, App., infra, at 15a. This 
break in time highlights the absence of the “common 
nucleus of operative fact” between Tru-Tech and the 
instant case that would make the two part of the same 
constitutional “case or controversy.”* See 39 F.3d at 
503 n.14, App., infra, at 19a n.14. 


Two circuit courts that have reached conclusions sim- 
ilar to the one below have said that Beecher should be 
treated as a nullity. In Argento, a divided panel of the 
Seventh Circuit approved an exercise of ancillary juris- 
diction over a separate lawsuit to impose liability on 
parties held not liable in the prior suit. They declined 
to follow Beecher: “That case, decided over 75 years 


* As we discuss infra in describing Kokkonen, it is clear that 
constitutional and statutory limits on federal court power apply to 
exercise of ancillary and pendent jurisdiction. See also Owen, 437 
U.S. at 372, 98 S. Ct. at 2401. The accepted constitutional test is 
whether there is a “common nucleus of operative fact” between 
the claim sought to be brought before the court and the accompany- 
ing federal claims. Without this “common nucleus,” the matters 
are not part of the same constitutional “case.” 


This standard has recently been codified, without any relevant 
impact on the inquiry to be undertaken. 28 U.S.C. 1367, App., 
infra, at 73a, allows the exercise of “supplemental” jurisdiction 
over claims that “form part of the same case or controversy under 
Article III” of the Constitution as a case already properly in 
federal court. 


12 


ago, is three paragraphs long con’aining a conclusion, 
but virtually no discussion. It has rarely been cited as 
precedent.” 838 F.2d at 1488. The dissent in Argento 
criticized the majority for reaching a decision “directly 
contrary” to Beecher. 838 F.2d at 1501. 


A similar disagreement over the vitality of Beecher 
erupted in the Third Circuit in Skevofilax. The majority of 
the en banc court declined to follow Beecher, calling it 
a “delphic pronouncement” and dismissing the opinion 
because it did not expressly claim to “serve as a pro- 
nouncement on the constitutional limits of ancillary juris- 
diction.” 810 F.2d at 385 n.4. The dissent countered 
that Beecher did have precedential value, and that it 
should have controlled. 810 F.2d at 392-93. 


Although not directly controlling, the analysis of this 
Court’s unanimous opinion last term in Kokkonen clearly 
indicates that Beecher is good law and that the decision 
-below was incorrect. Kokkonen considered whether a fed- 
eral court has ancillary jurisdiction to enforce a settlement 
agreement from a prior federal case. After noting that 
federal courts have limited jurisdiction, possessing “only 
that power authorized by Constitution and statute,” 114 
S. Ct. at 1675, the Court concluded there is no auto- 
matic federal jurisdiction over a claimed breach of a 
settlement agreement. The factual issues involved in the 
two cases were plainly distinct, and the court’s ability 
to function was not “imperiled by the alleged breach.” 
114 S. Ct. at 1677. The suit, in short, “involve[d] a claim 
for breach of a contract,” and “automatic jurisdiction over 
such contracts is in no way essential to the conduct of 
federal-court business.” Jd. This analysis suggests that 
Beecher is right and the result below is wrong. There is 
‘no common nucleus of operative fact here, and the al- 
leged wrong is not one that imperils the operation of 
the federal courts such that “automatic jurisdiction” over 
such a claim is “essential.” 


13 


The instant case presents clearly the issue of the con- 
tinuing vitality of Beecher. This is an attempt (i) in a 
second, separate lawsuit (ii) to invoke facts not in issue 
in the prior lawsuit * (iii) in order to hold liable a person 
not already within the federal court’s jurisdiction.’ Under 
Beecher, under the constitutionally mandated ancillary 
jurisdiction analysis contained in Owen and Kokkonen, 
and under various circuit court authorities we will de- 
scribe below, ancillary jurisdiction should not have been 
exercised here. In light of the growing tendency to dis- 
regard Beecher, the Court should take this opportunity to 
make it plain that Beecher, and Article III principles in 
general, govern this case. 


B. The Decision Below Broadens a Substantial Split of 
Authority Over the Scope of Federal Ancillary 
Jurisdiction. 


1. Cases Disagreeing with the Fourth Circuit. 


We provided at the beginning of this section a list of 
many of the federal court decisions following Beecher and 


* This issue is well presented here, as the Fourth Circuit several 
times relied on its conclusion that the facts in the instant case were 
different from the facts at issue in the original Tru-Tech litigation. 
See 39 F.3d at 501, App., infra, at 15a (distinguishing Beecher 
because alleged wrongs here were directed to “already-extent [sic] 
judgment” ; id. n.10, App., infra, at 16a n.10 (distinguishing Sandlin 
on basis that this case involves “conduct by Peacock occurring after 
the judgment in the initial litigation”); id. at 503 n.14, App., 
infra, at 19a n.14 (activity leading to conclusion of veil-piercing here 
occurred “after the activity pursuant to which the corporation is 
deemed to have breached its ERISA fiduciary duties”). 


* Courts considering the issue have recognized that parties 
absolved of liability in a prior action should be treated as strangers 
to the judgment in that action for purposes of any subsequent 
action attempting to impose liability on them. Argento, 838 F.2d 
at 1488 n.7; Skevofilaz, 810 F.2d at 384-85 (treating township as 
“nonparty to the original lawsuit” for purposes of imposing liabil- 
4 S — for individual officers’ liability; Berry, 795 F.2d 
a 


ee err eS ee 


14 


in conflict with the result below. We describe some of 
those cases in more detail here. 


Many of these opinions have acknowledged the passage 
from Riggs relied on by the Fourth Circuit, see supra 
note 1, which states that a federal court’s jurisdiction 
continues after the entry of judgment, but have concluded 
that this holding does not mean that a federal court can 
do anything it pleases, to anyone it pleases, in the name 
of enforcing a judgment. See Berry, 795 F.2d at 455 
(post-judgment jurisdiction described in Riggs “is limited 
to those actions that a court may take in that same ac- 
tion”); National Westminster Bank, 751 F. Supp. at 
1160 (in construing Riggs, “where a party seeks to invoke 
ancillary jurisdiction to protect a judgment of the court, 
there must be a transactional relationship between the 
claims predicated on federal jurisdiction and the claims 
to be piggy-backed into the federal court” (internal quo- 
tation omitted) ). 


Prior to the decision below, the Tenth Circuit had most 
recently dealt with this matter. That court faced the 
precise issue presented by the present case—an attempt by 
a successful plaintiff to enforce his judgment against al- 
leged alter egos of the judgment debtor—in Sandlin, 972 
F.2d 1212 (10th Cir. 1992). Calling the precedents 
“largely consistent,” the Sandlin court stated that “[w]hen 
a party asserts a postjudgment claim against a nonparty 
not arising out of the operative facts that produced the 
original judgment, an independent basis for federal juris- 
diction must exist.” 972 F.2d at 1216 (emphasis added). 
Although noting that Beecher has recently been criticized 
as “dated and for its lack of exposition,” the Tenth Circuit 
read Beecher “as saying that when postjudgment proceed- 
ings seek to hold nonparties liable for a judgment on a 
theory that requires proof on facts and theories signifi- 
cantly different from those underlying the judgment, an 
independent basis for federal jurisdiction must exist. So 
read, the opinion seems both consistent with most modern 


15 
court decisions and controlling upon us.” 972 F.2d at 
1217. 


National Westminster Bank, supra, also involved an 
attempt by a judgment creditor to collect his judgment 
from principals of the corporate debtor by “piercing the 
corporate veil.” 751 F. Supp. at 1159. The court declined 
ancillary jurisdiction in this separately filed lawsuit, be- 
cause there was no nexus between the original claim and 
the veil-piercing action. “[P]etitioner’s theories of fraudu- 
lent conveyance and piercing the corporate veil are re- 
moved from the original breach of contract action... . 
Petitioner’s claims involve investigation into the facts of 
how the corporations at issue were run... .” 751 F. Supp. 
at 1160. The principle relied on in this case was drawn 
directly from the Second Circuit's opinion in Manway 
Construction Co., 711 F.2d 501, 504 (2d Cir. 1983), 
which was also relied on by Sandlin. Although Manway 
involved different facts, its controlling principle is con- 
trary to the ruling by the Fourth Circuit below, and the 
Second Circuit should be counted among the circuits in 
direct conflict with the Fourth Circuit’s ruling. 


In Berry, 795 F.2d 452, the Fifth Circuit refused to 
exercise ancillary jurisdiction over an attempt to collect 
a judgment from the alleged indemnitors of the judgment 
debtor. The Berry court first concluded that the two ac- 
tions did not share a common nucleus of fact, noting that 
plaintiff's first action “arose out of an alleged violation of 
his constitutional rights,” while the second involved a con- 
tract. “[T]he alleged obligations of the Town and NHI 
are completely independent of the primary judgment 
against McLemore.” 795 F.2d at 455. The court con- 
cluded: “We can find no case where a court held that it 
had ancillary jurisdiction to consider claims in a new and 
independent action merely because the second action 


sought to satisfy or give additional meaning to an earlier 
judgment.” /d. 


16 


Several decisions by the Ninth Circuit fall into this line 
of authority.° Sederquist holds that ancillary jurisdiction 
will not extend to “a separate case against different de- 
fendants.” 861 F.2d at 558; see also Redding Ford, 722 
F.2d at 498 (9th Cir. 1983) (“[aJncillary jurisdiction 
cannot be extended beyond the claims asserted in one 
action”); Fidelity & Casualty Company, 596 F.2d at 918 
(9th Cir. 1979) (“Whatever the current parameters of 
ancillary jurisdiction the doctrine has never extended be- 
yond claims asserted in one action.” ).” 


2. Cases Agreeing with the Fourth Circuit. 


There are also courts that have agreed broadly with the 
ruling below. In our discussion of Beecher above, we 
discussed two of these cases, Argento, 838 F.2d 1483, 
and Skevofilax, 810 F.2d 378, which regard Beecher as 
having fallen into desuetude. 


The other case agreeing with the result below reflects 
confusion within a circuit. In an opinion decided without 
oral argument less than one month after Redding Ford, 


® As we discuss infra, there is one contrary opinion in the Ninth 
Circuit on this issue, but the majority of Ninth Circuit cases 
disagree with the Fourth Circuit. 


™The Ninth Circuit cases do not involve attempts to enforce 
judgments, but their rationales nevertheless conflict directly with 
the result below. This highlights the fact that the ancillary 
jurisdiction cases involve two approaches, which complement one 
another, and which both disagree with the result below. One 
approach emphasizes that the facts involved in the veil-piercing 
analysis will typically be unrelated to the facts giving rise to sub- 
stantive liability; absent a common nucleus of operative fact, there 
can be no ancillary jurisdiction. Other cases have not reached this 
stage of analysis, because they have held that ancillary jurisdiction 
can never extend to a second lawsuit; a federal court’s power to 
hear ancillary matters stops at the boundaries of the suit over 
which it has original jurisdiction. Both issues are presented in 
this case, since it involves both a separate lawsuit and a clear 
disjunction of the relevant facts in the two cases. See supra 
note 4. 


a 


supra, the Ninth Circuit took a position inconsistent with 
its own precedents. Blackburn Truck Lines v. Francis, 
723 F.2d 730 (9th Cir. 1984), was a separate lawsuit to 
collect a judgment in a freight charges case from the 
alleged alter egos of the bankrupt original defendants. 
Without citation to Beecher or the Ninth Circuit prece- 
dents mentioned above that expressly hold that ancillary 
jurisdiction will not extend to an entirely separate lawsuit, 
the Blackburn panel concluded that the federal courts did 
have ancillary jurisdiction over such a matter. 


This is an area that is beset with considerable con- 
fusion; the various circuits employ various methods of 
analysis, with various results, and pay various amounts of 
deference to this Court’s decision in Beecher. This case 
squarely and cleanly presents these issues, and the Court 
should take this opportunity to provide unity and guidance 
on this question. 


Nor are the stakes trivial. The rule enunciated by the 
Fourth Circuit would open the federal courts to any 
separate lawsuit with the stated purpose of imposing a 
judgment entered in a federal court on a party not ini- 
tially held liable for that judgment. Although the Fourth 
Circuit saw “no practical reason” not to exercise jurisdic- 
tion over such a matter, 39 F.3d at 502, App., infra, 
at 17a, such a rule would increase the load of federal 
cases without any efficiency advantages; since, by defini- 
tion, these new cases involve entirely new issues, the fed- 
eral courts that handled the prior actions have no advan- 
tage over the state courts in disposing of them. For these 
reasons as well, review by this Court is appropriate. 


18 


Ill. THE DECISION BELOW, BY FASHIONING AN 
ERISA REMEDY FOR ENFORCEMENT OF AN 
ERISA JUDGMENT, AND IMPOSING IT ON ONE 
HELD NOT TO BE A FIDUCIARY, CONFLICTS 
WITH THIS COURT’S RECENT DECISIONS IN- 
TERPRETING ERISA. 


The decision below is in conflict with this Court’s cases 
in Mertens and Mackey. It violates their teachings by 
fashioning a substantive ERISA remedy for the collection 
of judgments, and by applying that remedy to one who 
would not be held liable within the four corners of the 
ERISA statute. The question of whether there is an 
ERISA remedy in this case is of particular importance 
because, regardless of subject matter jurisdiction, the only 
basis for personal jurisdiction over Petitioner Peacock in 
South Carolina was ERISA’s nationwide service of process 
provision. If Respondent has only a state law remedy for 
his wrong, he cannot sue Mr. Peacock in South Carolina. 
App., infra, at 59a. 


The result also highlights considerable lower court con- 
fusion over the proper respect to be shown to corporate 
form in ERISA cases. Review by this Court is needed 
to establish the effect of its precedents and to give guid- 
ance on the deference to be given corporate form. 


A. In Mertens, This Court Held That Courts Should 
Not Fashion ERISA Remedies Not Expressly Cre- 
ated by Congress. The Court Below Derived Just 
Such a Remedy from ERISA. 


In Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 
(1993), the Supreme Court held that ERISA does not 
authorize suits for monetary relief by plan participants 
against a nonfiduciary. Observing that the only provision 
of ERISA allowing suit against nonfiduciaries provides for 
“equitable relief’ only, the Court declined to expand the 
express provisions of ERISA to allow monetary recovery 
as well as equitable relief against a nonfiduciary. 


> ~~ ” ee ae aa 


, 

After noting that ERISA is a “comprehensive and 
reticulated statute,” 113 S. Ct. at 2066 (internal quota- 
tions omitted), this Court stated its own “unwillingness to 
infer causes of action in the ERISA context, since that 
statute’s carefully crafted and detailed enforcement scheme 
provides strong evidence that Congress did not intend to 
authorize other remedies that it simply forgot to incorpo- 
rate expressly.” 113 S. Ct. at 2071-72 (internal quota- 
tions omitted). In closing, the Court rejected an invitation 
to “give a strained interpretation to [ERISA] in order to 
achieve the [claimed] ‘purpose of ERISA to protect plan 
participants and beneficiaries.’” 113 S. Ct. at 2071. The 
Court stated that “vague notions of a statute’s ‘basic pur- 
pose’ are . . . inadequate to overcome the words of its 
text,” especially with respect to “ERISA, an enormously 
complex and detailed statute that resolved innumerable 
disputes between powerful competing interests— not all in 
favor of potential plaintiffs.” Jd.; see also Massachusetts 
Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473 U.S. 134, 146, 105 
S. Ct. 3085, 3092 (1985) (“carefully integrated” enforce- 
ment scheme of ERISA is “strong evidence that Congress 
did not intend to authorize other remedies that it simply 


forgot to incorporate expressly” ). 


The Fourth Circuit treated the veil-piercing action 
brought by Respondent as “a substantive rule of liability.” 
39 F.3d at 499, App., infra, at 12a. It held that ERISA 
“preempts any state law of veil-piercing” and provides the 
rule of law for such an action. 39 F.3d at 503, App., 
infra, at 20a. By thus allowing a substantive cause of 
action, nowhere provided for in ERISA, to proceed as an 
ERISA action, the court below did precisely what Mertens 
said it should not. 


B. Mertens is Also Violated by the Imposition of a 
Substantive ERISA Remedy Against a Person 
Adjudged Not to be a Fiduciary. 


In Tru-Tech, the district court held and the Fourth 
Circuit affirmed that Grant Peacock was not a fiduciary 
of the ERISA plan at issue. As this Court explained in 


— 


20 


Mertens, ERISA establishes a broad definition of fiduciary 
that “expand[s] the universe of persons subject to fiduciary 
duties—and to damages”—beyond the common law, 
which limited the reach of fiduciary duty to “formal trus- 
teeship.” 113 S. Ct. at 2071. The Court relied on this 
expansive definition of fiduciary in declining to further 
expand liability to non-fiduciaries under ERISA. The 
Court would not disturb “the balance . . . that the text 
adopted by Congress has struck.” 113 S. Ct. at 2072. 


In other words, Congress used the term “fiduciary” to 
describe precisely those persons and entities against whom 
ERISA provides remedies for breaches. The ruling below 
upsets this statutory balance by providing an ERISA rem- 
edy against a person expressly held not to be a fiduciary. 


The rationales offered below for this departure from 
ERISA and this Court’s guidance—that such a step was 
necessary to vindicate ERISA’s “broad, remedial scope,” 
App., infra, at 50a, and that ERISA “cannot be said to 
attach great weight to corporate form,” 39 F.3d at 503, 
App., infra, at 22a—simply miss the point. The “re- 
medial purpose” of ERISA, be it broad or narrow, is 
incorporated into the fiduciary liability standard and the 
“balance” struck by Congress. Similarly, fiduciary liability 
defines precisely the degree to which the court may reach 
behind the corporate veil. If a person “exercises any dis- 
cretionary auhority or discretionary control” with respect 
to an ERISA plan, 29 U.S.C. § 1002(21)(A) then he or 
she can be held liable, regardless of the shielding presence 
of a corporation. An ERISA-based remedy that goes 
beyond this standard is at odds with the statute and with 
Mertens. 


By treating the veil-piercing claim as arising under 
ERISA, the court below went beyond the statute, and was 
able to find personal jurisdiction over Petitioner Peacock 
where none would otherwise exist. 


, 2 


C. By Fashioning a Separate, Substantive ERISA 
Remedy for the Enforcement of ERISA Judgments, 
the Fourth Circuit also Violated this Court’s Deci- 
sion in Mackey. 


In Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency & Service, 486 
US. 825, 833, 108 S. Ct. 2182, 2187 (1988), the Court 
explained that “ERISA does not provide an enforcement 
mechanism for colletcing judgments won” in civil enforce- 
ment actions under ERISA’s 29 U.S.C. § 1132. “Con- 
sequently,” the Court concluded, “state-law methods for 
collecting money judgments must, as a general matter, 
remain undisturbed by ERISA[.]” 486 U.S. at 834, 108 
S. Ct. at 2187-88. Once the judgment is in hand, an 
ERISA judgment debtor is no different from any other 
judgment debtor. 


Mackey plainly applies here, for there can be no doubt 
that Respondent Thomas’s intent in bringing this action 
was to collect the prior judgment.* As the Fourth Circuit 


®To be sure, the facts of Mackey are different from those of 
this case, but the holding of Mackey is clear and its import is 
unmistakable—ERISA does not provide a separate substantive 
remedy for the collection of ERISA judgments. Moreover, the 
Fourth Circuit’s divergence from Mackey is made manifest by the 
two opinions’ inconsistent rulings on the matter of ERISA preemp- 
tion of collection actions. 


Mackey involved two issues, both of which arose from an attempt 
by a Georgia collection agency to garnish welfare plan benefits to 
collect money judgments. In the first portion of its opinion, the 
Mackey Court struck down a Georgia statute that specifically ex- 
empted ERISA plans from “the process of garnishment,” on the 
grounds that the law made “reference to” an ERISA plan and 
— preempted by ERISA. 486 U.S. at 829-30, 108 S. Ct. 
at 2185-86. 


The second portion of the opinion went on to consider whether 
the entire Georgia garnishment procedure was preempted by 
ERISA. It was in this context that the Court concluded that 
ERISA does not provide its own mechanism for the enforcement 
of judgments; hence, the Court held that state law mechanisms 
must be used and that the garnishment statute was not preempted. 


22 


stated plainly in its opinion, “this is, at bottom, a proceed- 
ing the goal of which is to collect the judgment earlier 
obtained by the plaintiff class.” 39 F.3d at 501, App., 
infra, at 16a. 


Mackey reinforces, in the specific context of actions 
to enforce ERISA judgments, the general principles of 
Mertens that courts are not free to create new ERISA 
remedies. Nevertheless, the opinion below provided Re- 
spondent with a federal substantive remedy to assist him 
in haling Petitioner into court and collecting the ERISA 
judgment. Mackey teaches that there is no such remedy. 


D. The Decision Below Contributes to a Broad and 
Continuing Confusion over the Respect to be 
Accorded the Corporate Veil in ERISA Litigation. 
The Court’s Guidance is Needed on this Question. 


In the context of breach of fiduciary duty, a number of 
circuits have held, as the Fourth Circuit did below, that 
ERISA has little regard for the corporate form, and that 
the corporate veil of a corporate fiduciary may be 
breached almost at will to reach a solvent shareholder or 
director. The leading case in this area, relied on heavily 
below, is Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986); 
see also Lowen v. Tower Asset Management, Inc., 829 
F.2d 1209 (2d Cir. 1987). 


On the other hand, ERISA cases involving suits against 
employers for delinquent plan contributions have taken 
a much more cautious approach to the corporate veil. 
Although many of these cases allude to the possibility of 
veil-piercing in the appropriate circumstance, they do not 
suggest that the corporate form can be tossed aside when- 
ever convenience or the “broad remedial purpose” of 
ERISA so demand. Indeed, these cases point out that 


486 U.S. at 830-40, 108 S. Ct. at 2186-91. This is precisely contrary 
to the holding of the Fourth Circuit below that ERISA does 
“preempt[] any state law of veil-piercing” in the context of col- 
lection of judgments. 39 F.3d at 508, App., infra, at 20a. 


”“? — - 


‘ @B 


Congress could have imposed broader ERISA liability on 
corporate insiders had it chosen, but that it did not. See, 
e.g., International Bhd. of Painters v. George A. Kracher, 
Inc., 856 F.2d 1546, 1550 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (declining 
to hold principal shareholder and chief officer liable for 
corporation’s ERISA contributions; “Limited liability is 
a hallmark of corporate law. Surely if Congress had 
decided to alter such a universal and time-honored con- 
cept, it would have signaled that resolve somehow in the 
legislative history.”); Connors v. P&M Coal Co., 801 
F.2d 1373, 1376 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (rejecting “interest 
and control” test for imposition of individual liability for 
corporate obligations; noting that such a lowered standard 
would “discourage future participation in multiemployer 
pension plans”); Operating Engineers Pension Trust v. 
Reed, 726 F.2d 513, 515 (9th Cir. 1984) (no special 
standard of veil piercing set forth in employer contribu- 
tion case). 


The decision below highlights the divergence of views 
among the circuits as to the respect to be paid to the 
corporate form in ERISA actions; this divergence shows 
itself in a comparison of fiduciary breach and employer 
contribution cases, although there is no statutory or policy 
difference in the two areas that would justify such differ- 
ent degrees of deference to corporate form. Because of 
the importance of these issues, and because of the substan- 
tial disincentive to provision of ERISA plans by employ- 
ers that the liberal rule of veil-piercing enunciated below 
creates, the Court should take this case to clarify the 
rules under which ERISA liability may be imposed on 
corporate shareholders or managers. 


————___ 


24 
CONCLUSION 


Review of the decision below is necessary to end the 
confusion regarding the scope of the federal courts’ an- 
cillary jurisdiction, and to address the important ERISA 
issues presented here. Petitioner respectfully requests the 
issuance of a writ of certiorari to the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit to consider the ques- 
tions presented by this case. 


Respectfully submitted, 


DAVID L. FREEMAN 
(Counsel of Record) 


J. THEODORE GENTRY 
WYCHE, BURGESS, FREEMAN 
& PARHAM, P.A. 
Post Office Box 728 
44 East Camperdown Way 
Greenville, SC 29602 
(808) 242-8200 
Attorneys for Petitioner 
March 1, 1995 D. Grant Peacock 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


~ teenie al Se wtp a> > Wh 


o Reetet 2K 


Rea eS ee 


‘ #s 
APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOURTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 92-2524, 93-1394 and 93-1469 


Jack L. THomas, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 
Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a represettative of 
a class of plaintiffs similarly situated, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee, 
v. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendant-A ppellant, 


and 


ALAN H. FINEGOLpD, 
Defendant. 


Jack L. THomas, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 


Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a representative of 
a class of plaintiffs, similarly situated, 


Plaintiff-A ppellee, 


Vv. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendant-A ppellant, 


and 


ALAN H. FINEGOLD, 
Defendant. 


2a 


Jack L. THomas, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 
Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a representative of 
a class of plaintiffs, similarly situated, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee, 
v. 


Tru-TECH, INc.; D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendants-A ppellants, 


and 
GRANT PEACOCK AND COMPANY, INC.; 


CONNECTICUT GENERAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, 
Defendants. 


Argued May 9, 1994 
Decided Nov. 4, 1994 


Before RUSSELL and WIDENER, Circuit Judges, and 
CHAPMAN, Senior Circuit Judge. 


Affirmed in part and vacated and remanded in part by 
published opinion. Judge RUSSELL wrote the opinion, 
in which Judge WIDENER and Senior Judge CHAPMAN 
joined. 

OPINION 

DONALD RUSSELL, Circuit Judge: 


Jack L. Thomas (“Thomas”), a former employee of 
Tru-Tech, Inc. (“Tru-Tech”), brought a suit under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq., on behalf of a class 
of former Tru-Tech employees against Tru-Tech and D. 
Grant Peaccok (“Peacock”), an officer and shareholder of 
Tru-Tech. The district court held for the plaintiff class 
as against Tru-Tech, but held Peacock not liable as a 


‘ 3a 


plan fiduciary. Thomas v. Tru-Tech, Inc., No. 87-2243-3, 
1988 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 15929, 1988 WL 212511 (D.S.C. 
Nov. 28, 1988). On appeal, we affirmed the district 
court’s judgment in all respects. Thomas v. Tru-Tech, 
Inc., 900 F.2d 256 (4th Cir.1990) (unpublished disposi- 
tion; full text reported at 1990 WL 48865). 


Thomas then brought suit, purportedly on behalf of 
the plaintiff class certified in the earlier suit,’ against Pea- 
cock, individually, and against Peacock’s attorney, Alan 
H. Finegold (“Finegold”), seeking to collect the earlier 
judgment. Among various theories for recovery, Thomas 
sought to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil and reach Pea- 
cock. The district court rejected Thomas’ claim against 
Finegold, but allowed plaintiffs to recover as against Pea- 
cock based upon their veil-piercing theory. Thomas v. 
Peacock, No. 7:91-3843-21, 1992 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 18749 
(D.S.C. Oct. 28, 1992). Peacock appeals. We affirm. 


Peacock also appeals the district court’s assessment of 
attorneys’ fees against him with respect to both litigations 
pursued by Thomas. We vacate the award of attorneys’ 
fees and remand for further proceedings. 


I. 


In August of 1987, Thomas, on behalf of a class of 
similarly situated former Tru-Tech employees, filed suit 
against Tru-Tech and Peacock seeking payment of bene- 
fits due under Tru-Tech’s pension plan (the “initial liti- 
gation”). The complaint raised numerous claims for re- 
lief, including breach of fiduciary duty under ERISA. The 
district court found Tru-Tech, but not Peacock, to be a 
plan fiduciary; it further found that Tru-Tech had breached 


1 Thomas describes this suit as a continuation of the prior class 
action and, accordingly, asserts that this suit is also brought on 
behalf of the class. As discussed infra, Peacock disputes this 
assertion. 


ee nee 


4a 


its fiduciary duties. On appeal, we affirmed the district 
court in all respects.” 


Thomas subsequently sought to execute judgment 
against Tru-Tech in Pennsylvania, but was unsuccessful. 
Thomas then brought the present suit against Peacock, 
individually, and against Peacock’s attorney, Finegold, on 
theories of civil conspiracy, fraudulent transfer of assets, 
and corporate veil-piercing under ERISA. The district 
court approved of plaintiffs’ attempt to pierce Tru-Tech’s 
corporate veil and determined that plaintiffs were entitled 
to collect from Peacock their earlier judgment against 
Tru-Tech; the court otherwise rejected plaintiffs’ claims. 
Peacock appeals. 

Il. 


In 1981, Rockwell International decided to sell the 
textile machinery parts manufacturing business of its 
Draper Division; this business was conducted at two plants, 
one in Marion, South Carolina, and the other in Beebe 
River, New Hampshire. A Delaware corporation named 
Tru-Tech was organized for the purpose of acquiring this 
business. Tru-Tech maintained an office in Spartanburg, 
South Carolina; Bill Wilcock (“Wilcock”) was appointed 
its president and chief executive officer. A partnership 
named Marion Limited Partners (“Marion LP”) was es- 
tablished for the purpose of purchasing the Marion, South 
Carolina, plant from Rockwell International and leasing 
it to Tru-Tech. 


Among the investors in Tru-Tech was appellant Pea- 
cock. Peacock was the sole stockholder and director of 
Peacock, Williams & Company (“PW & C”).* Peacock 


2We summarized the facts underlying the initial litigation in 
our earlier opinion, see 1990 WL 48865, at *1-*2. 


In fact, PW & C was first called D. Grant Peacock & Company, 
and then Peacock, Williams & Company; it subsequently reverted 
to its original name. For ease of reference, we refer to it through- 
out our opinion as “PW & C.” 


‘i Sa 


was a CPA and a lawyer who also served as a partner in 


Marion LP. Marion LP’s sole general partner, however, 
was Wilcock. 


_ Despite high hopes, Tru-Tech quickly fell on hard 
times.‘ When, by September of 1983, Tru-Tech had al- 
ready lost a substantial sum of money, Wilcock was re- 
placed by John H. Blackburn (“Blackburn”), previously 
Tru-Tech’s vice president of operations. When Tru- 
Tech’s board determined that it was not viable for Tru- 
Tech to continue in business, it became Blackburn’s re- 
sponsibility to liquidate Tru-Tech’s assets. 


In 1985, Tru-Tech relocated its offices to space :ented 
by PW & C in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Timothy H. Wil- 
liams (“Williams”), PW & C’s president, assumed the role 
of Tru-Tech’s executive vice president, treasurer and sec- 
retary. From late 1986 through late 1988, PW & C 
silled Tru-Tech for incidentals such as telephone, travel, 


* The district court noted: 


The promoters and founders of Tru-Tech expected the busi- 
ness to derive substantial revenue primarily from two sources. 
First, they expected to continue supplying parts to Rockwell’s 
Draper Division which manufactured looms. Second, they be- 
lieved that Tru-Tech had purchased the tooling for Draper parts 
and that they could sell these parts on the open market. Un- 


fortunately, their expectations did not come to fruition and 
the business failed. 


Despite the general sluggishness in the textile industry at 
the time, the demise of Tru-Tech can be attributed to two 
events that occurred simultaneously. First, within six months 
of Tru-Tech’s purchase .. Rockwell’s Draper parts manufac- 
turing business, Rockwell sold its Draper Division to another 
group of investors who immediately reduced inventories, thus 
severely reducing orders Tru-Tech expected to fill. Second, the 
“new” Draper filed suit against Tru-Tech alleging that Draper, 
not Tru-Tech, had the tooling rights for Draper parts. It was 
determined subsequently that Draper had in fact retained these 
rights, and it was at this point that Tru-Tech’s potential for 
profit was eliminated. 


1992 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 18749, at *3-*4, 


6a 


entertainment, legal, postal and office supply expenses. 
Peacock testified that, at that time: “We ha[d]n’t been 
keeping the accounting records . . . for Tru-Tech since it 
it had no employees.” J.A. 345. 


By February of 1986, Tru-Tech had managed to sell 
all of its productive assets in South Carolina. Operations 
at the Beebe River Plant in New Hampshire ceased in 
June of 1986 and management sought to liquidate the 
assets at that plant to reduce Tru-Tech’s financial liabili- 
ties. Despite this effort, Tru-Tech’s negative net worth 
continued to increase from $893,676.00 on September 
30, 1986 to $1,376,888.00 by September 30, 1990. 


As Tru-Tech’s troubles continued to mount, Peacock 
took it upon himself to “buy out” other investors who, 
purportedly, could less well withstand the impact of Tru- 
Tech’s financial downturn than could he. As a result, by 
1987, Peacock controlled in excess of 70% of Tru-Tech’s 
stock. This domination continued until 1990,° when, on 
Finegold’s advice, Peacock sold 724,980 shares to Wil- 
liams and Blackburn for $200 in order to bring his hold- 
ings below the 50% mark. Moreover, from March 1988 
until February 1990 and, effectively, until Tru-Tech’s 
final dissolution in May 1990, Peacock served as the com- 
pany’s sole director. 


Peacock testified that, following the suspension of Tru- 
Tech’s operations, in July 1986, Blackburn was placed on 
PW & C’s payroll for the purpose of “wrapping-up Tru- 
Tech’s affairs.” For this service and for the rent for a 
portion of PW & C’s office in Pittsburgh, PW & C billed 
Tru-Tech $10,000 each month; this liability eventually 
grew to more than $110,000. PW & C issued invoices to 
Tru-Tech which described the $10,000 a month charge 
as levied for the services rendered by Blackburn, an en- 
gineer by trade, as having been billed for “FINANCIAL 
CONSULTING SERVICES.” E.g., J.A. 443. This lia- 


5 Althovgh the stock certificates exhibit dates in 1987, they were 
not forwarded to Blackburn for his signature until 1990. 


‘ 7a 
bility was not long maintained on PW & C’s books, how- 


ever, since, according to an August 3, 1989, memorandum 


to Williams, “the management fee receivable of [approxi- 
mately] $110,000 was written off in the year ended 
1/31/87.” J.A. 593. Nevertheless, as described below, 
Tru-Tech receivables were subsequently transferred from 
Tru-Tech to PW & C and to other Peacock-affiliated enti- 
ties, purportedly in consideration for this liability owed 
PW & C by Tru-Tech. 


On November 28, 1988, as described above, the district 
court entered judgment in favor of the plaintiff class 
against Tru-Tech, which timely filed its notice of appeal, 
leaving Tru-Tech beset by numerous large liabilities, in- 
cluding the Thomas judgment, some $50,000 owed to 
PW & C and approximately $350,000 owed to Peacock 
individually. After discussions with Peacock concerning 
the Thomas judgment against Tru-Tech, Finegold, by let- 
ter dated March 2, 1989, advised Peacock: 


I see no reason for any payment with regard to the 
Thomas litigation unless and until the judgment be- 
comes final and constitutes a lien on real estate held 
for sale. As I understand the situation, the corpora- 
tion Owns no real estate in South Carolina and the 
plaintiffs have made no effort to attach the corpora- 
tion’s property in New Hampshire at this time. It 
remains quite desirable then, to effect the disposition, 
for acceptable consideration, of the New Hampshire 
realty before the plaintiffs attempt to reach it. You 
will need, nevertheless, to pay any legal fees owed to 
Tru-Tech, Inc.’s counsel in the Thomas case in order 
to keep them involved in the appeal process. 


J.A. 625 4c. The letter goes on to suggest, as a means of 
“protect[ing] the [Tru-Tech] real estate against any claims 
in the Thomas case and to preserve some possibility of 
recovery of some portion of the amounts owed to you and 
your corporation, . . . an arrangement,” J.A. 625-26, 
under which a new corporation would be formed in New 


a 


—————Eoeeeee 


Hampshire for the purpose of assuming ownership of the 
Tru-Tech real estate. Finegold advised that “the arrange- 
ment suggested allows you and Peacock, Williams & Com- 
pany to recover $130,000 if the new corporation even- 
tually succeeds in consummating the sale of the premises,” 
J.A. 626, subject to the proviso that “the possibility 
exists of treatment of the transfer as a voidable prefer- 
ence,” J.A. 626. 


Peacock and Finegold then held a meeting to discuss 
further the subject of the Tru-Tech judgment, “as a con- 
sequence of which,” J.A. 628, Finegold, in a March 13, 
1989 letter, identified for Peacock “the various matters 
on which we had settled as a strategy,” J.A. 628, includ- 
ing, in particular, the following: 


(3) The [Tru-Tech] corporation will refrain, for 
the time being, from payment of any obligations aris- 
ing out of the Thomas litigation, pending further 
developments on this front. 


(7) The [Tru-Tech] corporation will, with the use 
of its receivables, pay down the amounts owed to 
Peacock, Williams & Company, and to you, person- 
ally, in order to start running the one year period for 
avoidance of preferences to control persons in bank- 


ruptcy. 
J.A. 628. 


The “strategy” outlined in Finegold’s letters to Peacock 
was never fully implemented. Still, several questionable 
transactions were executed during this general time frame. 
We summarize them here. 


On April 30, 1988, a $31,804 Tru-Tech receivable 
from Marion LP was “netted on Tru-Tech’s books” so as 
to become a receivable of PW & C. J.A. 433. 


By authorization dated October 31, 1988, Peacock, as 
sole director of Tru-Tech, transferred a $27,235.08 Tru- 


1 


Tech receivable known as the “Uhiman note” to Finegold 
and Peacock’s wife as trustees of the D. Grant Peacock 
trust, the beneficiary of which is Pe ’s wife. In return 
for this transfer, Finegold claimed, by letter dated April 
3, 1989, to have forwarded to Peacock checks payable to 
Tru-Tech for $27,235.08. The letter requests that Pea- 
cock furnish Finegold with “a schedule showing the appli- 
cation by Tru-Tech of the $27,235.08 paid, an applica- 
tion which, I assume, involves some favored creditors like 
Peacock, Williams & Company, Incorporated.” J.A. 618. 


Judge Traxler concluded “that there was either no con- 
sideration paid for the assignment of the Uhiman note on 
October 31, 1988, or the assignment was simply back- 
dated to reflect that as the supposed date of transfer,” 
1992 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 18749, at *12, and, further, “that 
the purpose of the sale of the Uhlman Note was to get 
enough cash into Tru-Tech to pay the $25,000 retainer 
to Greenville [counsel] for the purpose of handling the 
appeal of the Thomas judgment,” id.; October 31, 1988, 
the purported date of the sale, predates the entry of judg- 
ment in favor of plaintiffs in the original trial. 


At a March 6, 1989, Tru-Tech board meeting attended 
by Peacock, Finegold and Blackburn, Peacock agreed to 
pay $130,000 of Tru-Tech funds to PW & C. Peacock 
asserts that this was to repay PW & C for money paid to 
Blackburn to manage Tru-Tech’s affairs, even though, 
prior to that date, the evidence showed that PW & C had 
“written off” that amount due. 


On a June 26, 1989, Tru-Tech pro forma balance sheet. 
Peacock made a handwritten note that a $47,000 Tru- 
Tech receivable known as the “Brodsky note” should be 
transferred to PW & C. Further, next to numerous bal- 
ance sheet liability entries, including the entry “Judgment 
—Jack Thomas Case” as well as entries for interest 
thereon and estimated attorneys’ fees, is the handwritten 
word, “Forget.” J.A. 542. 


10a 


By unanimous consent order dated July 1, 1989, the 
Tru-Tech board of directors, of which Peacock was by 
then the sole member, approved the transfer of the Brod- 
sky note to PW & C “for accounts payable owed by Tru- 
Tech to Peacock Williams.” J.A. 590. Blackburn, as 
Tru-Tech’s president, formally executed the transfer on 
October 20, 1989, “for consideration paid,” J.A. 588. 


On November 1, 1989, Tru-Tech assigned a $5,737.75 
receivable from Marion LP to PW & C. 


On February 15, 1990, Peacock resigned as a director 
of Tru-Tech. Yet, as late as May of that year, Peacock 
continued to sign checks, drawn on Tru-Tech’s bank 
accounts, for legal fees. 


On April 26, 1990, Blackburn tendered his letter of 
resignation as Tru-Tech’s president. Nevertheless, for some 
six months thereafter, Blackburn remained on PW & C’s 
payroll and continued to oversee the “wrapping up” of 
Tru-Tech’s affairs. 


On May 1, 1990, Williams resigned as Tru-Tech’s 
executive vice president, treasurer and secretary. Yet, on 
May 4, 1990, he authorized the assignment of a $5,000 
mortgage from Tru-Tech to PW & C. 


When, in 1990, the plaintiff class, by way of Pennsyl- 
vania counsel, served interrogatories on PW & C, Fine- 
gold, and Peacock and his wife, Finegold responded, by 
letter dated August 30, 1990: 


[A]s I understand the situation, Tru-Tech, Inc., . . . 
has discontinued its businesses, and disposed of all its 
fixed assets . . .; and all of its directors and officers 
with any detailed knowledge of the businesses and 
affairs of the corporation have resigned. As a prac- 
tical matter, then, the corporation is defunct; and 
there is no one known to Grant Peacock or to me 
who has the authority and knowledge to prepare the 
answer demanded to the interrogatories propounded. 


J.A. 632. 


. ila 


Based on the foregoing, the district court found that 
Peacock failed to observe the traditional corporate format 
and engaged in a “corporate strategy” with “the specific 
intent and purpose . . . [of] siphon{ing] off [Tru-Tech’s] 
assets to favored creditors owned or controlled by Pea- 
cock and to defeat collection of the Thomas judgment.” 
1992 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 18749, at *19. Peacock appeals. 


Ill 


Peacock argues that this suit is one merely to collect an 
outstanding judgment and that, because ERISA is not 
thereby implicated, the district court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over this case.* He also argues that, even if 
the district court properly exercised jurisdiction, it erred 
in applying a federal common law, as opposed to state 
law, standard for piercing the corporate veil. Proper 
evaluation of these contentions requires that we examine 
the nature of an attempt to pierce the corporate veil. 


As we explained in DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc. v. W. 
Ray Flemming Fruit Co., 540 F.2d 681 (4th Cir.1976): 


[I]t is recognized that a corporation is an entity, 
Separate and distinct from its officers and stockhold- 
ers, and that its debts are not the individual indebted- 
ness of its stockholders. This is expressed in the 
presumption that the corporation and its stockholders 
are separate and distinct. . . . But this concept of 
Separate entity is merely a legal theory . . . and the 
courts “decline to recognize [it] whenever recogni- 
tion of the corporate form would extend the principle 
of incorporation ‘beyond its legitimate purposes and 
[would] produce injustices or inequitable conse- 
quences.” ” 


Id. at 683 (citation and footnote omitted) ( quoting 
Krivo Indus. Supply Co. v. National Distillers and Chem. 


*It is undisputed that there is no diversity of citizenship ji 
p in 
this action, and that there is no basis for federal question juris- 
diction other than the fact that the suit seeks to enforce a judg- 
ment obtained pursuant to ERISA. 


12a 


Corp., 483 F.2d 1098, 1106 (Sth Cir.1973), modified, 
490 F.2d 916 (1974)). 


“An attempt to pierce the corporate veil is not itself a 
cause of action but rather is a means of imposing liability 
on an underlying cause of action... .” 1 William Meade 
Fletcher, Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of Private 
Corporations § 41, at 603 (perm. ed. rev. vol. 1990). 
However, although an attempt to pierce the corporate 
veil is necessarily subsidiary to some primary cause of 
action, it is not simply an attempt to collect a preexisting 
liability against an entity already found liable under the 
relevant substantive law; it is, rather, an attempt » “a 

such a preexisting liability upon an entity not other- 
a liable. See Sandlin v. Corporate Interiors Inc., 972 
F.2d 1212, 1217 (10th Cir.1992) (in a “cause of action 
based upon the alter ego theory[,] . . . in theory the court 
is merely trying to identify the true debtor on the judg- 
ment”). Thus, the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil 
is not a mere procedural rule relating to “how” a judg- 
ment is to be enforced, but is, rather, a substantive rule 
of liability. See Craig v. Lake Asbestos of Quebec, Lid., 
843 F.2d 145, 149 (3d Cir.1988) (holding that, in 
diversity case, federal district court properly applied New 
Jersey substantive law of veil-piercing). Last, we note 
that “the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil is an 
equitable one.” 1 Fletcher, supra, § 41, at 603. 


IV. 


Peacock argues that, once the plaintiff class won its 
judgment against Tru-Tech, it became a judgment creditor, 
like any other. The district court, he argues, therefore 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Thomas’ attempt to 
pierce the corporate veil. We reject this argument. 


It is black letter law that 


7 We note that, at page 27 of his brief, Peacock, albeit in another 
context, relies upon this very excerpt from Professor Fletcher’s 
treatise. 


‘ 13a 


the jurisdiction of a court is not exhausted by the 
rendition of the judgment, but continues until that 
judgment shall be satisfied. . . . Process subsequent 
to judgment is as essential to jurisdiction as 

antecedent to judgment, else the judicial power would 
be incomplete and entirely inadequate to the purposes 
for which it was conferred by the Constitution. 


Riggs v. Johnson County, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 166, 187, 
18 L.Ed. 768 (1867). We established above that an at- 
tempt to pierce the corporate veil is a matter of substan- 
tive law that determines whether a corporate shareholder 
can be held liable for a preexisting judgment entered 
against the corporation. An attempt to pierce the corpo- 
rate veil, therefore, seeks to identify those parties against 
whom the judgment can be satisfied. Because identifica- 
tion of those parties who are liable is necessarily ante- 
cedent to procedural enforcement of the judgment against 
those parties, and because Riggs establishes that federal 
courts have “ancillary” jurisdiction over enforcement of 
judgments, it would seem that the federal courts’ “ancil- 
lary” jurisdiction would extend to the instant attempt to 
pierce the corporate veil. 

Before we leave the issue, however, we must assure 
ourselves that our conclusion is in accord with the Supreme 
Court’s holding in H.C. Cook Co. v. Beecher, 217 US. 
497, 30 S.Ct. 601, 54 L.Ed. 855 (1910).* There, a 


*The Seventh Circuit in Argento v. Village of Melrose Park, 
838 F.2d 1483, 1488 (7th Cir. 1988), discounted the Justice Holmes’ 
opinion in Beecher as a “case, decided over 75 years ago, [that] 
is three paragraphs long containing a conclusion, but virtually 
no discussion.” Further, noted that Court, “[i]t has rarely been 
cited as precedent.” Id. We are skeptical of the Seventh Circuit’s 
notion that, as an inferior court, we may evade Supreme Court 
precedent on grounds of “desuetude.” Cf. United States v. Chase, 
18 F.3d 1166, 1169 (4th Cir.1994) (“Although there has been 
little discussion of [Ball v. United States, 140 U.S. 118, 11 S.Ct. 
761, 35 L.Ed. 877 (1891),] since it was decided in 1891, the Su- 
preme Court and the Eighth Circuit, in deciding other issues, have 
recognized its continued vitality.”). Nor are we convinced, as was 


l4a 


Connecticut corporate patentholder brought a patent in- 
fringement suit in federal court against another Connecti- 
cut corporation. During the pendency of the suit, the 
directors of the defendant corporation voted to continue 
sales in alleged violation of the plaintiff's patent. Plaintiff 
proved the victor in the patent infringement case but was 
unable to collect from the defendant corporation, which 
was by then insolvent. 


Plaintiff then filed a second suit in federal court against 
the directors of the insolvent corporation. In its com- 
plaint, plaintiff alleged that the defendants voted to con- 
tinue sales “kn[o]w[ing] that [insolvency] would be the 
result of a judgment against [their corporation in the first 
suit], but did the acts alleged for the purpose of increasing 
the value of their stock in the company, and of receiving 
the profits and dividends that might be received from the 
sale.” Id. at 498, 30 S.Ct. at 601-02. 


On plaintiff's appeal of the second suit, Justice Holmes, 
writing for the Court, rejected Plaintiff's characterization 
of the suit as one to hold the directors jointly and sev- 
erally liable with their corporation for their part in in- 
fringing plaintiff's patent, id., instead according plaintiff's 
complaint its “natural interpretation [as] an attempt to 
make the defendants answerable for the judgment already 
obtained,” id. The Court then summarily concluded that 
the case “of course [did] not” fall within the federal 
court’s ancillary jurisdiction. Id. at 499, 30 S.Ct. at 602. 


the Third Circuit in Skevofilax v. Quigley, 810 F.2d 878, 385 n. 5 
(3d Cir.) (en banc), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1029, 107 S.Ct. 1956, 
95 L.Ed.2d 528 (1987), that “Justice Holmes probably intended 
the [Beecher] opinion to be an interpretation of the .. . governing 
statute,” and that the possibility that Justice Holmes might have 
“intended his opinion to serve as a pronouncement on the constitu- 
tional limits of ancillary jurisdiction” should be dismissed because 
“he certainly kept that intention to himself, for it is nowhere 
mentioned in the opinion.” In any event, we may assume Beecher’s 
continuing vitality, for the case is distinguishable on its facts 
from the case now before us. 


( ee 


The Court concluded: “[I]f the directors are under obli- 
gations by Connecticut to pay a judgment against their 
corporation, that is not a matter that can be litigated 
between citizens of the same State in the Circuit Court 
of the United States.” Jd. 


Beecher is factually distinguishable from the case at 
bar. While the instant case involves allegations that 
Peacock deliberately engaged in improper transfers and 
improperly ignored corporate formalities with the specific 
purpose of evading the already-extent judgment against 
Tru-Tech, Beecher involved an allegation that corporate 
directors, acting within their legal capacity, voted to con- 
tinue sales of a product which was the subject of a then- 
pending patent infringement suit. Beecher, however, does 
make clear that the mere fact that a “former judgment 
[provides] the foundation of [a subsequent] case,” id., is 
insufficient, alone, to establish that the subsequent case 
falls within the federal court’s ancillary jurisdiction. In 
particular, where the subsequent action is truly “independ- 
ent” of the former action and judgment, there is no ancil- 
lary jurisdiction. See Sandlin v. Corporate Interiors Inc., 
972 F.2d 1212, 1217 (10th Cir.1992) (“We read 
Beecher as saying that when postjudgment proceedings 
seek to hold nonparties liable for a judgment on a theory 
that requires proof on facts and theories significantly 
different from those underlying the judgment, an inde- 
pendent basis for federal jurisdiction must exist.”); Berry 
v. McLemore, 795 F.2d 452, 455 (5th Cir.1986) (“gar- 
nishment actions against third parties are construed as 
independent actions from the primary action which estab- 
lished the judgment debt” and, therefore, the “court’s 
ancillary jurisdiction to enforce its judgment does not 
extend to these garnishment actions” ).° 


®*We do not, by our citation of the Fifth Circuit’s decision in 
Berry, mean to imply a holding that garnishment actions against 
third parties are, in fact, “independent actions from the primary 
action which established the judgment debt”; that issue, of course, 
is not now before us. 


l6a 


Without defining the precise contours of when a subse- 
quent litigation is “independent” of a former litigation and 
judgment, we believe that Thomas’ attempt to pierce the 
corporate veil is not “independent” of the initial litigation 
herein. As noted above, an attempt to pierce the corpo- 
rate veil is necessarily subsidiary to some primary cause 
of action. That Thomas opted to file a separate action 
to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil is irrelevant: the 
court’s subject matter jurisdiction does not turn on 
whether Thomas pursued the procedurally proper route. 
Further, we do not believe that the possibility that Thomas 
may not have been able to pursue this litigation at the 
same time as the initial litigation should affect the fact 
that this is, at bottom, a proceeding the goal of which 
is to collect the judgment earlier obtained by the plaintiff 
class. Cf. Sandlin v. Corporate Interiors Inc., supra, 972 
F.2d 1212; but cf. Blackburn Truck Lines, Inc. v. 


%°In Sandlin, a successful age discrimination plaintiff sought 
to collect judgment against the owners of the debtor corporation, 
who were not parties to the initial age discrimination litigation, 
on an alter ego theory. The Tenth Circuit read Beecher, which it 
described as “[a] typically cryptic Justice Holmes opinion,” 972 
F.2d at 1217, to say “that when postjudgment proceedings seek to 
hold nonparties liable for a judgment on a theory that requires 
proof on facts and theories sigificantly different from those under- 
lying the judgment, an independent basis for federal jurisdiction 
must exist,” id. Purporting to apply that standard to the case 
before it, the court, “[w]ithout attempting to decide all future 
cases, when the alter ego contentions may be more intertwined 
with the merits of the underlying claim within the court’s primary 
jurisdiction, we hold the district court properly dismissed the in- 
stant alter ego claims.” Id. at 1218. The court reached this con- 
clusion on the grounds that the attempt to invoke the alter ego 
doctrine involved “significantly different factual proof, new parties, 
[and] prejudgment actions.” /d. By contrast, the court indicated 
that “[p]ursuing the new parties . . . on a successor theory” would 
be viable to the extent that plaintiff could allege “postjudgment 
transfers of [the corporate debtor’s] property.” Jd. (citing Chris- 


‘ AT7a 


Francis, 723 F.2d 730 (9th Cir.1984)", ‘There is, in 
short, simply no practical reason to treat this litigation 


tiansen v. Mechanical Contractors Bid Depository, 404 F.2d 324 
(10th Cir.1968) ). ' vat 2 
The Tenth Circuit’s holding in Sandlin is not inconsistent with, 
and, indeed, can be read to support, our conclusion herein. First, 
the case at bar involves primarily conduct by Peacock occurring 
after the judgment in the initial litigation was obtained. More- 
over, to whatever extent the Tenth Circuit may properly have ob- 
served that, for jurisdiction to lie, “alter ego contentions [should] 
be [somewhat] intertwined with the merits of the underlying 
claim,” we note that the district court here found that Peacock 
engaged in a strategy with “the specific intent and purpose... 
[of] siphon[ing] off [Tru-Tech’s] assets to favored creditors 
owned or controlled by Peacock and to defeat collection of the 
Thomas judgment.” 1992 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 18749, at *19. 


In Francis, the plaintiff, who was unable to collect upon de- 
fault judgments it previously had obtained against two bankrupt 
corporations, brought suit against the three owners of both cor- 
porations, seeking to pierce the corporate veil. The court of ap- 
peals held that jurisdiction was proper in the district court. Rea- 
soned the court: “In one sense this suit is an effort to enforce 
the initial default judgment; in another sense it is an effort to 
accomplish what a joinder might have provided.” Jd. at 732. 


We do not believe that the Ninth Circuit’s reference to joinder 
has bearing here. This is because Peacock was in fact a party 
to the initial ‘tigation, although not in the same capacity as he was 
in the phase of litigation now under review. Moreover, plaintiffs 
presumably could not successfully have pursued their veil-piercing 
claim because most of the actions which led the district court to 
its conclusion had then yet to occur. Nevertheless, we do not think 
that these differences warrant a different conclusion as to jurisdic- 
tion. Especially where, as here, a stock-holder has deliberately 
manipulated corporate assets in order to frustrate the ability of 
one who holds a judgment against the corporation by virtue of 
federal law, we think it clear that the federal courts have jurisdic- 
tion to ensure that the federal judgment is ultimately collected. 
To the extent that the Ninth Circuit’s opinion in Francis suggests 
otherwise, we respectfully disagree. 

We would note that the Francis court made no mention of the 
Justice Holmes’ opinion in Beecher. 


18a 


as separate from the initial litigation.”* Cf. Pineville Real 
Estate Operation Corp. v. Michael, 32 F.3d 88 (4th Cir. 
1994) (holding that there is no federal question jurisdic- 
tion over case where the plaintiff brought action against 
defendants who had, in an earlier ERISA case, obtained 
judgments against the plaintiff, seeking to enjoin state 
enforcement of the judgment liens obtained by defendants 
and where the only federal statute or rule relied upon in 
plaintiffs complaint was Fed.R.Civ.P. 54(b) ). 


Peacock places heavy reliance upon the Supreme 
Court’s statement in Mackey v. Lanier Collection Agency 
& Service, 486 U.S. 825, 833, 108 S.Ct. 2182, 2187, 
100 L.Ed.2d 836 (1988), that “ERISA does not provide 
an enforcement mechanism for collecting judgment won” 
in either actions brought against plans by purported bene- 
ficiaries or in actions brought by general creditors of the 
plan, see ERISA § 502, 29 U.S.C. § 1132. Peacock reads 
this statement out of context. The Mackey Court imme- 
diately proceeded to note that, while ERISA did not pro- 
vide for an enforcement mechanism, where suit is filed in 
federal court, judgment enforcement is conducted pur- 
suant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 69(a), which 
adopts state law for judgment enforcement mechanisms. 
486 US. at 833-34, 108 S.Ct. at 2187-88. Thus, the mere 
fact that ERISA may not provide an explicit mechanism 
for judgment enforcement does not mean that ERISA does 
not provide jurisdiction for judgment enforcement. There- 
fore, even assuming, arguendo, that piercing the corporate 
veil is merely a method of judgment enforcement,” 
Mackey does not undermine but, rather, supports the 
district court’s exercise of jurisdiction. 


12 For this reason, we reject Peacock’s challenge to the venue 
of the instant litigation, as well as his contention that the district 
court erred in failing to certify the plaintiff class for purposes of 
the instant litigation. 


13 We, in fact, consider and reject this argument below. 


‘ 19a 


Peacock also claims that the Supreme Court’s decision 
in Mertens v. Hewitt Asseciates,; —— U.S. ——, 113 
S.Ct. 2063, 124 L.Ed.2d 161 (1993), establishes that the 
instant litigation against him was improperly maintained. 
We disagree. In Mertens, the Court hold that ERISA 
provides for no action for monetary damages against non- 
fiduciaries. The current attempt by plaintiffs is not, how- 
ever, as discussed above, an independent action for mone- 
tary damages against a nonfiduciary, but an equitable 
attempt to satisfy a previous judgment entered against a 
fiduciary. 


We therefor conclude that jurisdiction was proper in 
the district court. 


V. 


Having determined that the court below properly exer- 
cised jurisdiction over Thomas’ claim, we now turn to 
whether the district court applied the proper legal standard 
in adjudicating Thomas’ attempt to pierce Tru-Tech’s 
corporate veil."* The district court relied upon a federal 


* Peacock argues that the doctrine of piercing the corporate 
veil has no place in ERISA actions at all. He argues that, wherever 
the corporate veil should be pierced so that a shareholder will be 
subject to the ERISA fiduciary liability of its corporation, ERISA, 
standing alone, should allow the shareholder to be sued as a fidu- 
ciary; piercing the corporate veil, he argues, adds nothing to 
ERISA, but “results [only] in an uncomfortable inconsistency: the 
imposition of liability on an individual who previously had been 
adjudged not to be a fiduciary and hence not to have any liability 
under ERISA’s statutory scheme.” Appellant’s Br. 23. 

We disagree. The tests for ERISA fiduciary liability and veil- 
piercing are not identical, especially where, as here, most of the 
activity leading to the conclusion of veil-piercing occurs after the 
activity pursuant to which the corporation is deemed to have 
breached its ERISA fiduciary duties. 

Peacock also argues that res judicata should bar Thomas’ claim 
here. Thomas, Peacock argues, could and should have brought his 
piercing claim at the same time as his ERISA claim. The record 
does not provide the support necessary to this argument, however: 


20a 


common law rule for piercing the corporate veil in ERISA 
cases. Peacock argues that the Supreme Court’s decision 
in Mackey forecloses the existence of a federal common 
law veil-piercing rule in ERISA actions. We disagree. 
The Mackey Court held that “ERISA does not provide an 
enforcement mechanism for collecting judgments won in” 
suits brought by plan beneficiaries, pursuant to ERISA 
§ 502(a)(1)(B), (d), 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a)(1)(B), (d), 
against ERISA benefit plans. Even assuming, arguendo, 
that ERISA also does not provide an enforcement mecha- 
nism for collecting judgments won in suits brought by plan 
beneficiaries, pursuant to ERISA § 502(a)(2), 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1132(a)(2), such as the initial litigation won by plain- 
tiffs,"* Mackey would only preclude a federal common law 
veil-piercing ruie in ERISA actions to the extent that an 
attempt to pierce the corporate veil is merely an enforce- 
ment mechanism for collecting a judgment. It would be 
error, however, as we discuss above in Section III, to 
characterize the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil as 
a mere judgment enforcement mechanism. Because a rule 
of veil-piercing determines who is liable for breaches of 
ERISA fiduciary duties, we believe that ERISA preempts 
any state law of veil-piercing. See ERISA § 514(a), 29 
U.S.C. § 1144(a); 1 Fletcher, supra, § 41.90, at 91 
(Supp.1993) (“In disputes involving workers’ claims to 
ERISA benefits, a federal court may apply a federal : com- 
mon law standard of corporate separateness.” ). 


most of the transactions relied upon by Judge Traxler in piercing 
the corporate veil did not occur until after completion of the initial 
ERISA litigation. 


15 ERISA § 502(a) (2) allows for “[a] civil action [to] be brought 
. . . by a participant, beneficiary or fiduciary for appropriate re- 
lief under section 1109 of this title.” 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a) (2). 
ERISA § 409, 29 U.S.C. § 1109, in turn, imposes liability upon plan 
fiduciaries who breach their fiduciary duties. Plaintiffs, in the 
initial litigation, were successful in establishing, pursuant to 
ERISA § 409, 29 U.S.C. § 1109, that Tru-Tech was a fiduciary of 
the benefit plan it had established, and that Tru-Tech had breached 
its fiduciary duties. 


‘ Bie 


Having concluded that the determination of whether to 
pierce the corporate veil in an ERISA action is made 
under federal law, we turn to what standard the federal 


veil-piercing rule adopts. See Phoenix Mut. Life Ins. Co. 


vy. Adams, 30 F.3d 554, 563-64 (4th Cir.1994). The 


First Circuit in Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1, 3-4 (lst 
Cir.1986), explained: 

There is no litmus test in the federal courts govern- 
ing when to disregard corporate form. The Supreme 
Court has, however, provided some guidance, stating 
that “the doctrine of corporate entity, recognized 
generally and for most purposes, will not be regarded 
when to do so would work fraud or injustice.” Taylor 
v. Standard Gas Co., 306 U.S. 307, 322, 59 S.Ct. 
543, 550, 83 L.Ed. 669 (1939). The Court has 
further indicated that corporate form may not defeat 
overriding federal legislative policies. See First Na- 
tional City Bank v. Banco Para el Comercio Exterior 
de Cuba, 462 U.S. 611, 630, 103 S.Ct. 2591, 2602, 
77 L.Ed.2d 46 (1983); Bangor Punta Operations, 
Inc. v. Bangor & Aroostook Railroad Co., 417 U.S. 
703, 713, 94 S.Ct. 2578, 2584, 41 L.Ed.2d 418 
(1974). This court has said, 


The general rule adopted in the federal cases is 
that “a corporate entity may be disregarded in 
the interests of public convenience, fairness and 
equity,” [citing Capital Telephone Co. v. FCC, 
498 F.2d 734, 738 (D.C.Cir.1974)]. In apply- 
ing this rule, federal courts will look closely at 
the purpose of the federal statute to determine 
whether the statute places importance on the 
corporate form [citations omitted], an inquiry 
that usually gives less respect to the corporate 
form than does the strict common law alter 
ego doctrine... . 


Town of Brookline v. Gorsuch, 667 F.2d 215, 221 
(1st Cir.1981). 


22a 


ERISA, the statute sought to be enforced here, 
cannot be said to attach great weight to corporate 
form. Indeed, deferring too readily to the corporate 
identity may run contrary to the explicit purposes of 
the Act. Congress enacted ERISA in part because 
many employees were being deprived of anticipated 
benefits, which not only reduced the financial re- 
sources of individual employees and their dependents 
but also undermined the stability of industrial rela- 
tions generally. See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 (1982) (state 
ment of congressional findings and declaration of 
policy); H.Rep. No. 807, 93d Cong., 2d Sess., re- 
printed in 1974 U.S.Code Cong. & Ad. News 4639, 
4670, 4676. Allowing the shareholders of a marginal 
corporation to invoke the corporate shield in circum- 
stances where it is inequitable for them to do so and 
thereby avoid financial obligations to employee bene- 
fit plans, would seem to be precisely the type of con- 
duct Congress would want to prevent. 


801 F.2d at 3-4. Several Other circuits have followed 
similar reasoning. Ellison v. Shenango Inc. Pension Bd. v. 
Snyder, 956 F.2d 1268, 1274-75 (3d Cir.1992); Janow- 
ski v. International Bhd. of Teamsters Local No. 710 
Pension Fund, 673 F.2d 931, 941 (7th Cir.1982), va- 
cated on other grounds, 463 U.S. 1222, 103 S.Ct. 3565, 
77 L.Ed.2d 1406 (1983); see NLRB v. Greater Kansas 
City Roofing, 2 F.3d 1047, 1052 (10th Cir.1993) (inter- 
preting federal rule to allow veil piercing only where 
“(i) . . . there [was] such unity of interest and lack of 
respect given to the separate identity of the corporation 
by its shareholders that the personalities and assets of the 
corporation and the individual are indistinct and (ii) . . . 
adherence to the corporate fiction [would] sanction a 
fraud, promote injustice, or lead to an evasion of legal 
obligations”). We, too, find this reasoning persuasive ™ 


1® We note that this federal common law veil-piercing rule accords 
with our understanding of the South Carolina rule, as expounded 


‘ 2 


and, accordingly, adopt the liberal veil-piercing standard 
enunciated by the First Circuit in Alman for use in 
ERISA actions. As a consequence, we conclude that the 
district court applied the correct legal standard in evalu- 
ating the plaintiff class’ effort to pierce Tru-Tech’s cor- 
porate veil. 


in our opinion in DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc. v. W. kay Flemming 
Fruit Co., 640 F.2d 681 (4th Cir.1976). There, we explained that 
the “concept of [the corporation as a] separate entity is merely 
a legal theory . . . and the courts ‘decline to recognize [it] whenever 
recognition of the corporate form would extend the principle of 
incorporation beyond its legitimate purposes and [would] produce 
injustices or inequitable consequences.’” Jd. at 683 (footnote 
omitted) (quoting Krivo Indus. Supply Co. v. National Distillers 
and Chem. Corp., 483 F.2d 1098, 1106 (Sth Cir.1973), modified, 
490 F.2d 916 (1974)). We proceeded to stress that “proof of plain 
fraud is not a necessary element in a finding to disregard the cor- 
porate entity,” id. at 684, and that “courts have experienced ‘little 
difficulty’ and have shown no hesitancy in applying what is described 
as the ‘alter ego’ or ‘instrumentality’ theory in order to cast aside 
the corporate shield and to fasten liability on the individual stock- 
holder,” id. at 685 (quoting Jron City Sand & Gravel Div. of Me- 
Donough Co. v. West Fork Towing Corp., 298 F.Supp. 1091, 1098 
(N.D.W.Va.1969), rev’d on other grounds, 440 F.2d 958 (4th Cir. 
1971)). Thus, while the federal veil-piercing test may “usually 
give[] less respect to the corporate form than does the strict 
common law alter ego doctrine,” Town of Brookline, 667 F.2d at 
221, the South Carolina doctrine of veil-piercing accords with the 
ERISA veil-piercing standard announced in Alman. Compare Per- 
petual Real Estate Servs., Inc. v. Michaelson Properties, Inc., 974 
F.2d 545, 549 (4th Cir.1992) (noting that the standard we set out 
in DeWitt is “not the law in Virginia,” which sets more stringent 
standards for piercing the corporate veil). 


In light of the foregoing, we observe that, to the extent that, 
“[{w)hile the veil piercing inquiry in an ERISA case is .. . rooted 
in federal law, state is not rendered completely irrelevant,” United 
Elec., Radio and Machine Workers of America v. 163 Pleasant 
Street Corp., 960 F.2d 1080, 1092 n. 12 (1st Cir.1992), and that, in 
“apply[ing] federal substantive law, ... we may look to state law 
for guidance,” Laborers Clean-Up Contract Administration Trust 
Fund v. Uriarte Clean-Up Service, Inc., 736 F.2d 516, 523 (9th 
Cir.1984), the federal standard we apply accords with South Caro- 
lina veil-piercing law. 


24a 


VI. 


Peacock next argues that, on the facts presented, the 
district court erred in concluding that Tru-Tech’s corporate 
veil should be pierced. We disagree. The district court 
found, as matters of fact, that Peacock owned a control- 
ling (and, at most relevant times, a complete) interest in 
Tru-Tech and, from March of 1988 until its liquidation, 
served as Tru-Tech’s sole director; that PW & C hired 
Blackburn to wind down Tru-Tech’s business and, in turn, 
billed Tru-Tech $10,000 a month for financial services, 
and also for incidental expenses; and that numerous trans- 
fers were effected among Tru-Tech, PW & C, Peacock 
and others without proper consideration or formalities. 
On the basis of these facts and others set out above, the 
court further found that Peacock engaged in a “corporate 
strategy” with “the specific intent and purpose . . . [of] 
siphon[ing] off [Tru-Tech’s] assets to favored creditors 
owned or controlled by Peacock and to defeat collection 
of the Thomas judgment.” 1992 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18749, 
at *19. On the record before us, we cannot characterize 
these findings of fact as clearly erroneous. 


We also review the district court’s decision to pierce 
Tru-Tech’s corporate veil under the clearly erroneous 
standard. DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc., supra, 540 F.2d at 
684; accord Laborers Clean-Up Contract Administration 
Trust Fund v. Uriarte Clean-Up Service, Inc., 736 F.2d 
516, 523 (9th Cir.1984) (reviewing, under the clearly 
erroneous standard, the district court’s decision in an 
ERISA case to pierce the corporate veil). Under that 
limited standard of review, the district court’s decision 
will not be disturbed. 


Peacock’s remaining arguments against the district 
court’s judgment regarding the imposition against him of 
the Tru-Tech ERISA liability established in the initial 
litigation are without merit. We consequently affirm the 
district court’s judgment in that regard. 


' = 


Vil. 

Following the determination by the district court in the 
initial litigation that Tru-Tech was liable while Peacock 
was not, District Judge G. Ross Anderson, Jr., entered an 
order allowing plaintiffs to defer any motion for attorneys’ 
fees until final disposition of the initial litigation. Because 
of the appeal of the initial litigation and the subsequent 
attempt to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil, such a motion 
was not made until the instant litigation was complete in 
the district court. At that time, District Judge William B. 
Traxler, Jr., referred the matter back to Judge Anderson 
for determination of fees arising out of the initial litiga- 
tion. Judge Anderson applied the five-factor test enunci- 
ated in Reinking v. Philadelphia American Life Insurance 
Co., 910 F.2d 1210, 1217-18 (4th Cir.1990), to deter- 
mine whether a fee award was appropriate, and, finding 
that one was, the twelve-factor test adopted in Barber v. 
Kimbrell’s, Inc., 577 F.2d 216, 226 & n. 28 (4th Cir.), 
cert. denied, 439 U.S. 934, 99 S.Ct. 329, 58 L.Ed.2d 
330 (1978), to fix the amount thereof. Ultimately, Judge 
Anderson decided that a fee of $123,181.25 was reason- 
able, along with costs of $13,103.60. Judge Traxler 
undertook a similar inquiry and analysis with respect to 
fees arising out of the veil-piercing litigation, concluding 
that $64,406.25 in attorneys’ fees and $4,490.91 in costs 
were due. Thus, a total of $205,182.01 in attorneys’ 
fees and expenses were assessed against Peacock. This, 
we note as a preliminary matter, exceeds the total damages 
assessed in this case. Peacock argues both that it was 
inappropriate for the district court to award attorneys’ 
fees in this case and that, even if such an award was 
appropriate, the amount of the award was excessive. We 
reject Peacock’s first argument but find his second argu- 
ment persuasive. 


In keeping with ERISA § 502(g)(1)’s explicit grant of 
discretion to the district courts to award “a reasonable 
attorney’s fee,” 29 U.S.C. § 1132(g), we review the dis- 


wal f 


26a 


trict court’s decision to award attorneys’ fees solely for 
abuse of discretion, Quesinberry v. Life Ins. Co. of N. 
Am., 987 F.2d 1017, 1028 (4th Cir.1993) (en banc). 
Peacock argues that, because the initial litigation resulted 
in his exoneration, any award of attorneys’ fees is unjust 
here. The truly culpable party, Peacock suggests, is Tru- 
Tech. Because this argument ignores the district court’s 
finding that Peacock was Tru-Tech’s alter ego and was, 
himself, culpable for siphoning off Tru-Tech’s funds, we 
reject it and find no abuse of discretion in the district 
court’s decisions to award attorneys’ fees arising out of 
both stages of litigation in this case. 


Of far greater weight is Peacock’s challenge to the 
amount of the fee awards announced by the district 
judges. Factor eight of the procedure established in 
Barber v. Kimbrell’s, Inc., for fixing the amount of an 
attorneys’ fee award is “the amount in controversy and 
the results obtained.” 577 F.2d at 226 n. 28. This is “the 
most critical factor,” in such an analysis. Hensley v. 
Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 436, 103 S.Ct. 1933, 1941, 
76 L.Ed.2d 40 (1983). Yet, although the fee award for 
the initial litigation amounts to more than two-thirds of 
the total award resulting from that litigation, the district 
court, in its discussion of “the most critical factor” in the 
Barber analysis focused on the result and the tenacity of 
the attorneys without mentioning the size of the proposed 
attorneys’ fee and costs award in comparison with the 
total damage award.’’ A subsequent discussion in the 
district court’s opinion justifies the disproportionate award 
by citation to cases discussing fee awards in the context of 
civil rights actions, and by asserting that the policies un- 
derlying ERISA are equally strong. This justification is 
without basis in law. We think it safe to say, without 
belittling the important interests which ERISA serves to 


17 Nor did the district court discuss the size of the fee award 
in the context of another Barber factor, the attorneys’ reasonable 
expectations at the outset of the litigation. 


‘ 27a 


vital protections and vindicate far more important in- 
terests. Cf. Quesinberry, 987 F.2d at 1030 (noting Con- 
gress’ decision not to implement, in the ERISA context, 
“a mandatory fee shifting rule analogous to 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1988”). As the Fifth Circuit has explained: 


The policies underlying ERISA are certainly im- 
portant ones, but they simply do not rise to the 
level of assuring that all citizens are accorded their 
civil rights. Not only are the policies that [ERISA] 
is designed to enforce less compelling than those 
furthered by [the civil rights laws], but the need for 
attorneys’ fees as an enforcement incentive is less 
under ERISA than the . . . civil rights statutes. 
Plaintiffs suing under the [civil rights laws] are 
“private attorneys general” in the sense that they seek 
injunctive relief to vindicate important public rights. 
If such “plaintiffs were routinely forced to bear their 
own attorneys’ fees, few aggrieved parties would be 
in a position to advance the public interest by invok- 
ing the injunctive powers of the federal courts.” 
[Newman v. Piggie Park Enterprises, Inc., 390 U.S. 
400, 402, 88 S.Ct. 964, 966, 19 L.Ed.2d 1263 
(1968)]. Plaintiffs under Title I of ERISA may be 
seeking injunctive relief for the benefit of all the 
participants and beneficiaries of a particular plan. 
but they may also be seeking damages on behalf of 
their plan or simply the recovery of benefits from the 
plan that are due them alone. Fiduciaries, more- 
over, may have a statutory obligation to bring ERISA 
suits. Thus, incentives in the form of attorneys’ fees 
are, on the whole, less necessary to insure that the 
Statute is enforced. 


Iron Workers Local No. 272 v. Bowen, 624 F.2d 1255, 
1265-66 (Sth Cir.1980) (footnotes omitted); accord 
Ellison v. Shenango Inc. Pension Bd. v. Snyder, 956 F.2d 
1268, 1274-75 (3d Cir.1992); Janowski v. International 
Bhd. of Teamsters Local No. 710 Pension Fund, 673 F.2d 


28a 


931, 941 (7th Cir.1982), vacated on other grounds, 463 
U.S. 1222, 103 S.Ct. 3565, 77 L.Ed.2d 1406 (1983). 
We agree with the position taken by other circuits in 
this regard. We therefore vacate the attorneys’ fees de- 
termination entered by the district court with regard to 
the initial litigation.** On remand, the district court should 
recalculate, in a manner consistent with this opinion, the 
amount of attorneys’ fees. 


With respect to the district court’s assessment of attor- 
ney’ fees with regard to the instant attempt to pierce 
Tru-Tech’s corporate veil, Peacock claims that the district 
court erred in failing to address whether any portion of 
the total hours spent by the plaintiff's attorneys was de- 
voted solely to plaintiffs’ case against Finegold, which, as 
opposed to plaintiffs’ case against Peacock, was not suc- 
cessful. We disagree. It is true that “no fees should be 
awarded for time spent on unsuccessful claims that were 
unrelated to successful ones.” Abshire v. Walls, 830 F.2d 
1277, 1282 (4th Cir.1987). Where, however, the facts of 
an unsuccessful claim are “inextricably intertwined” with 
those of a successful claim, fees for total time spent are 
appropriately awarded because both claims required in- 
vestigation of a “common core of facts.” Here, given 
Finegold’s relationship to Peacock and his role in Pea- 
cock’s and Tru-Tech’s transactions, and the nature of the 
claims raised against Finegold, we conclude that the facts 
underlying all of the plaintiffs’ claims in this litigation 
were “inextricably intertwined.” 

Peacock also raises several specific objections to the 
district court’s assessment of attorneys’ fees as to both 
phases of the litigation herein. First, Peacock cites nu- 


18 We also note that the district court, in assessing attorneys’ 
fees with respect to the initial litigation, made reference to plain- 
tiffs’ counsel’s success in piercing Tru-Tech’s corporate veil in the 
instant litigation. This was error. In proceeding under the “results 
obtained” factor in determining an appropriate fee award for the 
initial litigation, the district court should confine its consideration 
to the “results obtained” in that litigation. 


ae 


one would have sufficed. See n v. Metts, 973 F.2d 
378, 383-85 (4th Cir.1992). Second, Peacock claims 
that the district court awarded items of “cost” which do 
not fall within the definition of the term at 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1920. Last, Peacock describes as excessive the time 
plaintiffs’ counsel claim to have spent in preparing their 
fee petitions for submission to the district court and in 
performing unspecified tasks since the victory against 
Peacock in the veil-piercing phase of this case. 


The district judges’ orders herein reveal no examination 
of the objections described above. While we acknowledge 
the great deference we afford district courts in assessing 
the proper amount of attorneys’ fees and costs, Goodwin, 
973 F.2d at 385, where a party raises specific objections 
to particular fees or items of cost, we believe it appropri- 
ate for the district court, in the first instance, to address 
such objections and make appropriate factual finding in 
order that we might arrive at an informed review of the 
district court’s decision. See Joseph A. by Wolfe v. New 
Mexico Dep’t of Human Servs., 28 F.3d 1056, 1060-61 
(10th Cir.1994). 

VIII. 


We affirm the district court’s judgment allowing the 
plaintiff class to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil and 
recover the damages assessed in the initial litigation from 
Peacock. While we affirm the district court’s decision to 
allow the plaintiff class to recover the attorneys’ fees it 
incurred in maintaining both the initial litigation and the 
instant litigation, we vacate the amounts of attorneys’ fees 
and costs assessed by the district court and remand for 
recalculation consistent with this opinion. 


AFFIRMED IN PART AND VACATED AND RE- 
MANDED IN PART. 


30a 
APPENDIX B 
[Filed and Entered Oct. 28, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF SOUTH CAROLINA 
SPARTANBURG DIVISION 


C/A No. 7:91-3843-21 


Jack L. THomas, Individually and on Behalf of the Tru- 
Tech, Inc. Pension Plan, and as a Representative of a 
Class of Plaintiffs Similarly Situated, 

Plaintiff, 
vs. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK and ALAN H. FINEGOLD, 
Defendants. 


ORDER 


This matter is before the court as a nonjury trial. 
I find for the Plaintiff against D. Grant Peacock. I do 
not find for the Plaintiff against Alan H. Finegold. 


Background of the Case 


In 1987 the Plaintiff (“Thomas”) brought an action in 
United States District Court in South Carolina on behalf 
of himself and other employees of Tru-Tech, Inc. (“Tru- 
Tech”) seeking payment of pension benefits under the 
Tru-Tech, Inc. Pension Plan (“the Pension Plan”). 
Thomas v. Tru-Tech, Inc., No. 7:87-2243-3 (D.S.C. 
1988). In that action, Thomas asserted numerous causes 
of action, including breach of fiduciary duty under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (“ERISA”), 
29 U.S.C. § 1001, et seg. (1982). The substance of 


3la 


Thomas’ claim was that he and others were entitled to 
pension benefits under an amendment to the Pension Plan. 


In November 1988, the district court ruled that Thomas 
was entitled to benefits and further held that Tru-Tech, 
as a fiduciary of the Pension Plan, was liable to Thomas 
under ERISA for breach of its fiduciary duty in the 
amount of $187,628.93. The case was appealed to the 
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals which, in April 1990 
affirmed in all respects the lower court’s decision and left 
intact Thomas’ judgment against Tru-Tech. See Thomas 
v. Tru-Tech, Inc., 900 F.2d 256 (4th Cir. 1990) (table 
only; text available on Westlaw). 


Following the decision by the Fourth Circuit, Thomas 
attempted to some extent to collect the judgment from 
Tru-Tech, but was unsuccessful. Thomas then brought the 
present suit against D. Grant Peacock (“Peacock”), indi- 
vidually, and Peacock’s attorney, Alan H. Finegold 
(“Finegold”), on theories of civil conspiracy, fraudulent 
transfer of assets, and corporate veil piercing under 
ERISA and applicable federal law. Thomas alleged Pea- 
cock and Finegold conspired to improperly charnel Tru- 
Tech’s assets in order to defeat Thomas’ claim as a judg- 
ment creditor. In addition, Thomas alleged that Peacock’s 
control over Tru-Tech’s affairs was such that Tru-Tech 
was a mere “alter ego” of Peacock himself and that Tru- 
Tech’s disregard for corporate formalities justified piercing 
the corporate veil in order to secure satisfaction of the 
$187,628.93 Thomas judgment. 


Findings of Fact 


Tru-Tech was organized in 1981 as a Delaware cor- 
poration to purchase a textile machinery parts manufac- 
turing business from the Draper division of Rockwell 
International. Financing for the two plants, located in 
Marion, South Carolina, and Beebe River, New Hamp- 
shire, was arranged through a group of investors from 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Grant Peacock was one of these 


32a 


investors. A partnership named Marion Limited Partners 
was established for the purpose of purchasing the Marion, 
South Carolina, plant from Rockwell International and 
leasing it to Tru-Tech. An office was placed in Spartan- 
burg, South Carolina. 


The promoters and founders of Tru-Tech expected the 
business to derive substantial revenue primarily from two 
sources. First, they expected to continue supplying parts 
to Rockwell’s Draper Division which manufactured looms. 
Second, they believed that Tru-Tech had purchased the 
tooling for Draper parts and that they could sell these 
parts on the open market. Unfortunately, their expecta- 
tions did not come to fruition and the business failed. 


Despite the general sluggishness in the textile industry 
at the time, the demise of Tru-Tech can be attributed to 
two events that occurred simultaneously. First, within six 
months of Tru-Tech’s purchase of Rockwell’s Draper parts 
manufacturing business, Rockwell sold its Draper Division 
to another group of investors who immediately reduced 
inventories, thus severely reducing orders Tru-Tech ex- 
pected to fill. Second, the “new” Draper filed suit against 
Tru-Tech alleging that Draper, not Tru-Tech, had the 
tooling rights for Draper parts. It was determined sub- 
sequently that Draper had in fact retained these rights, 
and it was at this point that Tru-Tech’s potential for 
profit was eliminated. 


By September of 1983, Tru-Tech had lost a substantial 
sum of money and Bill W. Wilcock, Tru-Tech’s president 
and chief executive officer, was terminated and replaced by 
John H. Blackburn, Tru-Tech’s Vice President of Opera- 
tions. The Spartanburg office was closed. Since Tru-Tech 
continued to lose money, it became Blackburn’s respon- 
sibility to liquidate Tru-Tech’s assets. 


During the latter half of 1985 and early 1986, Tru- 
Tech managed to sell all of its productive assets in South 
Carolina. Although the lease between Marion Limited 


‘ 3a 


Partners and Tru-Tech did not — until the fall of 
1986, Tru-Tech quit paying rent in February of . 
Operations .at the Beebe River Plant in New Hampshire 
ceased in June of 1986. . ‘While Tru-Tech maintained as- 
sets at this plant, management sought to liquidate the 
assets to reduce its financial liabilities. Tru-Tech’s nega- 
tive net worth increased from $893,676.00 on September 
30, 1986, to $1,376,888.00 on September 30, 1990, thus 
evidencing the fact that Tru-Tech continued to lose money. 
Among the liabilites owed by Tru-Tech were the amount 
of Thomas’ judgment, approximately $50,000.00 owed 
to Grant Peacock & Co., approximately $350,000.00 
owed to Peacock individually, and several other large out- 
standing debts. 


D. Grant Peacock was the sole stockholder and director 
of Peacock, Williams & Company, formerly D. Grant 
Peacock & Company. He also ended up serving as the sole 
director of Tru-Tech from March of 1988 until its liquida- 
tion. Peacock owned controlling interest in Tru-Tech 
prior to the sale of 724,980 shares to Timothy H. Williams 
and John H. Blackburn for $200. Peacock was a CPA 
and a lawyer who also served as a partner in Marion 
Limited Partnership. 


Following discontinuation of the operations of Tru- 
Tech, Peacock testified that John H. Blackburn was 
“placed on the payroll of Peacock, Williams” for the pur- 
pose of handling the wrap-up of Tru-Tech in July 1986. 
For this service and for the service of operating out of 
Peacock’s office in Pittsburgh, Peacock, Williams & Com- 
pany billed Tru-Tech $10,000 per month for “financial 
consulting services,” generating a large receivable on the 
books of Tru-Tech in excess of $110,000. However, ac- 
cording to an August 3, 1989, memo to Timothy H. Wil- 
liams, with a copy to Peacock and Jack Blackburn, “The 


_ 
\o 
oo 
an 


1 Although the stock certificates are dated December 10, 1988, 
they were forwarded by Grant Peacock to John Blackburn for his 
signature as president of Tru-Tech on April 4, 1990. 


34a 


Peacock, Williams books contain[ed] no receivable from 
Tru-Tech because the management fee receivable of ap- 
proximately $110,000 was written off in the year ended 
January 31, 1987.” During the entire period from No- 
vember 1, 1986, through October 31, 1988, Peacock, 
Williams & Company billed Tru-Tech for such incidental 
expenses as telephone bills, travel, entertainment, legal 
fees, UPS, Federal Express, office supplies, Xerox, post- 
age, and petty cash. Peacock testified that during this 
period no accounting records were kept for Tru-Tech 
“since it had no employees.” 

On November 28, 1988, the Plaintiff obtained the 
judgment from the district court against Tru-Tech. An 
appeal was taken immediately thereafter. After obvious 
discussions with Peacock concerning the Thomas judg- 
ment, Finegold wrote Peacock on March 2, 1989, stating 
in part as follows: 


I see no reason for any payment with regard to the 
Thomas litigation unless and until the judgment be- 
comes final and constitutes a lien on real estate held 
for sale. As I understand the situation, the corpora- 
tion owns no real estate in South Carolina and the 
plaintiffs have made no effort to attach the corpora- 
tion’s property in New Hampshire at this time. It 
remains quite desirable then, to effect the disposition, 
for acceptable consideration, of the New Hampshire 
realty before the plaintiffs attempt to reach it. You 
will need, nevertheless, to pay any legal fees owed to 
Tru-Tech, Inc.’s counsel in the Thomas case in order 
to keep them involved in the appeal process. 


In the same letter, it was suggested to Peacock “in 
order to protect the real estate against any claims in the 
Thomas case and to preserve some possibility of recovery 
of some portion of the amounts owed to you and your 
corporation” that Peacock consider an elaborate scheme 
under which a new corporation would be formed in New 
Hampshire for the purpose of receiving a transfer of the 


—> 


Tru-Tech real estate. Recognizing that “the possibility 
exists of treatment of the transfer as a voidable prefer- 
ence,” Finegold nonetheless advised that “the arrangement 
suggested allows you and Peacock, Williams & Company 
to recover $130,000 if the new corporation eventually 
succeeds in consummating the sale of the premises.” 


Following more discussions with Peacock, on March 
13, 1989, Finegold wrote to Peacock “as a consequence of 
our meeting this past Monday with respect to Tru-Tech, 
Inc.,” to point out “the various matters on which we had 
settled as a strategy,” including: 


(3) The corporation will refrain, for the time being, 
from payment of any obligations arising out of the 


Thomas litigation, pending further developments on 
this front. 


( 1) The corporation will, with the use of its receiv- 
ables, pay down the amounts owed to Peacock, 
Williams & Company and to you, personally, in order 
to start running the one year period for avoidance of 
preferences to control persons in bankruptcy. 


Following this exchange of correspondence, on a Tru- 
Tech Proforma Balance Sheet dated June 26, 1989, Pea- 
cock indicated in his own handwriting that the note 
receivable shown on the books of Tru-Tech as the “Brod- 
sky Note” with a value of $47,000 should be transferred 
to Peacock, Williams & Company and that Tru-Tech 
should “forget” the $187,628.93 Thomas judgment car- 
ried as a liability on the Tru-Tech balance sheet together 
with estimated interest on the judgment of $12,000 and 
estimated Plaintiff's attorneys’ fees of $50,000. It is also 
worthy of note that this same document shows that the 
asserted consideration for this preferential transfer of the 
Brodsky Note to Peacock, Williams & Company was the 
same management fee for “financial consulting services” 
which were written off on the books of Peacock, Williams 
& Company in the year ending January 31, 1987. 


36a 


According to this “strategy,” Peacock, who by then 
was sole director of Tru-Tech, executed a written consent 
of the Tru-Tech Board of Directors dated July 1, 1989, 
authorizing the Brodsky Note to be transferred to Pea- 
cock, Williams & Company “for accounts payable owed 
by Tru-Tech to Peacock, Williams,” and the assignment 
of the Brodsky Note was executed by John H. Blackburn 
as president of Tru-Tech on October 20, 1989. Biack- 
burn was then operating out of Peacock’s office in Pitts- 
burgh. However, although the transfer date of the Brod- 
sky Note is shown in Tru-Tech’s general ledger with a 
transaction date of July 31, 1989, a typed list of accounts 
payable for Tru-Tech dated April 19, 1990, still shows a 
total of $111,706 payable to Grant Peacock & Company 
with a handwritten entry questioning whether the $40,000 
Brodsky Note should be deducted. 


In addition to the Brodsky Note, deposition exhibits 
identified by Peacock and Finegold indicate that a note 
receivable known as the “Uhlman Note” was transferred 
to Finegold and Nancy B. Peacock. The authorization for 
this transfer, signed by D. Grant Peacock as sole director 
of Tru-Tech, is dated October 31, 1988, and Finegold 
testified in his deposition that a check should have been 
issued to Tru-Tech “more or less” at the same time: 


Q. And the check would have been at the same 
time as far as you know? 


A. I assume more or less. Whether it was on the 
exact same day that the note was signed, I don’t 
know. 


The date of the transfer and payment of consideration 
is important because, if the authorization was actually 
executed on the date shown in Plaintiff's Deposition Ex- 
hibit # 7, this transfer would have taken place on Octo- 
ber 31, 1988, twenty-eight days prior to the entry of the 
Thomas judgment against Tru-Tech. Finegold testified 
that “Mr. Peacock contacted me and indicated to me that 


‘ 37a 


Tru-Tech, Inc., had as one its assets this particular note” 
and that Tru-Tech “was badly in need of funds that it 
could use to pay certain obligations and that it wished to 
sell this note for cash.” However, the actual “transaction 
date” shown on the general ledger of Tru-Tech for the 
transfer of the Uhlman Note is May 31, 1989. In addi- 
tion, Thomas introduced as Exhibit # 31 a letter from 
Finegold dated April 3, 1989, the first paragraph of which 
States: 


Pursuant to your request, I have signed and enclosed 
herewith, in my capacity as trustee of the D. Grant 
Peacock Trust for Nancy B. Peacock u/a dated De- 
cember 26, 1985, two checks payable to the order 
of Tru-Tech in the aggregate amount of $27,235.08 
constituting the purchase price of the Uhlman note, 
including interest accrued through same date. 


This same letter requests that Peacock furnish Finegold 
“a copy of the so-called Uhlman note” and “a schedule 
showing the application by Tru-Tech of the $27,235.08 
paid, an application which, I assume, involves some fa- 
vored creditors like Peacock, Williams & Company, In- 
corporated.” 

Thus, the evidence is that there was either no con- 
sideration paid for the assignment of the Uhlman Note on 
October 31, 1988, or the assignment was simply back- 
dated to reflect that as the supposed date of transfer. In 
addition, the court finds that the purpose of the sale of 
the Uhlman Note was to get enough cash into Tru-Tech 
to pay the $25,000 retainer to Greenville attorney David 
L. Freeman for the purpose of handling the appeal of the 
Thomas judgment.’ Deposition exhibits identified by 
Peacock indicate that reports on the progress of the 
Thomas litigation were made by Freeman to John H. 
Blackburn as senior vice-president of Peacock, Williams & 


? According to a pencil entry on the Tru-Tech accounts payable 
list of July 31, 1989, the $25,000 retainer appears to have been 
paid on June 2, 1989. 


38a 


Company and that Freeman’s bill for handling the appeal 
was sent, not to Tru-Tech, but to Peacock himself and to 
Grant Peacock & Company.* 


In addition to these transfers, Tru-Tech also transferred 
a receivable from Marion Limited Partners, in which Pea- 
cock was a partner, in the amount of $5,737.75 to Pea- 
cock, Williams & Company on November 1, 1989, together 
with a $5,000 note on May 4, 1990.‘ There is further 
evidence that Peacock was the “alter ego” of Tru-Tech in 
a memorandum dated November 2, 1989, which stated: 


On September 30, 1987, Tru-Tech, Inc., shows a 
payable to Peacock Williams of $31,804. Tru-Tech 
also shows a receivable from Marion Limited Partners 
for $37,541.75. 


On April 30, 1988, the two amounts were netted 
on Tru-Tech’s books lowering the receivable from 
Marion Limited Partners to $5,737.75 and the 
amount due tc Peacock, Williams to zero. 


Marion Limited Partners and Peacock, Williams 
should now reflect this change. Marion Limited Part- 
ners now owes Peacock, Williams $31,804.° 


Peacock continued to act as the “alter ego” of Tru- 
Tech even after his purported resignation as a director 


*Freeman’s letter of January 6, 1989, enclosing his $25,000 
“retainer statement” was sent directly to D. Grant Peacock of D. 
Grant Peacock and Company, and the invoice itself is directed to 
Grant Peacock & Company, Inc. 


* This transfer was pursuant to what Peacock called “a floating 
authorization,” and the assignment was executed by Timothy H. 
Williams as executive vice-president of Tru-Tech on May 4, 1990, 
four days after he resigned as an officer of Tru-Tech on May 1, 
1990. 


’This remaining Tru-Tech receivable of $5,737.75 was subse- 
quently transferred to Peacock Williams & Company on November 
1, 1989. 


é 39a 


on February 15, 1990. On March 6, 1990, Finegold 
forwarded him “for signature in connection with the with- 
drawal of Tru-Tech, Inc., from the State of New Hamp- 
shire,” a letter to the State of New Hampshire “apparently 
required for completion of this process.” Finegold con- 
tinued to bill Peacock for delinquent legal services ac- 
counts of Tru-Tech through May of 1990, and Peacock 
continued to sign checks for legal fees on the bank ac- 
count of Tru-Tech, including a $249.91 check dated May 
29, 1990, and a check for $1,057.16 dated May 31, 1990. 
However, although Finegold had no problem in getting 
Peacock to sign Tru-Tech checks in payment of Finegold’s 
legal fees after Peacock had resigned as a director, on 
August 30, 1990, Finegold wrote to Donald L. Phillips, 
a Pittsburgh attorney hired by Thomas to undertake sup- 
plemental proceedings in Pennsylvania, stating in part as 
follows: 


Apparently, a problem exists in furnishing answers to 
those interrogatories; for at present, as I understand 
the situation, Tru-Tech, Inc. . . . has discontinued 
its businesses, and disposed of all of its fixed assets 
. . . 5 and all of its directors and officers with any 
detailed knowledge of the businesses and affairs of 
the corporation have resigned. As a practical matter, 
then, the corporation is defunct; and there is no one 
known to Grant Peacock or to me who has the au- 
thority and knowledge to prepare the answers de- 
manded to the interrogatories propounded. 


Further, with respect to Peacock’s credibility, there was 
no reference to Marion Limited Partners’ transfer to Pea- 
cock, Williams & Company in Peacock’s answers to gar- 
nishee interrogatories in the Pennsylvania supplemental 
proceedings * and the evidence reveals the back-dating of 
the stock certificates from Peacock to Timothy H. Williams 


* The interrogatories were signed by Finegold and verified by 
Peacock. 


40a 


and John R. Blackburn from April 4, 1990 to December 
10, 1988.’ 


Based on the background findings stated above, the 
court makes the following specific findings of fact: 


1. Grant Peacock was the sole shareholder and director 
of Peacock, Williams & Company, formerly Grant Peacock 
& Company. 


2. From March 1988 until its ultimate dissolution in 
May of 1990, Peacock was the controlling shareholder 
and sole director of Tru-Tech. He directed and controlled 
essentially all of its affairs, including its finances, dictated 
the disposition of its assets, and ran the company from 
his own office in Pittsburgh, either directly or through 
other employees of Peacock, Williams & Company. 


3. During the entire period from November 1986 
through its ultimate dissolution in May of 1990, there was 
a failure to observe corporate formalities between Tru- 
Tech, Grant Peacock, and Peacock, Williams & Company. 
No dividends were paid, there were no independently 
functioning officers and directors other than Peacock and 
those employees of Peacock, Williams & Company domi- 
nated by Grant Peacock; there was an absence of many 
of the corporate records normally found in a functioning 
corporation, and the corporate shell of Tru-Tech was 
merely a facade for the operation of the dominant will of 
Grant Peacock. 


TIn his deposition, Peacock testified that the reason for this 
stock transfer had nothing to do with tax considerations. How- 
ever, Tru-Tech’s amended 1988 tax return dated January 5, 1990 
states as follows: “This return as originally filed incorrectly in- 
dicated that a shareholder owned more than 50% of the stock as of 
year end. This return is filed to correct the answer to question 
l(a) and (b) on the original return.” Peacock testified that the 
stock was issued in September of 1989, but the actual documents 
show that the stock certificates were not signed unti] April 1990. 


try ; 
ber 1988 through its ultimate dissolution in May of 1990, 
Tru-Tech was and remained insolvent. In contemplation 
of the Thomas judgment and following its entry, Pea- 
cock directed the management of Tru-Tech’s affairs to 


creditors owned or controlled by Peacock, including Pea- 
cock, Williams & Company and the D. Grant Peacock 
Trust for Nancy B. Peacock. 


5. Included in the assets of Tru-Tech siphoned off by 
Peacock to certain favored creditors owned or controlled 
by him were the following: 


(a) The Uhlman Note valued at $27,235. 
(b) The Brodsky Note valued at $47,000 to $48,000. 


(c) The Marion Limited Partners’ receivable valued 
at $5,737.75. 


(d) A note transferred to Peacock, Williams & Com- 
pany in May 1990 valued at $5,000. 


6. The stated consideration for the bulk of these trans- 
fers was a $110,000 receivable payable to Peacock, Wil- 
liams & Company primarily for “financial consulting serv- 
ices” billed to Tru-Tech during the time it was dominated 
and controlled by Peacock and Peacock, Williams & 
Company. This receivable had been previously written 
off on the books of Peacock, Williams & Company in 
January of 1987. The remaining consideration for these 
transfers was a cash payment from the D. Grant Pea- 
cock Trust for Nancy B. Peacock, the apparent purpose 
of which was to pay the retainer charged by Greenville 
attorney David Freeman to Peacock and Grant Peacock 


& Company for handling the appeal of the Thomas judg- 
ment. 


42a 


7. These assets of Tru-Tech were siphoned off by Pea- 
cock pursuant to a corporate strategy developed by him. 
It was the specific intent and purpose of this strategy to 
siphon off these assets to favored creditors owned or con- 
trolled by Peacock and to defeat collection of the Thomas 
judgment. 


8. There was a significant intermingling of funds as 
well as overlap of administrative personnel between Tru- 
Tech and Peacock, Williams & Company. As a result of 
these and other actions of Peacock as the dominant share- 
holder and director, Tru-Tech failed to observe traditional 
corporate formalities. 


9. In his efforts to siphon off the assets of Tru-Tech 
to favored creditors owned or controlled by Peacock, it 
was the specific intent of Peacock to defraud the former 
employees of Tru-Tech who were beneficiaries of the Pen- 
sion Plan and to defeat their legitimate attempt to collect 
a lawful judgment. 


10. The corporate form of Tru-Tech during the period 
of November 1986 through its ultimate dissolution in May 
of 1990, and even following that date, was a mere facade, 
and during that period Tru-Tech was nothing more than 
the “alter ego” of Peacock and an instrumentality domi- 
nated and controlled by him. 


11. Under the facts of this case and in light of the 
clear legislative purpose of ERISA, it would be inequitable 
and unfair to allow Tru-Tech’s corporate form to be mis- 
used for the purpose of depriving its employees of their 
anticipated benefits and of avoiding lawful financial obli- 
gations to an employee benefit plan under ERISA. 


12. The involvement of Finegold was not proven to 
have exceeded the scope of proper legal representation. 


‘ 43a 
_ Conclusions of Law 
A. Federal Policy Under ERISA 


The applicable federal policy under ERISA was well 
stated by the United States Court of Appeals for the First 
Circuit in Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1, 304 (ist Cir. 
1986) where the court explained: 


There is no litmus test in the federal courts governing 
when to disregard corporate form. The Supreme 
Court has, however, provided some guidance, stating 
that “the doctrine of corporate entity, recognized 
generally and for most purposes, will not be regarded 
when to do so would work fraud or injustice.” 
Taylor v. Standard Gas Co., 306 U.S. 307, 322, 
59 S.Ct. 543, 550, 83 L.Ed. 669 (1939). The Court 
has further indicated that corporate form may not 
defeat overriding federal legislative policies... . This 
Court has said, 


The general rule adopted in the federal cases 
is that “a corporate entity may be disregarded 
in the interests of public convenience, fairness 
and equity. .. .” In applying this rule, federal 
courts will look closely at the purpose of the 
federal statute to determine whether the statute 
places importance on the corporate form... , 
an inquiry that usually gives less respect to the 
corporate form than does the strict common law 
alter ego doctrine. . . . 


ERISA, the statute sought to be enforced here, can- 
not be said to attach great weight to corporate form. 
Indeed, deferring too readily to the corporate iden- 
tity may run contrary to the explicit purposes of the 
Act. Congress enacted ERISA in part because many 
employees were being deprived of anticipated bene- 
fits, which not only reduced the financial resources 
of individual employees and their dependents but also 
undermined the stability of industrial relations gen- 


44a 


erally. . . . Allowing the shareholders of a marginal 
corporation to invoke the corporate shield in circum- 
stances where it is inequitable for them to do so and 
thereby avoid financial obligations to employee bene- 
fit plans, would seem to be precisely the type of con- 
duct Congress wanted to prevent. 


801 F.2d at 3-4 (citations omitted). 


In deciding whether it is appropriate to disregard the 
corporate form and to impose liability upon the dominant 
shareholder under the “alter ego” doctrine, the courts have 
generally focused on the following three factors: 


the small respect paid by the shareholders themselves 

to [the corporation’s] separate corporate entity; the 

fraudulent intent of the incorporator; and the degree 

of injustice that would be visited on the litigants by 

recognizing the corporate identity. Other courts have 

looked to similar factors where ERISA is involved. 
8 


Citing Alman v. Danin, with approval, the Seventh 
Circuit in Lumpkin v. Envirodyne Industries, Inc., 933 
F.2d 449, 461 (7th Cir. 1991) stated as follows: 


The underlying congressional policy behind ERISA 
clearly favors the disregard of the corporate entity 
in cases where employees are denied their pension 
benefits. In Pension Ben. Guaranty Corp. v. Quimet 
Corp., 711 F.2d 1085 (1983), certiorari denied, 464 
U.S. 961, 104 S.Ct. 393, 78 L.Ed.2d 337, the First 
Circuit pierced the corporate veil to impose liability 
upon the solvent members of a corporation that had 
declared bankruptcy. The court emphasized that the 
congressional intent of ERISA is to hold employers 


8 Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d at 4, citing Contractors, Laborers, 
Teamsters & Engineers Health & Welfare Plan v. Hroch, 757 F.2d 
184, 190 (8th Cir. 1985); Laborers Clean-up Contract Administra- 
tion Trust Fund v. Uriarte Clean-up Service, Inc., 736 F.2d 516, 
524 (9th Cir. 1984). 


i a 


responsible for pension benefits, so that when the 
corporate form poses a bar to liability, “concerns for 
corporate separateness are secondary to what we view 
as the mandate of ERISA.” .. . Thus under Quimet 
Corp., the corporate form chosen by defendant does 
not necessarily preclude plaintiffs from piercing the 
corporate veil and suing Envirodyne. If justice would 
be served and potential fraud nullified then plaintiffs 
should be able to proceed against the party that had 
actual control of WSC and EDC.’ 


In DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc. v. W. Ray Flemming 
Fruit Company, 540 F.2d 681 (4th Cir. 1976), the 
Fourth Circuit described the appropriate considerations in 
determining whether the corporate veil should be pierced. 
In an opinion by Judge Donald Russell, the court stated: 


At the outset, it is recognized that a corporation is an 
entity, separate and distinct from its officers and 
stockholders, and that its debts are not the individual 
indebtedness of its stockholders. . .. But this concept 
of separate entity is merely a legal theory, “introduced 
for purposes of convenience and to subserve the ends 
of justice,” and the courts “decline to recognize [it] 
whenever recognition of the corporate form would 
extend the principle of incorporation ‘beyond its le- 
gitimate purposes and [would] produce injustices or 
inequitable consequences.’” ... . Accordingly, “in 
an appropriate case and in furtherance of the ends 
of justice,” the corporate veil will be pierced and the 
corporation and its stockholders “will be treated as 
identical.” 
DeWitt Truck Brokers, 540 F.2d at 683. 


. The Fourth Circuit stressed the “proof of plain fraud 
is not a necessary element in a finding to disregard the 


* Lumpkin v. Envirodyne Industries, Inc., 933 F 
(7th Cir. 1991). 2d 449, 461 


46a 


corporate entity” (540 F.2d 684) and “that the mere 
fact that all or almost all of the corporate stock is owned 
by one individual or a few individuals, will not afford 
sufficient grounds for disregarding corporateness. .. .” 


But when substantial ownership of all the stock of a 
corporation in a single individual is combined with 
other factors clearly supporting disregard of the cor- 
porate fiction on grounds of fundamental equity and 
fairness, courts have experienced “little difficulty” 
and have shown no hesitancy in applying what is de- 
scribed as the “alter ego” or “instrumentality” theory 
in order to cast aside the corporate shield and to 
fasten liability on the individual stockholder. . . . 


DeWitt Truck Brokers, 540 F.2d at 685. 


Stating that the piercing of the corporate veil is a ques- 
tion of fact that is “particularly in the province of the trial 
court” (540 F.2d 684), the Fourth Circuit in DeWitt 
Truck Brokers stated: 


One fact which all the authorities consider significant 
in the inquiry, and particularly so in the case of the 
one-man or closely held corporation, is whether the 
corporation was grossly under-capitalized for the pur- 
poses of the corporate undertaking. . .. And [t]he 
obligation to provide adequate capital begins with 
incorporation and is a continuing obligation there- 
after . . . during the corporation’s operations. . . . 
Other factors that are emphasized in the application 
of the doctrine are failure to observe corporate for- 
malities, non-payment of dividends, the insolvency of 
the debtor corporation at the time, siphoning the 
funds of the corporation by the dominant stock- 
holder, non-functioning of other officers or directors, 
absence of corporate records, and the fact that the 
corporation is merely a facade for the operations of 
the dominant stockholder or stockholders. .. . 


DeWitt Truck Brokers, 540 F.2d at 685-687 (citations 
omitted ). 


47a 


In accord with these rules, see Federal Deposit Insur- 
ance Corporation v. Sea Pines Company, 692 F.2d 973 
(4th Cir. 1982); Sturkie v. Sifly, 280 S.C. 453, 313 
S.E.2d 316 (S.C. Ct. App. 1984); C.T. Lowndes & Coe 
v. Suburban Gas & Appliance Company, 415 §.E.2d 404 
(S.C. Ct. App. 1991); Cumberland Wood Products, Inc. 
v. Bennett, 1992 W.L. 71171 (S.C. Ct. App. 1992); Cen- 
tral States v. Minneapolis Van and Warehouse Company, 
746 F. Supp. 1289, 1294-1296 (N.D. Ill. 1991). The 
general rule is also stated in Fletcher Cyclopedia of Cor- 
porations, section 41.90, page 715, as follows: 


The federal rule states that a corporate entity may be 
disregarded in the interest of public convenience, fair- 
ness, and equity, and in applying this rule the federal 
courts will look closely at the purpose of the federal 
statute involved to determine whether it places im- 
portance on corporate form. Under federal common 
law, the corporate form may be disregarded in the 
interest of justice where it is used to defeat an over- 
riding public policy... . 


In Leddy v. Standard Drywall, Inc., 875 F.2d 383, 387- 
88 (2nd Cir. 1989), the court held that the president and 
major shareholder of a corporation who conspired with 
the corporation to defraud pension, welfare, and fringe 
benefits of their employees was individually liable under 
ERISA for unpaid contributions even though traditional 
conditions for piercing the corporate veil were not met. 
On the issue of individual liability of Gedell, as president 
and major shareholder of the corporation, the court stated: 


We agree with Gedell that the District Court did not 
make sufficient findings for a conclusion to pierce the 
corporate veil under traditional common law princi- 
ples, nor was there sufficient proof at trial that would 
support such a conclusion. But this does not absolve 
Gedell of liability. 


48a 


Section 515 of ERISA imposes an obligation to 
make contributions to employee benefit funds on 
“every employer who is obligated to make contribu- 
tions . . . under the terms of a collectively bargained 
agreement.” 29 U.S.C. § 1145. The term “employer” 
is defined as “any person acting directly as an em- 
ployer, or indirectly in the interest of an employer, 
in relation to an employee benefit plan.” 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1002. 


Gedell was not merely a major shareholder and con- 
trolling officer of a company that neglected to make 
required benefit plan contributions. He and other 
Standard officials engaged in a criminal conspiracy to 
defraud the Funds. .. . 


The Supreme Court has consistently refused to give 
effect to the corporate form where it is interposed to 
defeat legislative policies. . . . 


Shielding from liability a controlling corporate officer 
who, like Gedell, deliberately flouts ERISA obliga- 
tions by conspiring to defraud employee pension and 
welfare plans would surely defeat this legislative pur- 
pose. We therefore hold that at least to the extent 
that a controlling corporate official defrauds or con- 
spires to defraud a benefit fund of required contribu- 
tions, the official is individually liable under Section 
502 of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. § 1132, just as he would 
be liable for unpaid minimum wages under [the Fair 
Labor Standards Act], even if the traditional condi- 
tions for piercing the corporate veil are not met... . 


Leddy v. Standard Drywall, 875 F.2d at 387-88. 


In Combs v. Ryan’s Coal Co., Inc., 785 F.2d 970, 983 
(11th Cir. 1986) the court stated that “because liability 


, 49a 


here flows from ERISA, we find it appropriate to follow 
the Supreme Court's holdings, in cases arising under anal- 
ogous labor law statutes, that have permitted imposing lia- 
bility for contempt on a successor or alter ego.” 
Accordingly, we affirm the district court’s determina- 
tion that Simmons and Alan’s are liable to the Trust- 
ees for the unpaid pension funds. The factual sup- 
port for the trial court’s finding, in both respects, is 
overwhelming. Simmons directed and controlled the 
finances of both companies, as well as numerous 
others, and ran the whole lot out of one office. The 
decision not to pay the obligation under the consent 
decree was his. During the period when Ryan’s was 
in default of its obligations under the consent decree, 
Simmons authorized over $60,000 in payments to 
himself and to other of his wholly owned concerns. 
. . . Further, there was significant intermingling of 


funds . . . as well as overlap of administrative per- 
sonnel. . . . Upon all of this evidence we cannot prop- 
erly say that the trial court’s findings were clearly in 
error. 


Combs v. Ryan’s Coal Co., Inc., 785 F.2d at 983. 


In Lowen v. Tower Asset Management, Inc., 829 F.2d 
1209 (2d Cir. 1987), the plaintiff-trustees of an ERISA 
pension plan sued the corporations, and their individual 
directors, responsible for investing the pension plan’s 
funds. The plaintiffs alleged that the defendants engaged 
in prohibited transactions because the defendants owned 
or had an interest in some of the corporations in which 
the defendants were investing the pension plan’s funds. 
Id. at 1212. In affirming summary judgment for the 
plaintiffs, the Second Circuit held that not only the cor- 
porations, but also the individual owners of the corpora- 
tions, were liable for fiscal mismanagement: 


Neither the separate corporate status of the three cor- 
porations nor the general principle of limited share- 


50a 


holder liability afford protection where exacting 
obeisance to the corporate form is inconsistent with 
ERISA’s remedial purposes. Parties may not use 
she'l-game-like maneuvers to shift fiduciary obliga- 
tions to one legal entity while channeling profits from 


self-dealing to a separate legal entity under their 
control. 


A failure to disregard the corporate form in the 
circumstances of the present case would fatally under- 
mine ERISA. The record demonstrates beyond dis- 
pute extensive intermixing of assets among the corpo- 
rations, and among the corporations and individual 
defendants. 


Id. at 1220-21. 


Lowen and Alman particularly demonstrate that fed- 
eral courts will look to substance over form when allega- 
tions of corporate mismanagement or fraud are prosecuted 
under ERISA. Moreover, the federal courts will hold 
defendants personally liable for their fraudulent actions. 
The fact of the matter is that ERISA was enacted to 
prevent corporate machinations from hindering employee- 
plaintiffs in securing their benefits. ERISA clearly states 
this not only in its purpose clause, but also in its legisla- 
tive history. The courts, therefore, have construed ERISA 
to have a broad, remedial scope. 


B. Civil Conspiracy 


The elements of a civil conspiracy under South Caro- 
lina law are (1) a combination of two or more persons, 
(2) for the purpose of injuring the plaintiffs, and (3) 
which causes the plaintiffs special damages. See LaMotte 
v. The Punchline of Columbia, Inc., 296 S.C. 66, 370 
_S.E.2d 711, 713 (1988); Island Car Wash, Inc. v. Norris, 


292 S.C. 595, 358 S.E. 2d 150, 152 (S.C. Ct. App. 
1987). 


Sla 


In Lee v. Chesterfield General Hospital, 289 S.C. 6, 
344 §.E.2d 379 (S.C. Ct. App. 1986), the court explained 
the distinction between a civil conspiracy and criminal 
conspiracy as follows: 


A criminal conspiracy consists of “a combination 
between two or more persons for the purpose of 
accomplishing a criminal or unlawful object or an 
object neither criminal nor unlawful by criminal or 
unlawful means.” . . . (“A conspiracy consists. . . 
in the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful 
act, or to do a lawful act by unlaw means”). To 
establish a criminal conspiracy it is not necessary 
to prove an overt act. The gist of the crime is the 
unlawful combination. The crime is then complete, 
even though nothing further is done. . .. 


A civil conspiracy, on the other hand, consists of 
three elements: (1) a combination of two or more 
persons, (2) for the purpose of injuring the plaintiff, 
(3) which causes special damages. . . . The grava- 
men of the tort is the damage resulting to the plain- 
tiff from an overt act done pursuant to the combina- 
tion, not the agreement or combination per se... . 
A civil conspiracy may, of course, be furthered by 
an unlawful act. . . . However, an unlawful act is 
not a necessary element of the tort. An action for 
conspiracy may lie even though no unlawful means 
are used and no independently unlawful acts are 
committed. 


Lee v. Chesterfield General Hospital, 344 S.E.2d at 381- 
82 (citations omitted). 


C. Specific Conclusions 


1. The plaintiff has the burden of proof and must 
establish each and every element of his cause of action 
by the preponderance of the evidence. This means that 
the plaintiff must produce evidence which, when consid- 


52a 


ered in the light of all the facts, leads this court to believe 
that what the plaintiff claims is more likely true than not. 


2. While the doctrine of corporate entity is recognized 
generally and for most purposes, it will not be regarded 
when to do so would work fraud or injustice, nor may 
the corporate form be misused to defeat overriding federal 
legislative policies. 


3. The general rule adopted is that a corporate entity 
may be disregarded in the interest of public convenience, 
fairness, and equity. Under the clear legislative purposes 
of ERISA, the courts do not attach great weight to cor- 
porate form when to do so would deprive employees of 
their anticipated benefits and avoid lawful financial obli- 
gations to employee benefit plans. 


4. The primary considerations in determining whether 
to pierce the corporate veil under ERISA are the amount 
of respect paid by the shareholders themselves to the cor- 
porations’ separate corporate entity, the fraudulent intent 
of the dominating shareholder, and the degree of injustice 
that would be visited on the litigants by recognizing the 
corporate entity. The underlying congressional policy be- 
hind ERISA clearly favors the disregard of the corporate 
entity in cases where employees are wrongfully denied 
their pension benefits. The congressional intent of ERISA 
is to hold employers responsible for pension benefits, so 
that when the corporate form poses a bar to liability, 
concerns for corporate separateness are secondary to the 
mandate of ERISA. If justice would be served and poten- 
tial fraud nullified, then the beneficiaries of the plans 
should be able to proceed against the party that has ac- 
tually exerted dominant control over the corporation. 


5. Proof of plain fraud is not a necessary element in 
a finding to disregard the corporate entity, but when sub- 
stantial ownership of the stock of a corporation in a single 
individual is combined with other facts clearly supporting 
disregard of the corporate fiction on the grounds of funda- 


; 53a 


mental equity and fairness, there should be little difficulty 
and no hesitancy in applying the alter ego doctrine. 

6. The evidence in this case dictates the conclusion 
that Peacock was the “alter ego” of Tru-Tech and that 
Tru-Tech was a mere “instrumentality” in his hands. 


7. The Plaintiffs have sustained their burden of proof 
on the “alter ego” theory and are entitled to “pierce the 
corporate veil” and to recover a judgment against D. 
Grant Peacock for recovery of their previously rendered 
judgment for $187,628.93 against Tru-Tech together with 
interest and attorneys’ fees. 


8. The Plaintiffs have not sustained their burden of 
proving the essential elements of a civil conspiracy under 
South Carolina law, the elements being (a) a combination 


of two or more persons, (b) for the purpose of injuring 
the Plaintiffs, and (c) that such combination and con- 
spiracy has caused the Plaintiffs special damages. 


9. The Plaintiffs have not sustained their burden of 
proving liability on the part of Finegold. 


THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that the Plaintiffs 
shall have judgment against D. Grant Peacock in the 
amount of $187,628.93 together with interest at the rate 
of 8.55% as set forth in the Thomas judgment and costs 
under 29 U.S.C. § 1132(q). Plaintiffs shall have thirty 
days after the filing of this Order to submit their petitions 
for attorneys’ fees. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the court finds for 
Alan H. Finegold and no judgment shall be entered 
against him. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


/s/ William B. Traxler, Jr. 
WILLIAM B. TRAXLER, Jr. 
United States District Judge 
Greenville, South Carolina 
October 26, 1992. 


54a 


APPENDIX C 
[Filed and Entered Jun. 24, 1992] 
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


FOR THE DISTRICT OF SOUTH CAROLINA 
SPARTANBURG DIVISION 


C/A NO: 7:91-3843-21 


JacK THOMAS, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 
Inc. Pension Plan, and as a Representative of a Class of 
Plaintiffs similarly situated, 

Plaintiffs, 
v. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK and ALAN H. FINEGOLD, 
Defendants. 


ORDER 


I. INTRODUCTION 


The Defendants, D. Grant Peacock (“Peacock”) and 
Alan H. Finegold (“Finegold”) have moved the court 
to dismiss the action pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(2), 
asserting that this court lacks personal jurisdiction over 
them. Alternatively, Peacock and Finegold, pursuant to 
Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(3), move to transfer venue of the 
case to the United States District Court for the Western 
District of Pennsylvania. Representative Plaintiff Thomas 
contends, however, that this court may exercise in per- 
sonam jurisdiction over the Defendants because jurisdic- 
tion is statutorily conferred under 29 U.S.C. § 1132(e)(2) 
of “The Employee Retirement Income Security Act” 
(“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seg. (1988). Moreover, 


‘ 55a 


the Plaintiff claims that venue of this cause is proper in 
the District of South Carolina. Having considered the 
statutory scheme, the Congressional purpose of enacting 
ERISA, and the relevant caselaw, the court concludes 
that it may exercise personal jurisdiction over the De- 
fendants and that venue is proper in this district. Accord- 
ingly, the court denies the Motion to Dismiss, Or In 
The Alternative, To Transfer This Action. 


Il. THE FACTS 


The facts giving rise to the present motion originated 
with an ERISA action by Plaintiff Thomas, representing 
a similarly situated class of plaintiffs, on August 20, 
1987, in the District of South Carolina before the Honor- 
able Judge G. Ross Anderson, Jr. This action was filed 
by Thomas against Tru-Tech, Incorporated (“Tru-Tech”), 
Peacock, who was Chairman of the Board of Tru-Tech, 
Grant Peacock & Company, Incorporated, and Connecti- 
cut General Life Insurance Company, for breach of fiduci- 
ary duty in failing to fund properly the Tru-Tech Pension 
Plan. The court held that Thomas and his class were 
entitled to benefits and that Tru-Tech, a fiduciary of the 
pension plan, was liable to the Plaintiffs for breach of its 
fiduciary duties. Accordingly, Plaintiff Thomas and his 
class prevailed in this action and were awarded a judg- 
ment of $187,500.00 in November of 1988. See Thomas 
v. Tru-Tech, Inc.. No. 7:87-2243-3 (D.S.C. 1988). The 
Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court’s judgment. See 
Thomas v. Tru-Tech, Inc., 90C F.2d 256 (4th Cir. 1990) 
(unpublished opinion). This judgment remains unsatis- 
fied, and its satisfaction is the impetus for the present 
action. 


Further information is gleaned from the affidavits and 
memoranda of the parties and the unpublished appellate 
opinion affirming the earlier action. Tru-Tech was or- 
ganized as a Delaware corporation in 1981 by Bill Wilcock 
for the purpose of acquiring a textile machinery parts 


56a 


business. One of the businesses Tru-Tech acquired was 
a manufacturing plant in Marion, South Carolina. The 
other acquired plant was located in Beebe River, New 
Hampshire. In addition to acquiring a manufacturing 
plant in South Carolina, Tru-Tech also kept its corporate 
headquarters and sales offices in Spartanburg, South Caro- 
lina, thereby establishing itself in South Carolina and 
availing itself to South Carolina’s jurisdiction. Signifi- 
cantly, the pension plan was administered in South Caro- 
lina, which also happens to be the district in which the 
Plaintiffs reside. Also in 1981, Tru-Tech formed a pen- 
sion plan for the benefit of its employees. Although the 
plan stated its effective date was October 1, 1981, the 
plan was subject to approval by the Internal Revenue 
Service (“IRS”). The plan, however, was not submitted 
for approval until December 31, 1982. The IRS, on July 
21, 1983, withheld its approval of the plan because its 
vesting schedule did not comply with the applicable law. 
The board of directors of Tru-Tech, therefore, on Septem- 
ber 14, 1983, amended the plan to correct the defective 
vesting schedule. 


By 1984, however, Tru-Tech was in financial straits. 
To this end, Tru-Tech’s directors notified the IRS that 
their prior amendment of the vesting schedule was un- 
authorized and requested the IRS to issue an adverse 
determination as to the plan, which was issued on Janu- 
ary 31, 1985 and became final on May 23, 1985. Ac- 
cordingly, the plan was terminated; and its assets were 
refunded to Tru-Tech with interest. 


The effective date of this plan was an issue in the 
earlier proceeding before Judge Anderson. Judge Ander- 
son held that the plan became effective in 1981—the year 
the plan would have been approved had its vesting sched- 
ule been properly calculated by Tru-Tech’s directors. The 
Fourth Circuit affirmed Judge Anderson’s ruling, holding 
that the pension plan was indeed effective in 1981. See 
900 F.2d 256 (4th Cir. 1990) (unpublished opinion). 


‘ 5Ta 


By 1986, Tru-Tech had moved most of its operations to 
Pennsylvania and was no longer transacting business in 
South Carolina. , | 
In the instant ed ae Thomas, potent gba nde 
attempting to sati judgment u 
Andenaaal tn tie promda dikds'ta' tau’ ark of i Pie 
tiffs’ breach of fiduciary duty claim against Tru-Tech, 
Peacock, and others. In his present Complaint, Plaintiff 
Thomas alleges that Peacock, with the advice and counsel 
of Finegold, fraudulently transferred Tru-Tech’s assets in 
an attempt to deprive the Plaintiffs of a res that would 
satisfy their judgment. Specifically, Plaintiff Thomas avers 
that Peacock and Finegold transferred Tru-Tech’s assets 
to certain favored creditors, some of which are corporate 
entities allegedly controlled by Peacock. The alleged ef- 
fect of these preferential transfers is that Tru-Tech is 
escaping not only the duties it had as a fiduciary of the 
pension plan, but also the judgment rendered adverse to 
it by Judge Anderson, whose ruling was affirmed by the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. 
Thus, the present action is an attempt to satisfy a former 
judgment properly rendered by the District Court. 


Ill. DISCUSSION 


A. The Purpose of ERISA 


ERISA’s broad, remedial scope is squarely established 
in the opening section of the Act: 


It is hereby declared to be the policy of this 
chapter to protect interstate commerce and the inter- 
ests of participants in employee benefit plans and 
their beneficiaries, by requiring the disclosure and 
reporting to participants and beneficiaries of financial 
and other information with respect thereto, by estab- 
lishing standards of conduct, responsibility, and obli- 
gation for fiduciaries of employee benefit plans, and 
by providing for appropriate remedies, sanctions, and 
ready access to the Federal courts. 


58a 


29 U.S.C. § 1001(b) (emphasis supplied). Apart from 
the expressly stated purpose of the Act, the legislative his- 
tory reveals that ERISA contemplated a liberal interpreta- 
tion, including liberal provisions for jurisdiction and 
venue. The House Committee on Education and Labor, 
reporting on drafts of the Act, stated: 


The enforcement provisions have been designed 
specifically to provide both the Secretary and partici- 
pants and beneficiaries with broad remedies for 
redressing or preventing violations of the Act. The 
intent of the Committee is to provide the full range 
of legal and equitable remedies available in both 
state and federal courts and to remove jurisdictional 
and procedural obstacles which in the past appear to 
have hampered effective enforcement of fiduciary re- 
sponsibilities under state law for recovery of benefits 
due to participants. For actions in federal courts, 
nationwide service of process is provided in order 
to remove a possible procedural obstacle to having 
all proper parties before the court. 


H.R.Rep. No. 93-533, 93rd Cong., Ist Sess., 17 (1973), 
reprinted in 1974 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 4639, 


4655 (emphasis supplied). ERISA, therefore, is to be 
construed liberally. 


Like its purpose, ERISA’s jurisdictional and venue pro- 
visions are sweeping in scope. Specifically, 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1132(e)(2) provides: 


Where an action under this subchapter is brought 
in a district court of the United States, it may be 
brought in the district where the plan is administered, 
where the breach took place, or where a defendant 
resides or may be found, and process may be served 
in any other district where a defendant resides or 
may be found. 


Accordingly, the Act provides for nation-wide service of 
process. The jurisdictional implications of this national 


59a 


service of process are the crux of the disputed issue in the 
present case. 


In its Motion to Dismiss or Transfer Venue, the De- 
fendants strenuously urge, pursuant to International Shoe 
Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 (1945), and its 
progeny, that they have not established the proverbial 

“systematic and continuous minimum contacts” with South 
Carolina, nor have they availed themselves to the courts 
of the forum state. Therefore, the Defendants claim that 
this court’s exercising in personam jurisdiction over them 
violates the Due Process Clause of the United States Con- 
stitution. See “Defendant’s Motion To Dismiss Or In 
The Alternative, To Transfer This Action,” pp. 9-19. 
While the Defendants correctly recite due process law and 
the limitations placed upon state courts, and federal courts 
sitting in diversity, to exercise jurisdiction over non- 
resident defendants, that argument is simply misplaced in 
the present action. Here, jurisdiction is premised upon a 
federal question, not upon diversity. Thus, the United 
States, not a state, is the sovereign. International Shoe 
Co., therefore, does not apply; and the Defendants’ asser- 
tions to the contrary fail in the wake of jurisdiction con- 
ferred by statute. 


As stated, International Shoe Co. applies to the power 
of state courts and federal courts exercising diversity juris- 
diction to extend their power and process beyond the 
borders of the state in order to compel the presence of 
non-residents. An International Shoe Co. analysis must 
first determine whether a state long-arm service of process 
statute exists and then whether ordering the defendant to 
appear by virtue of the long-arm statute comports with 
the Constitutional requirements of due process. The 
second prong of the International Shoe Co. analysis is 
determining whether the non-resident defendant has estab- 
lished “minimum contacts” with the forum state. See 
Federal Ins. of America v. Lake Shore, Inc., 886 F.2d 
654, 657 n.2 (4th Cir. 1989); Wolf v. Richmond County 


60a 


Hosp. Auth., 745 F.2d 904, 909 (4th Cir. 1984). In 
the present action, 29 U.S.C. § 1132(e)(2), provides for 
national service of process. The statute conferring juris- 
diction is a federal statute granting jurisdiction to courts 
of the United States. The Nation, therefore, is the entity 
seeking to establish its power and process. When the 
national law is at issue, Congress may freely prescribe for 
service of process and the federal courts—wherever situ- 
ated—may just as freely exercise jurisdiction, even over 
parties residing outside the forum state: 


The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the 
Court of Claims is not confined by geographical 
boundaries. Each of them, having by the law of 
its organization jurisdiction of the subject-matter 
of a suit, and of the parties thereto, can, sitting at 
Washington, exercise its power by appropriate proc- 
ess, served anywhere within the limits of the terri- 
tory over which the Federal government exercises 
dominion. 

x * * 


It is true that Congress has declared that no person 
Shall be sued in a circuit court [now, district court] 
of the United States who does not reside within the 
district for which the court was established, or who 
is not found there. But a citizen residing in Oregon 
may be sued in Maine, if found there, so that process 
can be served on him. There is, therefore, nothing 
in the Constitution which forbids Congress to enact 
that, as to a class of cases or a case of special char- 
acter, a circuit court—any circuit court—in which 
the suit may be brought, shall, by process served 
anywhere in the United States, have the power to 
bring before it all the parties necessary to its deci- 
sion. 


United States v. Union Pacific R.R., 98 U.S. 569, 603-04 
(1878). 


of the district courts based on presence of the de- 

fendant in the United States, rather than in any par- 

ticular state. When Congress does not provide, the 

district court’s service is not constrained by the due 

process limits to which state courts are subject. 
Driver v. Helms, 74 F.R.D. 382, 390 (D.R.I. 1977) 
(citations omitted and emphasis supplied), aff'd as to 
jurisdiction and modified on other grounds, 577 F.2d 147 
(1st Cir. 1978), rev'd on other grounds sub nom., Colby 
v. Driver, 444 U.S. 527 (1980) (consolidated with Staf- 
ford v. Briggs, 444 U.S. 527 (1980)). Specifically, the 
Fourth Circuit has held: 


[Defendant] argues before us that reliance on 
[Bankruptcy] Rule 704’s provisions to determine 
whether the bankruptcy court had in personam juris- 
diction over it would be misplaced, since valid service 
of process and personal jurisdiction are two separate 
concepts. In the abstract that may be true, but for 
purposes of proceedings arising from federal law, it 
is largely academic. . . . Where Congress has author- 
ized nationwide service of process by federal courts 
under specific federal statutes, so long as the asser- 
tion of jurisdiction over the defendant is compatible 
with due process, the service of process is sufficient 
to establish the jurisdiction of the federal court over 
the person of the defendant. 


Since we have determined that Congress author- 
ized nationwide service of process in cases like the 
present one, . . . [t]he propriety of process issuing 


62a 


from federal courts sitting in cases arising under 
federal law is not tested by [International Shoe Co.] 
because the issues involved necessarily are often na- 
tional in character. 


Hogue v. Mildon Eng’g, Inc., 736 F.2d 989, 991 
(4th Cir. 1984) (citations omitted). Accordingly, the 
Hogue court held that a bankruptcy court in Virginia had 
personal jurisdiction over a non-resident California corpo- 
ration because the bankruptcy law is federal law and pro- 
vides for national process. Similarly, Haile v. Henderson 
Nat'l Bank, 657 F.2d 816, 824 (6th Cir. 1981), cert. 
denied, 455 U.S. 949 (1982), held that “In an action 
where service of process is effected pursuant to a federal 
statute which provides for nationwide service of process, 
the strictures of /nternational Shoe do not apply.” See 
also Gilbert v. Bagley, 492 F. Supp. 714, 747 (M.D.N.C. 
1980). 


The Defendants consistently urge upon the court that 
South Carolina has no jurisdiction over them and that 
they have established no minimum contacts in the forum 
state. This. assertion reveals the flaw in the Defendants’ 
reasoning, and consequently, its authority. The United 
States, not South Carolina, is the sovereign asserting juris- 
diction over the Defendants by virtue of a federal statute. 
The Defendants are residents of the United States and 
they need merely have minimum contacts with the United 
States to effect jurisdiction over them, not minimum con- 
tacts with the forum state. The Second Circuit in Mariash 
v. Morrill, 496 F.2d 1138 (2d Cir. 1974), aptly addressed 
this issue. In Mariash, the Defendants were served with 
process in Massachusetts, but venue was laid in New York. 
The defendants claimed that New York did not have juris- 
diction over them because they had not established min- 
imum contacts with New York. The statute at issue was 
the Securities Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. 
(1988), of which § 78aa provided for national service of 


. 63a 


process. Rejecting the defendants’ contention that federal 
courts in New York could not exercise in personam 
jurisdiction, the Second Circuit held: 


It is not the State of New York but the United States 
‘which would exercise its jurisdiction over them.’ 
And plainly, where, as here, the defendants reside 
within the territorial boundaries of the United States, 
the ‘minimal contacts,’ required to justify the federal 
government’s exercise of power over them, are pres- 
ent. Indeed, the ‘minimal contacts’ principle does 
not, in our view, seem particularly relevant in evalu- 
ating the constitutionality of in personam jurisdiction 
based on nationwide, but not extraterritorial, service 
of process. 


Mariash, 496 F.2d at 1143 (emphasis in original). Sim- 
ilarly, the Fifth Circuit upheld jurisdiction, conferred by 
federal statute, over a non-resident defendant which trans- 
acted no business in the forum state. The court, as here, 
rejected the defendant’s assertion that due process had 
been violated: 


Subject only to the regulation of Congress, each fed- 
eral court exercises the ‘judicial Power of the United 
States,’ not a judicial power constitutionally limited 
by the boundaries of a particular district. Because 
the district court’s jurisdiction is always potentially, 
and, in this case, actually co-extensive with the boun- 
daries of the United States, due process requires 
only that a defendant in a federal suit have minimum 
contacts with the United States, ‘the sovereign that 
created the court.’ 


FTC v. Jim Walter, Corp., 651 F.2d 251, 256 (Sth Cir. 
1981) (citations omitted and emphasis in original). Ac- 
cordingly, provided that a defendant has minimum con- 
tacts with the United States, ERISA confers personal ju- 
risdiction over the defendant in any federal district court. 
The irresistible conclusion, therefore, is that this court 
does exercise in personam jurisdiction over the Defend- 


64a 


ants because the Defendants are residents of, and conduct 
business in, the United States. 


Apart from the decisional law, this court’s exercising 
personal jurisdiction over Peacock and Finegold com- 
ports with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Spe- 
cifically, Fed.R.Civ.P. 4(f) provides: 


All process other than a subpoena may be served 
anywhere within the territorial limits of the state in 
which the district court is held, and, when authorized 
by a statute of the United States or by these rules, 
beyond the territorial limits of that state. (emphasis 
supplied). 


Thus, Rule 4(f) recognizes the power of Congress to 
provide for nationwide service of process to enforce a 
federal right, as the Supreme Court in Union Pacific R.R. 
noted. This Congressional authority to provide for na- 
tional process springs from the right of any sovereign to 
exercise jurisdiction over any defendant within its terri- 
tory. Gilbert v. Bagley, 492 F. Supp. 714, 746 (M.D.N.C. 
1980); First Flight Co. v. National Carloading Corp., 
209 F. Supp. 730, 736 (E.D. Tenn. 1962). Finally, the 
court notes that the weight of authority holds that there 
is no requirement of minimum contacts with the state in 
which the federal court sits when a federal statute pro- 
vides for nationwide service of process. As the District 
of the District of Columbia held in Combs v. Adkins & 
Adkins Coal Co., 597 F. Supp. 122 (D.D.C. 1984): 


Moreover, this Court possesses personal jurisdic- 
tion over the defendants, who reside in Kentucky. 
Where Congress has authorized nationwide service 
of process, a federal court may exercise personal 
jurisdiction over any United States resident, without 
regard to whether its sister state court could assert 
jurisdiction under minimum contacts principles. 


Id. at 125. See also Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1, 5 (lst 
Cir. 1986); Securities Investor Protection Corp. v. Vig- 


‘ 65a 


man, 764 F.2d 1309, 1314-15 (9th Cir.-1985); Haile v. 
Henderson Nat'l Bank, 657 F.2d 816, 824-26 (6th Cir. 
1981), cert. denied, 455 U.S, 949 (1982); FTC v. Jim 
Walter Corp., 651 F.2d 251, 256 (Sth Cir. 1981); Fitz- 
simmons v. Barton, 589 F.2d 330, 334 (7th Cir. 1979); 
Mariash v. Morrill, 496 F.2d 1138, 1142-43. (2d Cir. 
1974); United States Telecom, Inc. v. Hubert, 678 F. 
Supp. 1500, 1508 (D. Kan. 1987); City of Harrisburg v. 
Bradford Trust Co., 621 F. Supp. 463, 467 (M.D. Pa. 
1985); Piper Acceptance Corp. v. Slaughter, 600 F. Supp. 
169, 171 (D. Colo. 1985); Clement v. Pehar, 575 F. 
Supp. 436, 438-39 (N.D. Ga. 1983); and Gilbert v. Bag- 
ley, 492 F. Supp. 714, 746-47 (M.D.N.C. 1980). Accord- 
ingly, this court, by virtue of ERISA’s statutory authority, 
may exercise personal jurisdiction over Peacock and Fine- 


gold. 


Concluding that Jnternational Shoe Co. does not apply 
to the present action, the type of process the Defendants 
are due must now be considered. Here, ERISA provides 
for nationwide service of process. Since a federal statute 
is at issue, the fifth amendment, not the fourteenth amend- 
ment, of the Constitution is implicated. Fifth amendment 
due process, with respect to national service of process, 
only requires that a defendant receive sufficient notice of 
a legal proceeding, namely by first class or certified mail. 
This is the rule of Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & 
Trust, 339 U.S. 306 (1950). The issue, therefore, is one 
of notice under the fifth amendment. The process due 
the defendant is whether the service was reasonably cal- 
culated to inform the defendant of the pendency of the 
proceedings against him so that he might have an oppor- 
tunity to be heard and establish a defense. Certainly, 
Peacock and Finegold, residents of the United States, were 
given sufficient notice of the action pending against them: 
the Defendants received service of process and employed 
counsel to appear on their behalf. Because the Defend- 
ants are cognizant of the proceeding instituted against 
them, Peacock and Finegold received sufficient due proc- 


66a 


ess; and their Constitutional due process rights have not 
been violated. 


B. Venue 


In their motion, the Defendants alternatively move the 
court to transfer this action to the Western District of 
Pennsylvania. Peacock and Finegold allege that Pennsyl- 
vania, not South Carolina, is the appropriate form for 
this action. The Defendants are residents of Pennsylvania 
and some of the allegedly fraudulent actions of the De- 
fendants occurred in Pennsylvania. In support of this 
contention, the Defendants cite the general venue provi- 
sions of 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a) (1988), and claim that 
transfer of venue is routinely granted. As with their per- 
sonal jurisdiction argument, the venue argument is equally 
misplaced because ERISA itself provides for venue; thus, 
28 U.S.C. § 1404(a) does not apply to this action. 
ERISA specifically provides that a plaintiff may bring an 
action: (1) in the district where the plan is administered; 
(2) where the breach took place; or (3) where the de- 
fendant resides or may be found. 29 U.S.C. § 1132 
(e)(2). ERISA plainly states that venue may lie where 
the plan was administered. Venue is proper in South 
Carolina, therefore, because the plan was administered 
in South Carolina. 


The Plaintiffs, as residents of South Carolina, have 
properly chosen to prosecute their action in the District 
of South Carolina; and a plaintiff’s choice of forum should 
not be disturbed unless the balance of equities strongly 
favors the defendant. Gulf Oil v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501, 
508 (1947); Gross v. Owen, 221 F.2d 94, 95 (D.C.Cir. 
1955). Moreover, when a claim may conceivably be held 
to have arisen in more than one district, “a plaintiff may 
choose between those two (or conceivably even more) 
districts that with approximately equal plausibility . . . 
may be assigned as the locus of the claim.” Leroy v. 
Great Western United Corp., 443 U.S. 173, 185 (1979) 


‘ 67a 


(citations omitted). When Congress has enacted a special 
venue provision for a particular action which the com- 
plaining party meets, the impetus on transferring the case 
decreases while the burden on the movant demonstrating 
that the action should be transferred increases. Interna- 
tional Bhd. of Painters v. Best Painting and Sandblasting 
Co., 621 F. Supp. 906, 907 (D.D.C. 1985). Also, a 
transfer will not be effected where the inconvenience to 
the defendant would simply be shifted to the plaintiff. 
Trustees of Nat'l Asbestos Workers Pension Fund v. Lake 
Erie Ins., 688 F. Supp. 1059, 1060 (D.Md. 1988). 


In Combs v. Adkins & Adkins Coal Co., 597 F. Supp. 
122 (D.D.C. 1984), the court, in denying the defendant’s 
motion to transfer venue of an ERISA action, held: 


This Court also declines to disturb the plaintiffs’ 
choice of forum by transferring this action to Ken- 
tucky under the doctrine of forum non conveniens or 
pursuant to its discretion under 28 U.S.C. § 1404(a). 
Numerous decisions of this Court have denied simi- 
lar motions filed by non-resident defendants in other 
ERISA cases. The defendants were given ample 
notice that litigation could ensue in the District of 
Columbia, and in any event, it makes good sense to 
hear this case where the Plans are administered. 


Id. at 125 (citations omitted and emphasis supplied). 
The courts have uniformly held that venue is not freely 
transferred under ERISA when the beneficiaries have filed 
suit. See Securities Investor Protection Corp. v. Vigman, 
764 F.2d 1309, 1317 (9th Cir. 1985), Varsic v. United 
States District Court for the Central District of California, 
607 F.2d 245, 248 (9th Cir. 1979); Trustees of the Nat'l 
Asbestos Workers Pension Fund v. Lake Erie Ins., 688 
F.Supp. 1059, 1060 (D.Md. 1988), United States Tele- 
com, Inc. v. Hubert, 678 F. Supp. 1500, 1504 (D. Kan. 
1987), International Bhd of Painters v. Best Painting and 
Sandblasting Co., 621 F. Supp. 906, 907 (D.D.C. 1985), 
Trustees of the Nat'l Automatic Sprinkler Indus. Pension 


68a 


Fund v. Best Automatic Fire Protection, Inc., 578 F. 
Supp. 94, 96 (D.Md. 1983), and Bostic v. Ohio River 
Co. Basic Pension Plan, 517 F. Supp. 627, 637 (S.D. 
W.Va. 1981), all denying to transfer venue at an ERISA 
defendant’s request. 


Under ERISA’s venue provisions, venue is proper in 
South Carolina. The plan was administered here when 
Tru-Tech had its corporate headquarters and sales offices 
in South Carolina. Since Plaintiff Thomas has chosen 
this district as his forum, the weight of authority dictates 
that it not be disturbed. Moreover, maintaining this action 
in this forum serves the broad remedial purposes of ERISA 
by removing procedural obstacles from the Plaintiffs- 
employees suit, which the legislative history of the Act 
clearly mandates. Accordingly, because venue is proper 
in this district and the Defendants’ venue analysis miscon- 
ceives the law, the motion to transfer is denied. 


THEREFORE, THIS COURT ORDERS, AD- 
JUDGES, AND DECREES that the motion to dismiss 
pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(2) is DENIED, AND 
THIS COURT FURTHER ORDERS that the motion to 
transfer venue to the Western District of Pennsylvania 
pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(3) is likewise DENIED. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


/s/ William B. Traxler, Jr. 
WILLIAM B. TRAXLER, JR. 
United States District Judge 


Greenville, South Carolina 
June 23, 1992. 


‘ 69a 
APPENDIX D 
Filed December 2, 1994 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


No. 92-2524 
CA-91-3843-7-21 


Jack L. Tuomas, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 
Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a representative of 
a class of plaintiffs similarly situated, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee 
v. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendant-A ppellant 


and 


ALAN H. FINEGOLD, 
Defendant 


No. 93-1394 
CA-91-3843-7-21 


Jack L. Tuomas, Individually, on behalf of Tru-Tech, 
Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a representative of 
a class of plaintiffs similarly situated, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee 
v. 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendant-A ppellant 
and 


ALAN H. FINEGOLD, 
Defendant 


70a 


No. 93-1469 
CA-87-2243-7 


Jack L. Tuomas, Individually, on behalf of the Tru-Tech, 
Incorporated Pension Plan, and as a representative of 
a class of plaintiffs similarly situated, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee 
v. 


TRU-TECH, INCORPORATED; D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Defendants-Appellants 
and 


GRANT PEACOCK & COMPANY, INCORPORATED; 
CONNECTICUT GENERAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, 
Defendants 


ON PETITION FOR REHEARING WITH 
SUGGESTION FOR REHEARING IN BANC 


The appellants’ petition for rehearing and suggestion 
for rehearing in banc were submitted to this Court. As 
no member of this Court or the panel requested a poll 
on the suggestion for rehearing in banc, and 


As the panel considered the petition for rehearing and 
is of the opinion that it should be denied, 


IT IS ORDERED that the petition for rehearing and 
suggestion for rehearing in banc are denied. 


For the Court, 


/s/ Bert M. Montague 
Clerk 


é( Tla 


§ 1132. Civil enforcement 
(a) Persons.empowered to bring a civil action 
A civil action may be brought— 
(1) by a participant or beneficiary— 
(A) for the relief provided for in subsection (c) 
of this section, or 
(B) to recover benefits due to him under the 
terms of his plan, to enforce his rights under the 


terms of the plan, or to clarify his rights to future 
benefits under the terms of the plan; 


(2) by the Secretary, or by a participant, beneficiary 
or fiduciary for appropriate relief under section 1109 of 
this title; 

(3) by a participant, beneficiary, or fiduciary (A) to 
enjoin any act or practice which violates any provision 
of this subchapter or the terms of the plan, or (B) to ob- 
tain other appropriate equitable relief (i) to redress such 
violations or (ii) to enforce any provisions of this sub- 
chapter or the terms of the plan; 


(4) by the Secretary, or by a participant, or beneficiary 
for appropriate relief in the case of a violation of 1025(c) 
of this title; 


(3) except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) 
of this section, by the Secretary (A) to enjoin any act 
or practice which violates any provision of this subchap- 
ter, or (B) to obtain other appropriate equitable relief 
(i) to redress such violation or (ii) to enforce any pro- 
vision of this subchapter; 

(6) by the Secretary to collect any civil penalty under 
subsection (c)(2) or (i) or (/) of this section: 


72a 


(7) by a State to enforce compliance with a qualified 
medical child support order (as defined in section 1169 
(a)(2)(A) of this title); or 


(8) by the Secretary, or by an employer or other per- 
son referred to in section 1021(f)(1) of this title, (A) to 
enjoin any act or practice which violates subsection (f ) 
of section 1021 of this title, or (B) to obtain appropriate 
equitable relief (i) to redress such violation or (ii) to 
enforce such subsection. 


, * 73a 


§ 1367. Supplemental jurisdiction 


(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) 
or as expressly provided otherwise by Federal statute, in 
any civil action of which the district courts have original 
jurisdiction, the district courts shall have supplemental 
jurisdiction over all other claims that are so related to 
claims in the action within such original jurisdiction that 
they form part of the same case or controversy under 
Article III of the United States Constitution. Such sup- 
plemental jurisdiction shall include claims that involve 
the joinder or intervention of additional parties. 


(b) In any civil action of which the district courts 
have original jurisdiction founded solely on section 1332 
of this title, the district courts shall not have supplemental 
jurisdiction under subsection (a) over claims by plaintiffs 
against persons made parties under Rule 14, 19, 20, or 
24 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, or over claims 
by persons proposed to be joined as plaintiffs under Rule 
19 of such rules, or seeking to intervene as plaintiffs under 
Rule 24 of such rules, when exercising supplemental juris- 
diction over such claims would be inconsistent with the 
jurisdictional requirements of section 1332. 


(c) The district courts may decline to exercise supple- 
mental jurisdiction over a claim under subsection (a) if— 


(1) the claim raises a novel or complex issue of 
State law, 


(2) the claim substantially predominates over the 
claim or claims over which the district court has 
Original jurisdiction, 

(3) the district court has dismissed all claims over 
which it has original jurisdiction, or 


(4) in exceptional circumstances, there are other 
compelling reasons for declining jurisdiction. 


74a 


(d) The period of limitations for any claim asserted 
under subsection (a), and for any other claim in the same 
action that is voluntarily dismissed at the same time as 
or after the dismissal of the claim under subsection (a), 
shall be tolled while the claim is pending and for a 
period of 30 days after it is dimissed unless State law 
provides for a longer tolling period. 


(e) As used in this section, the term “State” includes 
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, and any territory or possession of the United States. 


(Added Pub.L. 101-650, Title MI, §310(a), Dec. 1, 
1990, 104 Stat. 5113.) 


