s 


«~ 


i 


geet \ ihe BE a " = 


+ 


RO a = TRE Nbe SY 
-" a ay asm = ay ” 


United States Court of Appvals 
for the Fourth Circuit 
F pMoaneal 


NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE 
FOR MULTIEMPLOYER PLANS AS AMICUS CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


DIANA L.S. Perens * 
Fever & Associates, P.C. 
1350 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Suite 600 
Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 955-8805 

Coordinating Committ 

for Multiemployer Plans 

September 6, 1995 Pe Sa 


WILson - Eras Painting Co., Inc. apy she salemmacsen D.C. 20001 
o> - 


Gi 


~~ BESTAVAILABLE COPY 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ....0........2....-ccccceceececeseeeeseeenees 


PRELIMINARY STATEMENT .......0000....2.---ccccceoceseeceseeees 


2. Jurisdiction over veil-piercing claims to enforce 


et 


I. IN ACTIONS TO ENFORCE ERISA, THE 


Il. 


TERMS OF EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS, 
OR ERISA JUDGMENTS, FEDERAL COURTS 
SHOULD ADOPT A FEDERAL VEIL- 
PIERCING STANDARD TO DETERMINE 
WHETHER CORPORATE SEPARATENESS 
SHOULD BE DISREGARDED ..........0.0.......... 


A. A federal veil-piercing standard is appropri- 
ate for all stages of ERISA enforcement........ 


B. A federal veil-piercing standard is appropri- 
ate where federal policies are at stake ............ 


C. A federal veil-piercing standard accommo- 
dates the economic realities in which multi- 
employer plans operate —..............-..-.-.-..----...-- 


FEDERAL JURISDICTION OVER CORPO- 
RATE VEIL-PIERCING CLAIMS TO COL- 
LECT ERISA JUDGMENTS IS CONSISTENT 
WITH ERISA’S BROAD GRANT OF FED- 
ERAL JURISDICTION TO ENFORCE ERISA 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS, AND IS SUP- 
PORTED BY APPLICABLE LAW .................... 


11 


14 


ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


A. Three distinct bases of federal jurisdiction 
exist where federal courts are asked to en- 


force a prior ERISA judgment by applying a 
federal common law veil-piercing standard.... 


B. The compelling national interests legislated 
in ERISA justify the Fourth Circuit’s find- 
ing that the federal district court has ancil- 
lary jurisdiction over postjudgment efforts 
to pierce the corporate veil of an ERISA- 
judgment debtor, as the retention of federal 
jurisdiction to impose liability in such cir- 
cumstances is necessary to vindicate the fed- 
eral courts’ authority and effectuate their 
GOCE GG ncsccreceninvcvvstsintpisntiodindcdaiplamamaiiabiieedia 


C. The district court had subject matter juris- 
diction over Respondent’s claim against 
Peacock under 28 U.S.C. § 1331, as suits to 
pierce the corporate veil to collect federal 
judgments “arise under” federal common 
BUT cnccsslesiendebinsntsntinieimaniimaC sna ina 


D. Suits to pierce the corporate veil to enforce 
a prior ERISA judgment state a cause of 
action under ERISA Section 502(a) (3) ........ 


CONOR a nccscecececesessncsseespscnianntinttnecimnaaiamiemmman 


16 


18 


21 


S 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

Cases Page 
Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986) ........ 13 
Aldinger v. Howard, 427 U.S. 1 (1976) ...........0...... 20 
Anderson v. Abbott, 321 U.S. 349 (1944) _.............. 12, 24 

Bangor Punta Operations v. Bangor & Aroostook 
OE Ee ee 11 


Concrete Pipe and Products of California v. Con- 
struction Laborers Pension Fund for Southern 


California, 113 S.Ct. 2°54 (1998) 000000. 4 
Conley v. Gibson, 356 U.S. 41 (1957) —....000000000..... 24 
Connors v. Princeton Coal Group, 770 F. Supp. 

a etusoreoses 11 
Cutting v. Jerome Foods, 993 F.2d 1293 (7th Cir. 

1998), cert. denied, 114 S.Ct. 308 (1998) ........... 3 
DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc. v. W. Ray Flemming 

Fruit Co., 540 F.2d 681 (4th Cir. 1976) .............. 11 
Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Bruch, 489 U.S. 101 

LE I Ee 2 7 3,13 
First National Bank v. Banco Para El Comercio 

Exterior de Cuba, 462 U.S. 611 (1988) —.............. 24 
FMC Corp. v. Holliday, 498 U.S. 52 (1990) ........... 8,4 
Franchise Tax Board v. Laborer’s Vacation Trust, 

I CE IID Be ectical ci nisiesbnatibincibitsiinnengnedeincces 21, 22, 26 
IAM National Pension Fund v. Wakefield Indus- 

tries, 612 F. Supp. 643 (D.D.C. 1985) .......000... 13 


Ilunois v. City of Milwaukee, 406 U.S. 91 (1972).. 21 
Keffer v. H.K. Porter Co., 872 F.2d 60 (4th Cir. 


GEE SR RE FOUN ON a: SO Se a 11 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of America, 
I ed 18 


Laborers Clean-Up Contract Admin. Trust Fund v. 
Uriarte Clean-Up Serv., Inc., 736 F.2d 516 (9th 


a Re ELT PG Ss oes Oe 14 
Leddy v. Standard Drywall, 875 F.2d 383 (2d Cir. 
SE 2 a eS ee ee 11 


Lewis v. Benedict Coal Corp., 361 U.S. 459 (1960) .. 16 

Local 144 Nursing Home Pension Fund et al. v. 
Demisay, 118 S.Ct. 2252 (1998) —.....00.. eo... 4 

Massachusetts Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473 
EE ES See 23 


iv Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 
: Other Authorities Page 

we o aren nao ane bias ia 1 William Meade Fletcher, Fletcher Cyclopedia of 
National F ’s Union I tien 0 Cie yee wg Foti ym § 41, at 603 ie 

Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 845 (1986) ................. 21 a eee ype. Wonepinereentnctronteeereenianeenenin 
Owen Equipment & Erection Co. v. Kroger, 487 

CR Ga Gee at Lae a 20 
Robbins v. Schneider Moving & Storage Co., 466 

US, COG CH issih che tinidi eS 16 


Taylor v. Standard Gas Co., 306 U.S. 307 (1989) .... 11, 26 
Thomas v. Peacock, 39 F.3d 498 (4th Cir. 1994)... 12, 14, 
17, 22, 25, 26 

Town of Brookline v. Gorsuch, 667 F.2d 215 (1st 
Cas TID cadnteeitiscstinscintnsnpiischalectiuistsbdeiteindiniedicans seein 11,12 

United Electrical Workers v. 168 Pleasant Street 
Corp., 960 F.2d 1080 (1st Cir. 1992) -.................... 13, 14 

United States v. Van Diviner, 822 F.2d 960 (10th 
CI seicathinctanssctteinctncsalnicticabpidtibaensiasiiltihrscden 12 


Federal Statutes 


BD NE ctutthcetitetnvitinisnvtitnticstaliiatind 8, 10, 18, 21, 22, 
BD es ek Sete CD a caiccceccttccbin iti dip icibioiel 
Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947 _............ 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
CY cpl Madiidhis ecincnacttthinibdaditotioadiacdhtntns dieticians 
29 U.S.C. §§ 1001-1461 _..................... pe I SET Ss 
ee I eating ick Mintiasuliicbinadibccocteaen 
ND het Riitintrcttscnsntticicsicncevinatecnatcadbitn 
29 U.S.C. § 1066(d) (8) (B) (i) ................................ 
ESS Se AL Sn Oe ae 
either tithidetnsccinidicebdicstinccinn 2, 
Ts Oe OD wicccts th scttererdscttisidntethtndnbiciists 
Bw Lh TRF Lh] | RTE eer res 
29 U.S.C. § 1182(a) (2) —................... 9 
29 U.S.C. § 1182(a) (3) -............... 6,9 
29 U.S.C. § 1182 (e) (1)......................... 2 
29 U.S.C. § 1144(b) (2) (A), (B) —..........-................ 
pe FR by 8 ARR REE AE Eee sk ARS 
ee ee C8 P three cteciicbonitsteckeveditclishiccnumiinas 
BD ie ele itccererrectemnennctchetitindalicbdndiatids 6, 9,1 


aan & 


CoOnwwn wy 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1453 


D. GRANT PEACOCK, 
Petitioner, 


Vv. 


Jack L. THOMAS, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF OF THE 
NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE 
FOR MULTIEMPLOYER PLANS AS AMICUS CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


PRELIMINARY STATEMENT 


The National Coordinating Committee for Multiem- 
ployer Plans (“NCCMP”) submits this brief amicus 
curiae to urge the Court to affirm the holding below. Let- 
ters manifesting the consent of Petitioner and Respondent 
have been filed with the Clerk of the Court. 


By enacting the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act (“ERISA”) in 1974 and its subsequent amendments 


2 


in 1980, Congress sought to enhance the financial stabil- 
ity of multiemployer employee benefit plans and to foster 
the growth and maintenance of such plans. 29 U.S.C. 
§§ 1001-1461. As reflected in ERISA’s legislative history 
and more than two decades of case law construing the 
statute, Congress intended to implement the policies and 
objectives underlying the law by making all aspects of 
employee benefit plan regulation an exclusive federal 
concern. To this end, the statute itself contains a civil 
enforcement provision which—with one limited exception 
—gives federal district courts exclusive jurisdiction over 
all actions brought by plan fiduciaries (e.g., the trustees 
of -multiemployer plans), participants, beneficiaries, and 
the Secretary of Labor to enforce the statute or the terms 
of a plan, and over all actions by participants, beneficiar- 
ies, or the Secretary against plans or their fiduciaries for 
similar relief. 29 U.S.C. § 1132.’ In addition, ERISA 
contains an expansive preemption provision providing for 
the supersedure of all state laws (including state common 
law) that “relate to” employee benefit plans except where 
expressly exempted.? Moreover, where ERISA is silent 
as to a particular matter affecting employee benefit plans, 
courts are required to develop a body of federal common 


1 The sole exception is to be found in ERISA § 502(e)(1), 29 
U.S.C. § 1182(e) (1), which gives state courts concurrent jurisdic- 
tion over actions brought by participants or beneficiaries under 
§ 502(a) (1) (B), 29 U.S.C. § 11382(a) (1) (B), to enforce or clarify 
their rights to benefits under a plan. In such actions, however, 
state courts are required to apply federal law. Because the federal 
courts have far greater experience with ERISA matters, and 
because federal law is controlling, most plans or their trustees 
routinely remove such state actions to federal court, as can be 
judicially noticed. 


2 For example, state insurance, banking, and securities laws are 
expressly exempted from preemption except as applied to self- 
insured plans. 29 U.S.C. §1144(b)(2)(A) and (B); likewise, 
state criminal laws of general applicability are expressly exempted 
under 29 U.S.C. § 1144(b) (4), while qualified domestic relations 
orders, as permitted by ERISA § 206(d) (3) (B) (i), are exempt 
under 29 U.S.C. § 1144(b) (7). 


3 


law to fill the statute’s interstices. Firestone Tire & Rub- 
ber Co. v. Bruch, 489 U.S. 101 (1989).’ 


In the case at bar, the district court, mindful of the ex- 
clusively federal interests at stake, first assumed jurisdic- 
tion over the plaintiff-participant’s action to enforce a 
prior ERISA judgment, and then applied a federal com- 
mon law veil-piercing standard to impose liability for the 
judgment debt on an individual whose postjudgment con- 
duct resulted in the original judgment debtor’s financial 
inability to satisfy the judgment. The Fourth Circuit af- 
firmed. Petitioner, however, attempts to turn the federal 
scheme on its head by arguing first that the federal court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the participant’s 
enforcement action and second, that even if jurisdiction 
did exist, state law rather than a more liberal federal 
veil-piercing standard should be applied. 


The NCCMP files this brief because it strongly believes 
that a federal veil-piercing standard should be applied 
whenever a federal court finds it necessary to disregard 
the corporate form to enforce ERISA or an ERISA judg- 
ment. In addition, the NCCMP believes that, consistent 
with ERISA’s goals and this Court’s precedents, the 
trustees of multiemployer plans should be able to vindi- 
cate their rights in federal courts, including—where 
appropriate—against individuals whose postjudgment 
conduct is responsible for making an ERISA judgment 
uncollectible, to the detriment of a plan or its participants 
and beneficiaries. 


* For example, following this Court’s ruling in FMC Corp. v. 
Holliday, 498 U.S. 52 (1990), in which the Court ruled that state 
antisubrogation laws are preempted by ERISA, federal courts have 
been developing federal common law to further define the scope of 
a plan’s subrogation rights. See Cutting v. Jerome Foods, 993 
F.2d 1298 (7th Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 114 8. Ct. 308 (1993) 
(state “make whole” doctrine not adopted as federal common law 
and does not bar plan’s right to full reimbursement of benefits paid). 


4 


INTEREST OF THE NCCMP 


The NCCMP is a nonprofit, tax-exempt organization 
that was formed after the enactment of ERISA to par- 
ticipate in the further development of employee benefits 
legislation, government regulations promulgated to imple- 
ment ERISA, and other laws affecting multiemployer 
plans. Currently more than 240 multiemployer plans and 
related international unions, located in at least 37 states, 
are affiliated with the NCCMP. These plans are repre- 
sentative of all the nation’s multiemployer plans, which 
cover more than nine million workers. Thus, considering 
the NCCMP’s broad range of constituent organizations 
and its contacts with hundreds of trustees who are 
charged with administering multiemployer plans in ac- 
cordance with ERISA’s fiduciary principles, the NCCMP 
believes that it is qualified to advise this Court of the 
practical implications the circuit court’s decision will 
have on self-funded multiemployer plans, and to repre- 
sent herein the position of the trustees, participants, and 
beneficiaries of such plans.* 


The NCCMP believes that the Fourth Circuit correctly 
affirmed the district court’s assumption of jurisdiction 
over an ERISA plan participant’s action to enforce a prior 
ERISA judgment, and it endorses the circuit court’s  ap- 
plication of a federal common law veil-piercing standard 
to impose liability on an individual whose postjudgment 
conduct defeated the judgment. Therefore, the NCCMP 
submits this brief in support of the Respondent’s request 
that this Court affirm the court of appeal’s decision. To 
that end, this brief will delineate the far-reaching and 
beneficial consequences the Fourth Circuit’s decision will 


* The NCCMP has participated as an amicus curiae in numerous 
cases involving important issues affecting multiemployer plans. 
See, e.g., Local 144 Nursing Home Pension Fund et al. v. Demisay, 
113 S. Ct. 2252 (1998); Concrete Pipe and Products of California 
v. Construction Laborers Pension Fund for Southern California, 
113 S. Ct. 2264 (1998) ; FMC Corp. v. Holliday, 498 U.S. 52 (1990). 


5 


have on multiemployer plans in situations other than, and 
in addition to, the specific fact pattern at bar—particularly 
with respect to those plans’ collection efforts. 


The nature of multiemployer plans and the economic 
realities in which they operate make a federal veil- 
piercing standard critically important. As noted above, 
multiemployer employee benefit plans affiliated with the 
NCCMP are located throughout the nation. Many of 
those affiliates are large plans whose participants and con- 
tributing employers reside in numerous states. Conse- 
quently, actions to collect contributions and to enforce 
ERISA judgments against delinquent employers may be 
subject to varying degrees of restrictive state veil-piercing 
standards and laws pertaining to enforcement of judg- 
ments, thereby defeating Congress’s goal of ensuring 
uniformity in the treatment of employee benefit plans. 


Multiemployer plan trustees have a fiduciary obligation 
to maintain a sound funding policy and to collect unpaid 
contributions owed by contributing employers. For many 
reasons, however, plan trustees face great obstacles when 
attempting to fulfill those obligations. One such obstacle 
is the fact that many contributing employers who fail to 
make required contributions escape their liability by hid- 
ing behind the facade of corporate entities that are often 
nothing more than empty shells. Indeed, in many indus- 
tries represented by multiemployer plans, such as the 
building and construction trades and service industries 
(such as restaurants), contributing employers are fre- 
quently family-owned close corporations which operate 
with substantial indifference to corporate formalities and 
to the appropriate capitalization of those corporations. 
Despite that fact, however, multiemployer plans, as third- 
party beneficiaries to collective bargaining agreements 
between unions and employers, must accept contributions 
from these employers and, concomitantly, must provide 
benefits to the employers’ eligible participants, without 
having had a prior opportunity to investigate the credit- 
worthiness of those employers or the manner in which 


6 


they operate their corporate businesses (information 
which is normally impossible to obtain absent discovery 
in the context of litigation). Thus, multiemployer plans, 
unlike ordinary trade creditors who can assess the risks 
associated with their contractual undertakings, suffer a 
great disadvantage to their self-preservation. Because of 
that serious disadvantage, multiemployer plans require 
and deserve the benefit of a more relaxed veil-piercing 
standard.° 


Moreover, although ERISA contemplates that collection 
actions brought under ERISA Section 502(a)(3), 29 
U.S.C. § 1132(a)(3), and ERISA Section 515, 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1145 for violation of the terms of a plan or of a collec- 
tive bargaining agreement will normally be brought 
against contributing employers as business entities, the 
statutory definition of “employer” is sufficiently broad to 
permit liability for delinquent contributions to be imposed 
on the company’s owners or directors in appropriate 
circumstances “—not because of their titles or positions, 
but because of specific conduct. In this context, a 
majority of federal courts have adopted a liberal federal 
veil-piercing standard as federal common law that is 
consistent with the fact that ERISA enforcement actions 
are federal cases; that ERISA places less importance on 
corporate separateness than on the policies sought to be 


5 The status of multiemployer plans as third-party beneficiaries 
of collective bargaining agreements executed by others is estab- 
lished pursuant to Section 302(c)(5) of the Labor-Management 
Relations Act of 1947, 29 U.S.C. § 186(c) (5). Multiemployer plans 
are unique creatures of federal statute, and their structure is 
strictly mandated by federal law. Thus, the disadvantages inherent 
in collecting judgments are not assumed by choice. 


®* ERISA § 3(5), 29 U.S.C. § 1002(5), defines the term “employer” 
as “any person acting directly as an employer, or indirectly in the 
interest of an employer, in relation to an employee benefit plan.” 
ERISA § 3(9), 29 U.S.C. § 1002(9), defines “person” as an “individ- 
ual” as well as a “partnership, joint venture, corporation, mutual 
company, joint-stock company, trust, estate, unincorporated associa- 
tion, or employee organization.” 


7 


implemented by the statute; and that individual state veil- 
piercing standards, which are typically very restrictive, 
should not be utilized to frustrate federal legislative pol- 
icy. The NCCMP supports this view and is concerned 
that it not be eroded. Finally, the NCCMP submits that 
it would be incongruous and inconsistent with ERISA’s 
enforcement scheme to relegate such postjudgment en- 
forcement actions to state courts, only to require those 
courts to apply federal common law to enforce a federal 
court judgment. 


Thus, the NCCMP’s brief focuses on issues which it 
believes may not be adequately presented elsewhere, 
including: 

(a) the need for a federal veil-piercing standard 
as part of ERISA’s overall enforcement scheme, and, 


in particular, in connection with the collection efforts 
of multiemployer plans; and, 


(b) the propriety of federal courts’ assuming jur- 
isdiction over postjudgment enforcement actions 
where a federal common law standard of liability 
provides the only correct rule of decision. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS 


1. Federal common law 


Where justice, fairness, and equity dictate, both federal 
and state courts are prepared to disregard the corporate 
form and to impose liability on a company’s shareholders. 
As state veil-piercing standards are typically very restric- 
tive, however, federal courts have traditionally applied a 
more liberal standard in order to effectuate federal in- 
terests and to enforce federal judgments. Consistent with 
this tradition, and with this Court’s precedents, the ma- 
jority of federal courts have fashioned a federal common 
law standard of veil-piercing in ERISA-related disputes 
and in actions to enforce ERISA judgments, in the belief 
that ERISA’s overriding interest in protecting the inter- 


8 


ests of plan participants and beneficiaries justifies a more 
liberal approach than permitted by state law. 


While there is no litmus test for disregarding the cor- 
porate form, and because federal courts must still con- 
sider a totality of circumstances, the NCCMP supports 
the federal common law standard because it enables the 
federal courts—when weighing competing considerations 
—to give due regard to ERISA’s policy and purposes. As 
stated above and as discussed further below in Section 
I, C., this more liberal approach is particularly important 
to multiemployer plans because of their inability to screen 
potential contributing employers for credit-worthiness or 
to terminate their relationship with undercapitalized, in- 
solvent, mismanaged, or fictitious corporations. Accord- 
ingly, federal courts should not apply standards that have 
developed under state law with regard to ordinary classes 
of creditors who voluntarily assume the risk of their 
contractual undertakings. 


2. Jurisdiction over veil-piercing claims to enforce an 
ERISA judgment 


The federal district court had subject matter jurisdic- 
tion over Respondent’s veil-piercing action under one of 
three alternative bases of federal jurisdiction. First, the 
Fourth Circuit properly held that the federal district court 
had ancillary jurisdiction over the veil-piercing claim, as 
the court’s continuing jurisdiction over an individual who 
intentionally caused the judgment debtor to violate the 
court’s prior order of judgment was necessary to vindicate 
the court’s judgment and effectuate its decree. Second, 
as federal standards apply in determining whether to dis- 
regard the corporate form to impose liability for viola- 
tions of a federal statute, the veil-piercing suit “arises 
under” federal law, and federal jurisdiction exists under 
28 U.S.C. § 1331. And third, federal jurisdiction exists 
under ERISA Section 502(e)(1), as Respondent’s veil- 
piercing suit alleged facts sufficient to state a claim under 


9 


ERISA Section 502(a)(3) for equitable relief to redress 
the ERISA-judgment debtor’s violations of ERISA. 


ARGUMENT 


I. IN ACTIONS TO ENFORCE ERISA, THE TERMS 
OF EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS, OR ERISA 
JUDGMENTS, FEDERAL COURTS SHOULD ADOPT 
A FEDERAL VEIL-PIERCING STANDARD TO DE- 
TERMINE WHETHER CORPORATE SEPARATE- 
NESS SHOULD BE DISREGARDED 


A. A federal veil-piercing standard is appropriate for 
all stages of ERISA enforcement 


In the case at bar, a corporate officer and shareholder 
held not to be liable as a fiduciary in an underlying 
ERISA action was subsequently held personally liable 
for a judgment rendered against a corporate fiduciary 
because the individual’s postjudgment conduct resulted 
in the judgment’s being uncollectible against the corporate 
debtor. To impose liability, the Fourth Circuit applied 
a federal common law veil-piercing standard to effectuate 
the prior judgment and, thus, to effectuate ERISA goals 
and policies. 


The NCCMP endorses the Fourth Circuit’s reasoning 
and submits that federal courts should apply a federal 
veil-piercing standard in circumstances wherein the exist- 
ing facts warrant disregarding the corporate form in order 
to protect the interests of ERISA funds and their partici- 
pants and beneficiaries. Federal courts should employ 
that federal standard whether the operative facts involve 
prejudgment or postjudgment conduct, and, in the post- 
judgment context, without regard to the nature of the 
ERISA judgment sought to be enforced; i.e., a judgment 
based on breach of fiduciary duty under ERISA Sections 
409(a) and 502(a)(2), or a judgment under ERISA 
Sections 515 and 502(a)(3) for violations of ERISA 
and/or the terms of the plan. 


10 


As a practical matter, the trustees of multiemployer 
plans will most often seek to invoke a federal veil-piercing 
standard in the course of prejudgment collection actions 
arising under Section 502(a)(3) of the statute, 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1132(a)(3).7. However, unless the Fourth Circuit's 
ruling is upheld, and a federal veil-piercing standard is 
made applicable to all stages of ERISA enforcement, the 
collection remedies available to multiemployer plans 
could well be substantially reduced,* thereby adversely 


7 In such actions, federal courts clearly have subject matter juris- 
diction under ERISA §§ 515, 502(a) (1), and 502(e) (1); i.e., the 
trustees’ cause of action arises under §§515 and 502(a) (3), 
while federal common law determines whether the facts in a case 
militate in favor of disregarding the corporate entity to hold a 
person or entity other than the contributing employer liable for 
the company’s failure to make contractually required contributions. 
In our view, the court would likewise have subject matter jurisdic- 
tion over an action to enforce against an individual owner a prior 
judgment for delinquent contributions rendered solely against the 
corporate debtor under § 502(a) (3), if that individual—like Peacock 
—engaged in postjudgment conduct rendering the judgment un- 
collectible. As will be discussed further in the next section of this 
brief, the federal court's jurisdiction could be premised on ERISA 
§ 502(a) (3), because the postjudgment enforcement action would 
still be an action for equitable relief to redress violations of ERISA 
and/or the plan. Moreover, as federal common law would provide 
the substantive rules of decision, the court would also have federal 
question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. Finally, as in the 
case at bar, the court would have ancillary jurisdiction to effectuate 
its own judgments. We believe the same principles should apply 
to a postjudgment enforcement action, such as the case at bar, 
where the original cause of action arose under § 502(a) (2). 


8 For example, if this Court were to find that traditional state- 
law principles should be applied to determine whether Peacock 
should be held liable for the judgment rendered below. As Peti- 
tioner urges, federal courts would be more likely to apply the 
stricter state standard not only in the context of postjudgment 
enforcement, but also in the context of prejudgment collection 
actions, unless the Court were also to provide guidelines as to when 
federal rather than state veil-piercing rules should apply to ERISA 
actions. As indicated above, however, we do not believe that there 
is any principled basis on which to make such a distinction; we 


11 


affecting those plans’ ability to provide benefits to their 
participants and beneficiaries. Thus, selecting an appro- 
priate standard is of crucial importance in enabling those 
plans to collect the contributions they need in order to 
remain financially viable. 


B. A federal veil-piercing standard is appropriate where 
federal policies are at stake 


The concept that a corporation is an entity separate and 
apart from the individuals who own and control it is a 
state-created legal fiction that was created “for the pur- 
poses of convenience and to subserve the ends of justice.” 
DeWitt Truck Brokers, Inc. v. W. Ray Flemming Fruit 
Company, 540 F.2d 681, 683 (4th Cir. 1976). How- 
ever, courts will refuse to recognize the corporate entity 
if such recognition would extend the principles of incor- 
poration beyond their legitimate purposes and would 
facilitate injustice and inequitable consequences. Taylor 
v. Standard Gas Co., 306 U.S. 307, 322 (1939); see also 
Bangor Punta Operations v. Bangor & Aroostook Ry., 
417 U.S. 703, 713 (1974). Accordingly, where justice, 
equity, and fairness dictate, courts disregard the corporate 
form and treat the corporation and its stockholders as 
one. Taylor, 306 U.S. at 322; Keffer v. H.K. Porter Co., 
Inc., 872 F.2d 60 (4th Cir. 1989); Leddy v. Standard 
Drywall, Inc., 875 F.2d 383 (2d Cir. 1989); Town of 
Brookline v. Gorsuch, 677 F.2d 215, 221 (1st Cir. 1981); 
DeWitt, 540 F.2d at 683; Connors v. Princeton Coal 
Group, 770 F.Supp. 1132 (S.D.W. Va. 1991). 


Beyond these general principles (which apply both to 
federal and state courts), it is well-established by Supreme 
Court precedent that federal legislative policies affect the 
standard to be applied in piercing the corporate veil. As 
a general rule, federal courts will apply a more liberal 
federal standard where federal interests are involved, 


therefore urge this Court to adopt a federal standard whenever 
it is necessary to pierce a corporate veil to enforce ERISA. 


12 


where a lawsuit arises under federal substantive law, or 
where a federal judgment is sought to be enforced. 


In Anderson v. Abbott, 321 U.S. 349, 365 (1944), for 
example, this Court characterized piercing the corporate 
veil of a bank-holding company to be an issue of federal 
law and stated that the corporate shield, as a creature of 
state law, could not be asserted to defeat the federal polli- 
cies of the national banking law. The Court noted that 
while states are free to treat shareholders’ liability as they 
wish, in the absence of a conflicting federal incorporation 
statute, “no State may endow its corporate creatures with 
the power to place themselves above the Congress of the 
United States and defeat the federal policy concerning 
national banks which Congress has announced.” Abbott, 
321 U.S. at 365. And, as the Fourth Circuit correctly 
observed in Peacock “the general rule adopted in the 
federal cases is that ‘a corporate entity may be disregarded 
in the interests of public convenience, fairness and equity,’ 
(citation omitted). In applying this rule, federal courts 
will look closely at the purpose of the federal statute to 
determine whether the statute places importance on the 
corporate form [citations omitted], an inquiry that usually 
gives less respect to the corporate form than does the 
strict common law alter ego doctrine. . . .” Peacock, 39 
F.3d at 503-04 (quoting Town of Brookline v. Gorsuch, 
667 F.2d 215, 221 (1st Cir. 1981)). 


In cases in which ERISA is implicated, the overriding 
federal policy at stake is the policy of protecting and pre- 
serving the solvency of ERISA-regulated employee benefit 
plans. Because these benefits are crucial to the welfare 
of.millions of Americans, and to this country’s ability to 
provide for and protect its citizens, a majority of federal 
courts that are asked to pierce corporate veils adopt 
the more liberal federal veil-piercing standard, fashioning 
federal common law to effectuate ERISA’s goals. See 
U.S. ». Van Diviner, 822 F.2d 960, 965 (10th Cir. 1987) 
(where federal interests are implicated, federal common 
law defines the rights and liabilities of the parties); JAM 


13 


1AM National Pension Fund v. Wakefield Industries, 612 
F. Supp. 643 (D.D.C. 1985) (in determining whether an 
individual should be liable for company’s withdrawal li- 
ability, court is guided by federal common law of veil- 
piercing). See also Alman v. Danin, 801 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 
1986) (as ERISA does not attach too great weight to cor- 
porate form, allowing shareholders of a marginal corpora- 
tion to invoke a corporate shield in order to avoid financial 
obligations to employee benefit plans would be inequitable 
and is precisely the type of conduct Congress wanted to 
prevent).° These cases are, of course, consistent with 
this Court’s teaching in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Bruch, 489 U.S. 101, 110 (1989), in which the Court 
specifically stated that when Congress enacted ERISA, it 
intended federal courts to fashion a federal common law 
of rights and obligations under ERISA to carry out the 
statute’s goals and policies. 


In fashioning a federal common law standard for veil- 
piercing, federal courts do not abandon the common law 
totality-of-circumstances test applied in state courts, nor 
do they ignore the numerous factors that state courts con- 
sider in their veil-piercing analyses. Indeed, federal com- 
mon law too requires that courts examine certain factors 
to determine whether a corporate form was properly main- 
tained. In doing so, federal courts may even look to state 
law standards for guidance. United Electrical Workers 
v. 163 Pleasant Street Corp., 960 F.2d 1080, 1092-93 
(ist Cir. 1992); Laborers Clean-Up Contract Admin. 


*In Alman, as in the case at bar, the company against which the 
district court entered an ERISA judgment for delinquent contri- 
butions was defunct and assetless; therefore, plaintiffs filed a 
second action against a related company and two shareholders, 
seeking to collect the first judgment under a single-enterprise and 
veil-piercing theory. 


10In United Electrical Workers, the First Circuit noted that 
“Cujnder Massachusetts common law, disregarding the corporate 
form is permissible only in rare situations.” However, the court 
found that it would “serve no useful purpose to explore the in- 


14 


Trust Fund vy. Uriarte Clean-Up Serv. Inc., 736 F.2d 516 
(9th Cir. 1984). However, as the Fourth Circuit ex- 
plained in the case at bar, although there is no “litmus 
test” in the federal courts for determining when to disre- 
gard the corporate form, federal courts, in making that 
determination, must give substantial consideration to 
ERISA’s goals and policies and its limited deference to 
the corporate form. Federal! courts must also seriously 
consider the inequitable results that would occur if they 
were to treat corporate acts that undermine the financial 
soundness of employee benefit plans (e.g., through the 
evasion of legal obligations) as the acts of the corporation 
alone, where a unity of interest and ownership indicates 
that the separate personalities of the corporation and the 
individual shareholders no longer exist. Peacock, 39 F.3d 
at 503-04." Thus, because the federal veil-piercing 
standard is sufficiently flexible to permit policy considera- 
tions to be taken so seriously into account, the NCCMP 
submits that this standard is appropriate to ERISA’s 
enforcement scheme as a whole. 


C. A federal veil-piercing standard accommodates the 
economic realities in which multiemployer plans 
operate 


Multiemployer employee benefit plans are plans created 
by parties to collective bargaining agreements for the 
purpose of providing health, retirement, and related bene- 
fits to workers and their families. These plans are pri- 


terstices of the state law standard [as] this is, after all, a federal 
question case—and in federal question cases courts are wary of 
allowing the corporate form to stymie legislative policies.”” The 
court added that the rationale for applying a less rigorous federal 
standard, i.e., for “encouraging a modicum of corporate disregard 
in ERISA cases,” is grounded on “congressional intent” to protect 
the interests of employee benefit plan participants and their bene- 
ficiaries.” 960 F.2d at 1091-1092. 


11 Given these concerns, the Fourth Circuit does not require a 
showing of “plain fraud” to pierce the corporate veil. Peacock, 
39 F.3d at 504, n.16. 


15 


marily self-funded through the ongoing contributions of 
several, hundreds, or even thousands of employers in one 
or more industries involving participants working or liv- 
ing in several or many states. The contributions are 
pooled for investment to provide benefits to all partici- 
pants and beneficiaries of the plan. 


A very large number of employers who contribute to 
multiemployer plans are close corporations. Many of 
these companies operate with a substantial degree of in- 
difference to corporate formalities. However, because 
multiemployer plans are third-party beneficiaries of col- 
lective bargaining agreements between unions and em- 
ployers, they generally cannot (and do not) screen pro- 
spective contributing employers for reliability or credit- 
worthiness. Moreover, there is little (if any) opportunity 
for plans to obtain information as to how the employer 
has structured its business—either before or after it be- 
comes a contributing employer. And, even if such oppor- 
tunity did exist, multiemployer plans often have no legal 
right to terminate their relationship with marginal em- 
ployers, as would a trade creditor who refuses further 
credit or orders. Thus, multiemployer benefit plans are 
not like creditors who voluntarily assume the risk of deal- 
ing with undercapitalized, insolvent, mismanaged, or fic- 
titious corporations. To balance out this lack of bar- 
gaining power, multiemployer benefit plans need, and in- 
deed deserve, greater latitude on their veil-piercing claims 
than might be accorded to trade creditors who contract 
directly with debtor corporations, for those creditors are 
in a better position to gain access to information about a 
corporation and to assess and/or assume the risks of their 
undertakings. Accordingly, federal courts should not ap- 
ply to employee benefit plans standards that have devel- 
oped under state law with regard to ordinary classes of 
creditors.” 


12In a somewhat different (though not unrelated context), this 
Court has previously recognized that employee benefit plans are 
uniquely situated third-party beneficiaries of collective bargaining 


16 


Finally, the NCCMP respectfully represents that by 
urging this Court to recognize and adopt a relaxed stand- 
ard of veil-piercing under ERISA, we do not suggest that 
courts disregard the corporate entity lightly. Rather, we 
urge this Court to consider that because so much is at 
stake nationally with respect to the proper funding of em- 
ployee benefit plans, it is crucial to the well-being of those 
plans that federal courts balance the degree of impro- 
priety required to pierce a corporate veil with the national 
goals and policies to be achieved under ERISA. Hence, 
the NCCMP urges this Court to affirm the federal veil- 
piercing standard adopted by the Fourth Circuit in the 
case at bar. 


Il. FEDERAL JURISDICTION OVER CORPORATE 
VEIL-PIERCING CLAIMS TO COLLECT ERISA 
JUDGMENTS IS CONSISTENT WITH ERISA’S 
BROAD GRANT OF FEDERAL JURISDICTION TO 
ENFORCE ERISA RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS, 
AND IS SUPPORTED BY APPLICABLE LAW 


A. Three distinct bases of federal jurisdiction exist 
where federal courts are asked to enforce a prior 
ERISA judgment by applying a federal common 
law veil-piercing standard 


To recapitulate the facts and procedural posture of 
this case, Respondent (Thomas), on behalf of a class of 
participants seeking entitlement to certain retirement 
benefits, succesfully prosecuted a breach of fiduciary duty 
claim against a corporation (Tru-Tech), which was held 
responsible for underfunding the plan, and a judgment 
was entered in the amount of 187,000. The district 


agreements. The Court has therefore held that defenses which 
could be raised against the Union as a contracting party can not 
be raised against trust funds whose trustees sue based on the same 
contract. See Lewis v. Benedict Coal Corp., 361 U.S. 459 (1960) ; 
Robbins ». Schneider Moving & Storage Co., 466 U.S. 364 (1984). 
Similar principles should apply in adopting a federal veil-piercing 
standard. 


17 


court’s jurisdiction over plaintiff's breach of fiduciary 
duty claim was predicated on ERISA Section 502(e)(1), 
29 U.S.C. § 1132(e)(1) as the cause of action was 
brought under ERISA Section 502(a)(2), 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1132(a)(2). After the judgment was entered, the com- 
pany’s principal shareholder and board chairman (Pea- 
cock), who was held not to be a co-fiduciary in the ini- 
tial action, engaged in a strategy to dissipate the assets 
of the corporate debtor, resulting in the ERISA judg- 
ment’s being uncollectible. Therefore, Thomas filed a 
second federal court action to collect the judgment, urg- 
ing the district court to pierce Tru-Tech’s corporate veil. 
The district court assumed jurisdiction in the second ac- 
tion and, applying a federal common law standard as 
being applicable to ERISA, found Peacock liable for the 
judgment as a result of his postjudgment conduct. 


Peacock argued that Thomas’s “suit [was] one merely 
to collect an outstanding judgment and that, because 
ERISA [was] not thereby implicated, the district court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the case.” 39 F.3d 
at 499. Arguing that once Thomas won its judgment 
against Tru-Tech it became a judgment creditor like any 
other, Peacock reasoned that Thomas should seek relief 
in the state courts. Rejecting this argument, the Fourth 
Circuit concluded that Thomas’s attempt to pierce the cor- 
porate veil to enforce a prior ERISA judgment was prop- 
erly entertained by the district court under its ancillary 
jurisdiction. 

Although the NCCMP believes the Fourth Circuit’s rul- 
ing is consistent with this Court’s precedents, and urges 
affirmance, we believe that alternate bases of federal jur- 
isdiction also exist. As we shall show, where an individ- 
ual having power to influence the disposition of corporate 
assets flouts ERISA by rendering an ERISA judgment 
against that corporation uncollectible, and a subsequent 
action is brought to enforce the judgment against that in- 
dividual on a federal veil-piercing theory, federal subject 
matter jurisdiction necessarily exists under both 28 U.S.C. 


18 


§ 1331 and under ERISA Section 502(e)(1). In our 
view, these bases of federal jurisdiction exist regardless 
of the nature of the prior ERISA judgment. Moreover, 
as federal law supplies the exclusive rules of decision, 
there is no place for state courts in this scheme. 


B. The compelling national interests legislated in 
ERISA justify the Fourth Circuit’s finding that the 
federal district court has ancillary jurisdiction over 
postjudgment efforts to pierce the corporate veil of 
an ERISA-judgment debtor, as the retention of 
federal jurisdiction to impose liability in such cir- 
cumstances is necessary to vindicate the federal 
courts’ authority and effectuate their decrees 


The Fourth Circuit’s finding that the federal district 
court had ancillary jurisdiction over Respondent’s attempt 
to pierce the corporate veil to impose liability on Peacock 
is fully consistent with this Court’s recent precedent. In 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of America, 114 
S. Ct. 1673 (1994), the Court articulated the “two 
separate, though sometimes related” circumstances un- 
der which it has asserted ancillary jurisdiction, as fol- 
lows: “(1) to permit disposition by a single court 
of claims that are, in varying respects and degrees, fac- 
tually interdependent; and (2) to enable the court to 
function successfully, that is, to manage its proceedings, 
vindicate its authority, and effectuate its decrees.” Id. at 
1676 (citations omitted). Assuming that the former 
basis cannot apply in cases such as the one at bar, in 
which the imposition of liability arises from facts occur- 
ring subsequent to a prior judgment, the latter basis 
plainly supports the exercise of ancillary jurisdiction 
under facts, such as those at issue, where liability is sought 
to be imposed on an individual who deliberately causes a 
judgment debtor to violate the court’s prior judgment 
ordering payment to the successful plaintiff. 


The facts in Kokkonen, of course, were very different 
from the facts and concerns at bar, and are therefore par- 


‘19 


ticularly useful for contrast. There, the original action, a 
suit for breach of an agency agreement which had been 
removed from state to federal court on the basis of divers- 
ity jurisdiction, was settled and the action dismissed with 
prejudice. Although the settlement agreement served as 
consideration for the dismissal, it was not incorporated 
into the dismisal order or otherwise committed to the 
federal court’s supervisory authority. Viewing the sub- 
sequent alleged breach of the settlement agreement as a 
breach of contract action having no relationship to the 
federal court other than the fact that it resulted in the 
dismissal of the earlier federal suit, this Court found that 
there was no basis for ancillary jurisdiction given the re- 


moteness of federal concerns to the subject matter of the 
second dispute. 


In contrast, the underlying action in the case at bar 
arose under a federal statute conferring exclusive jurisdic- 
tion on the federal court. Moreover, in the subsequent 
action to enforce the federal court judgment, federal law 
supplied the exclusive principles for imposing liability. 
Finally, unlike the facts in Kokkonen, the record in this 
case plainly reveals that Peacock engaged in a deliberate 
Strategy to cause the judgment debtor to violate the dis- 
trict court's order of judgment. See District Court’s Find- 
ings of Fact Reproduced in Appendix to Petition for Cer- 
tiorari, at 4la (“In contemplation of the Thomas judg- 
ment and following its entry, Peacock directed the man- 
agement of Tru-Tech’s affairs to defeat the collection of 
the Thomas judgment by siphoning off the assets of the 
corporation to certain favored creditors owned or con- 
trolled by Peacock.”); 42a (“These assets of Tru-Tech 
were siphoned off by Peacock pursuant to a corporate 
strategy developed by him. It was the specific intent and 
purpose of this strategy to siphon off these assets to fav- 
ored creditors owned or controlled by Peacock and to 
defeat collection of the Thomas judgment. . . .” In his 
efforts to siphon off the assets of Tru-Tech to favored 
creditors owned or controlled by Peacock, it was the 


20 


specific intent of Peacock to defraud the former em- 
ployees of Tru-Tech who were beneficiaries of the Pension 
Plan and to defeat their legitimate attempt to collect a 
lawful judgment.” (Emphasis added.) These finding of 
fact alone place this case squarely within the second basis 
for ancillary jurisdiction set forth in Kokkonen. 


Moreover, in Owen Equipment & Erection Company 
v. Kroger, 437 U.S. 365 (1978) this Court’s discussion 
of the factors relevant to a federal court’s exercise of 
ancillary jurisdiction also supports federal court juris- 
diction. Although Owen was also a diversity case in 
which the Court found ancillary jurisdiction lacking, 
Justice Stewart, writing for the majority, explained that 
“there must be an examination of the posture in which 
the nonfederal claim is asserted and of the specific statute 
that confers jurisdiction over the federal claim, in order 
to determine whether ‘Congress in [that statute] has... . 
expressly or by implication negated’ the exercise of juris- 
diction over the particular nonfederal claim.” Jd. at 373 
(quoting Aldinger v. Howard, 427 U.S. 1, 18 (1976)). 


Assuming, arguendo, that Thomas’s veil-piercing claim 
does not in and of itself give rise to an independent basis 
of federal jurisdiction, the character of the initial claim 
against Tru-Tech, as well as ERISA’s policy establishing 
employee benefits law as an atea of exclusive federal 
concern, are of prime relevance in determining the 
legitimacy of the district court’s continuing jurisdiction 
over postjudgment efforts to pierce the corporate veil. 
Because the initial claim against Tru-Tech was brought 
under ERISA Section 502(a)(2), for breach of fiduciary 
duty, over which federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction 
under ERISA Section 502(e)(1), the district court’s au- 
thority to vindicate its judgment against an individual who 
deliberately caused the judgment debtor to violate the 
court’s order cannot be more clear. Accordingly, the 
Fourth Circuit’s affirmance of the district court’s finding 
of ancillary jurisdiction was fully consistent with this 
Court’s precedent and with ERISA’s broad grant of fed- 


21 


eral jurisdiction over ERISA claims, and there is no 
logical reason why such veil-piercing actions should be 
decided by a state court. 


C. The district court had subject matter jurisdiction 
over Respondent’s claim against Peacock under 28 
U.S.C. § 1331, as suits to pierce the corporate veil to 
collect federal judgments “arise under” federal 
common law 


As discussed above, federal courts throughout the 
United States have held that a federal common law stand- 
ard should be applied in piercing corporate veils to 
impose liability for ERISA judgments, and in other 
ERISA-related disputes. Because the resolution of this 
case turns exclusively on a question of federal substantive 
law, Respondent’s veil-piercing claim “arises under” fed- 
eral law, and therefore, the federal district court had sub- 
ject matter jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 (“The 
district courts shall have original jurisdiction of all civil 
actions arising under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of 
the United States.”). 


In Illinois v. City of Milwaukee, 406 U.S. 91, 100 
(1972), this Court held that “§ 1331 jurisdiction will sup- 
port claims founded upon federal common law as well as 
those of statutory origin.” See also National Farmer's 
Union Insurance Companies v. Crow Tribe of Indians, 
471 U.S. 845, 850 (1985) (“Federal common-law as 
articulated in rules that are fashioned by court decisions 
are ‘laws’ as that term is used in § 1331.”). Likewise, in 
Franchise Tax Board v. Laborers’ Vacation Trust, 463 
U.S. 1 (1983), the Court confirmed that the “arising 
under” jurisdiction of federal district courts extends beyond 
those classes of cases in which a federal statute creates 
the cause of action, to include the general vindication of 
rights that “necessarily turn{] on some construction of 
federal law.” Id. at 9. Summarizing its own interpreta- 
tions “over many years,” the Court characterized as fall- 
ing within Congress’s grant of federal district court juris- 


22 


diction, “those cases in which a well-pleaded complaint 
establishes either that federal law creates the cause of 
action or that the plaintiff's right to relief necessarily 
depends on resolution of a substantial question of federal 
law.” Id. at 27-8. (Emphasis added. ) 


Although we believe that ERISA Section 502(a)(3) is 
sufficiently broad to encompass a cause of action for equi- 
table relief in the form of piercing the corporate veil to 
enforce an ERISA judgment, infra, the absence of such 
a cause of action under ERISA itself would not deprive 
federal courts of jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 for 
two distinct reasons. 


First, as noted above, this Court’s precedents make 
clear that jurisdiction under § 1331 is not dependent on 
the existence of a cause of action under another federal 
statute, but exists wherever resolution of a lawsuit turns 
entirely on a question of federal common law. Moreover, 
as the Fourth Circuit found, “an attempt to pierce the 
corporate veil is not itself a cause of action but rather is 
a means of imposing liability on an underlying cause of 
action . . . .” Peacock, 39 F.3d at 499, quoting | 
William Meade Fletcher, Fletcher Cyclopedia of the 
Law of Private Corporations, § 41, at 603 (perm. ed. 
rev. vol. 1990). Because “an attempt to pierce the cor- 
porate veil is necessarily subsidiary to some primary cause 
of action,” id., the postjudgment veil-piercing claim need 
not state an independent cause of action under ERISA, 
as complete relief may be afforded by federal common 
law. 


Second, in suing Peacock to pierce the corporate veil, 
Respondent was not attempting to hold Peacock liable 
for his own ERISA violations, but rather, was seeking to 
hold Peacock liable, under federal common law, to redress 
Tru-Tech’s ERISA violations. Therefore, because Re- 
spondent’s veil-piercing claim does not allege that Peacock 
violated ERISA, it need not fall within one of ERISA’s 
“six carefully integrated civil enforcement provisions.” See 


23 


Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 113 S. Ct. 2063 (1993); 
Massachusetts Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473 U.S. 
134 (1985). In both Mertens and Russell, plaintiffs al- 
leged that defendants violated ERISA, but the Court ruled 
against plaintiffs in both cases on the grouniis that the re- 
lief sought was not available under ERISA Section 502.” 
However, by claiming that a defendant such as Peacock 
breached a federal common law duty to refrain from 
rendering worthless a federal court judgment, as opposed 
to a duty imposed by ERISA, the federal common law 
claim need not fall within ERISA’s “carefully reticulated” 
enforcement scheme. Instead, although ERISA affects the 
standard to be applied in determining liability, the veil- 
piercing claim arises under federal common law, and fed- 
eral jurisdiction therefore exists under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. 


Finally, as discussed earlier, the equitable principle of 
disregarding the corporate form to advance the policies 
of federal legislation is not unique to ERISA, but repre- 


13 Mertens and Russell are readily distinguishable from both the 
case at bar as well as from analogous actions by multiemployer plan 
trustees seeking to enforce ERISA judgments for delinquent contri- 
butions against individuals on a federal common law veil-piercing 
theory. In Mertens, this Court held that ERISA § 502(a) (3) does 
not authorize suits for money damages against nonfiduciaries for 
knowingly participating in a fiduciary’s breach of fiduciary duty, 
as § 502(a) (3) contemplates only “equitable relief,” whereas direct 
and consequential damages constitute “legal relief” and are avail- 
able only in actions under ERISA § 502(a) (2) against fiduciaries. 
In Russell, the Court held that a participant could not sue under 
ERISA § 502(a) (2) to recover personally compensatory or punitive 
damages resulting from a plan administrator’s belated processing 
of a claim, as any recovery arising from a breach of fiduciary duty 
claim inures solely to the benefit of the plan. The Court also found 
that ERISA’s civil enforcement scheme does not contemplate puni- 
tive damages. In postjudgment federal veil-piercing actions of the 
type at bar, ERISA causes of action will already have been pursued 
to final judgment against a proper defendant; federal common law 
merely permits those judgments to be enforced against a nonjudg- 


ment debtor where equity and justice require the corporate entity 
to be disregarded. 


24 


sents a traditional remedy provided by federal courts. An- 
derson v. Abbott, 321 U.S. 349 (1944); First National 
Bank v. Banco Para El Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462 
U.S. 611 (1983). Therefore, even assuming, arguendo, 
that Respondent’s veil-piercing suit fails to state a claim 
under ERISA Section 502(a), the exclusivity of ERISA’s 
civil enforcement scheme cannot be interpreted to displace 
equitable remedies traditionally recognized by the courts 
of the United States. 


D. Suits to pierce the corporate veil to enforce a prior 
ERISA judgment state a cause of action under 
ERISA Section 502(a)(3) 


Section 502(a)(3) of ERISA provides that a civil ac- 
tion may be brought “by a participant, beneficiary, or 
fiduciary (A) to enjoin any act or practice which violates 
any provision of this title or the terms of the plan, 
or (B) to obtain other appropriate equitable relief (i) to 
redress such violations or (ii) to enforce any provisions 
of this title or the terms of the plan.” (Emphasis added. ) 


This provision is very broad. While it limits the classes 
of persons who are authorized to seek redress of ERISA 
violations, and provides only for equitable relief, it does 
not limit either the type of ERISA violations for which 
equitable relief is available or the persons against whom 
(or which) an action can be brought. Accordingly, the 
NCCMP submits that Respondent’s veil-piercing suit falls 
literally within the above provision, as would a suit 
brought by multiemployer plan trustees to enforce a judg- 
ment rendered in a collection action."* Therefore, federal 


4 Although Respondent’s Complaint did not allege a cause of 
action under § 502(a) (3), we believe Thomas’s suit to pierce the 
corporate veil under ERISA stated an ERISA claim under the 
am pleading rule set forth in Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 


25 


courts should have exclusive jurisdiction under ERISA 
Section 502(e)(1). 


We parse the provisions as follows. In the context of a 
postjudgment enforcement action, a federal court will 
already have determined that ERISA or “the terms of 
the plan” have been “violated” and will have rendered a 
judgment against the person(s) answerable for the harm— 
either under Section 502(a)(2) or Section 502(a)(3). 
Where an individual having power over a corporate judg- 
ment debtor deliberately flouts that judgment and makes 
it uncollectible, a participant, beneficiary, or fiduciary may 
seek relief, under Section 502(a)(3), to “redress” that 
subsequent “violation.” Therefore, the only question that 
requires further analysis is whether veil-piercing consti- 
tutes “other appropriate equitable relief.” 


Although the Fourth Circuit did not consider veil- 
piercing in the context of Section 502(a) (3), it stated quite 
clearly that “the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil 
is an equitable one,” citing 1 Fletcher, supra. 39 F.3d 
at 499-500. Distinguishing Mertens, supra, the Court of 
Appeals stated, further, that “[t]he current attempt by 
plaintiffs is not, however, . . . an independent action for 
monetary damages against a nonfiduciary, but an equitable 
attempt to satisfy a previous judgment entered against 
a fiduciary [e.g., a corporate judgment debtor].”° Jd. at 


15 This distinction cannot be overemphasized, and the Fourth Cir- 
cuit correctly rejected Peacock’s suggestion that Thomas’s second 
action constituted a second bite at the apple or an attempt to 
circumvent Mertens. First, as noted earlier. Mertens holds only 
that §502(a)(3) does not authorize suits for money damages 
against nonfiduciaries who assist fiduciaries in breaching their 
fiduciary obligations; Mertens does not foreclose suits for equitable 
relief under §502(a)(3) against nonfiduciaries to redress such 
violations, let alone to redress other and different violations of 
ERISA. Second, Thomas’s second action was not predicated on 
Peacock’s violation of any fiduciary duty under ERISA, but 
on Peacock’s deliberate attempt to render the corporate debtor 


judgment-proof. 


26 


502. The Fourth Circuit’s characterization accords with 
this Court’s recognition that veil-piercing to collect judg- 
ments based on federal law ‘s a traditional equitable rem- 
edy. See e.g., Taylor v. Standard Gas, 306 U.S. at 322. 


In sum, ERISA Section 502(a)(3) requires two ele- 
ments, a violation of ERISA and a request for equitable 
relief. A violation of ERISA can result from the violation 
of a specific statutory provision or from a violation of the 
federal common law of ERISA.** Consequently, because 
Peacock violated the federal common-law of ERISA by 
causing an ERISA judgment to be rendered uncollectible, 
and because veil-piercing is an equitable remedy, both 
requirements of Section 502(a)(3) have been satisfied in 
this case. 


16 In fact, this Court, in Franchise Taz Board, stated that, “fed- 
eral jurisdiction over suits under § 502 is exclusive, and they are 
governed entirely by federal common law.” Franchise Tax Board, 
463 U.S. at 19-20, n.20. 


27 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated above, the NCCMP respectfully 
urges this Court to affirm the decision of the Fourth 
Circuit, to hold that a federal veil-piercing standard should 
be applied by the federal courts whenever it is necessary 
to disregard the corporate form in the context of an 
ERISA-related dispute, and to hold that federal courts 
have exclusive jurisdiction over suits to enforce ERISA 
judgments where liability is predicated on a veil-piercing 
theory. 

Respectfully submitted. 


DIANA L.S. PETERS * 

PAUL LIMMIATIS 

FEDER & ASSOCIATES, P.C. 

1350 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 

Suite 600 

Washington, D.C. 20036 

(202) 955-8305 

Attorneys for National 
Coordinating Committee 
for Multiemployer Plans 

September 6, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


