515us3rulf 06-30-97 16:37:18    PGT • USRULES




      RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE
                UNITED STATES


                        ADOPTED JULY 26, 1995
                     EFFECTIVE OCTOBER 2, 1995



  The following are the Rules of the Supreme Court of the United States
as revised on July 26, 1995. See post, p. 1196. The amended Rules be-
came effective October 2, 1995, as provided in Rule 48, post, p. 1253.
  For previous revisions of the Rules of the Supreme Court see 346 U. S.
949, 388 U. S. 931, 398 U. S. 1013, 445 U. S. 985, and 493 U. S. 1099.




                                                             1195
515us3rulg 05-27-97 16:52:17   PGT • USRULES




             ORDER ADOPTING REVISED RULES
               OF THE SUPREME COURT OF
                   THE UNITED STATES

                   Wednesday, July 26, 1995

  IT IS ORDERED that the revised Rules of this Court,
today approved by the Court and lodged with the Clerk,
shall be effective October 2, 1995, and be printed as an ap-
pendix to the United States Reports.
  IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the Rules promulgated
December 5, 1989, see 493 U. S. 1099, and all amendments to
those Rules, shall be rescinded as of October 1, 1995, and
that the Rules shall govern all proceedings in cases com-
menced after that date and, to the extent feasible and just,
cases then pending. See revised Rule 48.2.




      1196
515us3rulc 07-09-98 11:56:07                        PGT • USRULES




         RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE
                   UNITED STATES


                               TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                        PART I. THE COURT                                                     Page
Rule 1.       Clerk.............................................................................................. 1199
Rule 2.       Library.......................................................................................... 1199
Rule 3.       Term.............................................................................................. 1200
Rule 4.       Sessions and Quorum................................................................. 1200

                         PART II. ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELORS
Rule 5.       Admission to the Bar ................................................................. 1200
Rule 6.       Argument Pro Hac Vice ........................................................... 1202
Rule 7.       Prohibition Against Practice.................................................... 1202
Rule 8.       Disbarment and Disciplinary Action ...................................... 1202
Rule 9.       Appearance of Counsel .............................................................. 1203

                 PART III. J URISDICTION ON W RIT OF CERTIORARI
Rule 10. Considerations Governing Review on Certiorari................. 1203
Rule 11. Certiorari to a United States Court of Appeals Before
           Judgment.................................................................................. 1204
Rule 12. Review on Certiorari: How Sought; Parties ......................... 1204
Rule 13. Review on Certiorari: Time for Petitioning.......................... 1207
Rule 14. Content of a Petition for a Writ of Certiorari...................... 1208
Rule 15. Briefs in Opposition; Reply Briefs; Supplemental Briefs... 1211
Rule 16. Disposition of a Petition for a Writ of Certiorari ................ 1214

                               PART IV. OTHER J URISDICTION
Rule 17.      Procedure in an Original Action ............................................. 1214
Rule 18.      Appeal from a United States District Court ........................ 1215
Rule 19.      Procedure on a Certified Question.......................................... 1220
Rule 20.      Procedure on a Petition for an Extraordinary Writ............ 1221

                           PART V. MOTIONS AND APPLICATIONS
Rule 21. Motions to the Court ................................................................. 1223
                                                                                      1197
515us3rulc 07-09-98 11:56:07                         PGT • USRULES




1198                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                               Page
Rule 22. Applications to Individual Justices ......................................... 1224
Rule 23. Stays ............................................................................................. 1225

             PART VI. BRIEFS ON THE M ERITS AND ORAL A RGUMENT
Rule 24.       Briefs on the Merits: In General............................................. 1226
Rule 25.       Briefs on the Merits: Number of Copies and Time to File 1228
Rule 26.       Joint Appendix ............................................................................ 1229
Rule 27.       Calendar ....................................................................................... 1232
Rule 28.       Oral Argument............................................................................ 1232

                           PART VII. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
Rule 29. Filing and Service of Documents; Special Notifications;
           Corporate Listing................................................................... 1233
Rule 30. Computation and Extension of Time...................................... 1236
Rule 31. Translations ................................................................................. 1237
Rule 32. Models, Diagrams, and Exhibits.............................................. 1237
Rule 33. Document Preparation: Booklet Format; 81 /2- by 11-Inch
           Paper Format .......................................................................... 1238
Rule 34. Document Preparation: General Requirements ................... 1241
Rule 35. Death, Substitution, and Revivor; Public Officers ............... 1243
Rule 36. Custody of Prisoners in Habeas Corpus Proceedings......... 1244
Rule 37. Brief for an Amicus Curiae..................................................... 1244
Rule 38. Fees ............................................................................................... 1246
Rule 39. Proceedings In Forma Pauperis ............................................ 1247
Rule 40. Veterans, Seamen, and Military Cases................................... 1248

                             PART VIII. DISPOSITION OF CASES
Rule 41.       Opinions of the Court ................................................................ 1249
Rule 42.       Interest and Damages ............................................................... 1249
Rule 43.       Costs.............................................................................................. 1250
Rule 44.       Rehearing..................................................................................... 1251
Rule 45.       Process; Mandates ...................................................................... 1252
Rule 46.       Dismissing Cases ........................................................................ 1252

                      PART IX. DEFINITIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Rule 47. Reference to “State Court” and “State Law” ...................... 1253
Rule 48. Effective Date of Rules............................................................. 1253
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




     RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE
               UNITED STATES


   Adopted July 26, 1995—Effective October 2, 1995


                      PART I. THE COURT
Rule 1. Clerk
  1. The Clerk receives documents for filing with the Court
and has authority to reject any submitted filing that does
not comply with these Rules.
  2. The Clerk maintains the Court’s records and will not
permit any of them to be removed from the Court building
except as authorized by the Court. Any document filed
with the Clerk and made a part of the Court’s records may
not thereafter be withdrawn from the official Court files.
After the conclusion of proceedings in this Court, original
records and documents transmitted to this Court by any
other court will be returned to the court from which they
were received.
  3. Unless the Court or the Chief Justice orders otherwise,
the Clerk’s office is open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday
through Friday, except on federal legal holidays listed in 5
U. S. C. § 6103.
Rule 2. Library
  1. The Court’s library is available for use by appropriate
personnel of this Court, members of the Bar of this Court,
Members of Congress and their legal staffs, and attorneys
for the United States and for federal departments and
agencies.
  2. The library’s hours are governed by regulations made
by the Librarian with the approval of the Chief Justice or
the Court.
                                                  1199
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1200           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

  3. Library books may not be removed from the Court
building, except by a Justice or a member of a Justice’s staff.
Rule 3. Term
  The Court holds a continuous annual Term commencing on
the first Monday in October and ending on the day before
the first Monday in October of the following year. See 28
U. S. C. § 2. At the end of each Term, all cases pending on
the docket are continued to the next Term.
Rule 4. Sessions and Quorum
  1. Open sessions of the Court are held beginning at 10 a.m.
on the first Monday in October of each year, and thereafter
as announced by the Court. Unless it orders otherwise, the
Court sits to hear arguments from 10 a.m. until noon and
from 1 p.m. until 3 p.m.
  2. Six Members of the Court constitute a quorum. See
28 U. S. C. § 1. In the absence of a quorum on any day
appointed for holding a session of the Court, the Justices
attending—or if no Justice is present, the Clerk or a Deputy
Clerk—may announce that the Court will not meet until
there is a quorum.
  3. When appropriate, the Court will direct the Clerk or
the Marshal to announce recesses.

            PART II. ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELORS
Rule 5. Admission to the Bar
  1. To qualify for admission to the Bar of this Court, an
applicant must have been admitted to practice in the highest
court of a State, Commonwealth, Territory or Possession, or
the District of Columbia for a period of at least three years
immediately before the date of application; must not have
been the subject of any adverse disciplinary action pro-
nounced or in effect during that 3-year period; and must
appear to the Court to be of good moral and professional
character.
  2. Each applicant shall file with the Clerk (1) a certificate
from the presiding judge, clerk, or other authorized official
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                     1201

of that court evidencing the applicant’s admission to practice
there and the applicant’s current good standing, and (2) a
completely executed copy of the form approved by this Court
and furnished by the Clerk containing (a) the applicant’s per-
sonal statement, and (b) the statement of two sponsors en-
dorsing the correctness of the applicant’s statement, stating
that the applicant possesses all the qualifications required
for admission, and affirming that the applicant is of good
moral and professional character. Both sponsors must be
members of the Bar of this Court who personally know, but
are not related to, the applicant.
   3. If the documents submitted demonstrate that the appli-
cant possesses the necessary qualifications, and if the appli-
cant has signed the oath or affirmation and paid the required
fee, the Clerk will notify the applicant of acceptance by the
Court as a member of the Bar and issue a certificate of ad-
mission. An applicant who so wishes may be admitted in
open court on oral motion by a member of the Bar of this
Court, provided that all other requirements for admission
have been satisfied.
   4. Each applicant shall sign the following oath or affirma-
tion: I, ..............., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that as an
attorney and as a counselor of this Court, I will conduct my-
self uprightly and according to law, and that I will support
the Constitution of the United States.
   5. The fee for admission to the Bar and a certificate bear-
ing the seal of the Court is $100, payable to the United States
Supreme Court. The Marshal will deposit such fees in a
separate fund to be disbursed by the Marshal at the direction
of the Chief Justice for the costs of admissions, for the benefit
of the Court and its Bar, and for related purposes.
   6. The fee for a duplicate certificate of admission to the
Bar bearing the seal of the Court is $15, payable to the
United States Supreme Court. The proceeds will be main-
tained by the Marshal as provided in paragraph 5 of this
Rule.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1202           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Rule 6. Argument Pro Hac Vice
   1. An attorney not admitted to practice in the highest
court of a State, Commonwealth, Territory or Possession, or
the District of Columbia for the requisite three years, but
otherwise eligible for admission to practice in this Court
under Rule 5.1, may be permitted to argue pro hac vice.
   2. An attorney qualified to practice in the courts of a
foreign state may be permitted to argue pro hac vice.
   3. Oral argument pro hac vice is allowed only on motion
of the counsel of record for the party on whose behalf leave
is requested. The motion shall state concisely the qualifica-
tions of the attorney who is to argue pro hac vice. It shall
be filed with the Clerk, in the form required by Rule 21, no
later than the date on which the respondent’s or appellee’s
brief on the merits is due to be filed, and it shall be accompa-
nied by proof of service as required by Rule 29.
Rule 7. Prohibition Against Practice
  No employee of this Court shall practice as an attorney or
counselor in any court or before any agency of government
while employed by the Court; nor shall any person after
leaving such employment participate in any professional
capacity in any case pending before this Court or in any
case being considered for filing in this Court, until two
years have elapsed after separation; nor shall a former em-
ployee ever participate in any professional capacity in any
case that was pending in this Court during the employee’s
tenure.
Rule 8. Disbarment and Disciplinary Action
  1. Whenever a member of the Bar of this Court has been
disbarred or suspended from practice in any court of record,
or has engaged in conduct unbecoming a member of the Bar
of this Court, the Court will enter an order suspending that
member from practice before this Court and affording the
member an opportunity to show cause, within 40 days, why
a disbarment order should not be entered. Upon response,
or if no response is timely filed, the Court will enter an
appropriate order.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1203

   2. After reasonable notice and an opportunity to show
cause why disciplinary action should not be taken, and after
a hearing if material facts are in dispute, the Court may take
any appropriate disciplinary action against any attorney who
is admitted to practice before it for conduct unbecoming a
member of the Bar or for failure to comply with these Rules
or any Rule or order of the Court.
Rule 9. Appearance of Counsel
   1. An attorney seeking to file a document in this Court
in a representative capacity must first be admitted to prac-
tice before this Court as provided in Rule 5, except that
admission to the Bar of this Court is not required for an
attorney appointed under the Criminal Justice Act of 1964,
see 18 U. S. C. § 3006A(d)(6), or under any other applicable
federal statute. The attorney whose name, address, and
telephone number appear on the cover of a document pre-
sented for filing is considered counsel of record, and a sepa-
rate notice of appearance need not be filed. If the name of
more than one attorney is shown on the cover of the docu-
ment, the attorney who is counsel of record shall be clearly
identified.
   2. An attorney representing a party who will not be filing
a document shall enter a separate notice of appearance as
counsel of record indicating the name of the party repre-
sented. A separate notice of appearance shall also be en-
tered whenever an attorney is substituted as counsel of rec-
ord in a particular case.

      PART III. J URISDICTION ON W RIT OF CERTIORARI
Rule 10. Considerations Governing Review on
             Certiorari
   Review on a writ of certiorari is not a matter of right, but
of judicial discretion. A petition for a writ of certiorari will
be granted only for compelling reasons. The following, al-
though neither controlling nor fully measuring the Court’s
discretion, indicate the character of the reasons the Court
considers:
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1204            RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

         (a) a United States court of appeals has entered a
       decision in conflict with the decision of another United
       States court of appeals on the same important matter;
       has decided an important federal question in a way that
       conflicts with a decision by a state court of last resort;
       or has so far departed from the accepted and usual
       course of judicial proceedings, or sanctioned such a de-
       parture by a lower court, as to call for an exercise of
       this Court’s supervisory power;
         (b) a state court of last resort has decided an impor-
       tant federal question in a way that conflicts with the
       decision of another state court of last resort or of a
       United States court of appeals;
         (c) a state court or a United States court of appeals
       has decided an important question of federal law that
       has not been, but should be, settled by this Court, or
       has decided an important federal question in a way that
       conflicts with relevant decisions of this Court.
A petition for a writ of certiorari is rarely granted when the
asserted error consists of erroneous factual findings or the
misapplication of a properly stated rule of law.

Rule 11. Certiorari to a United States Court of Appeals
            Before Judgment
   A petition for a writ of certiorari to review a case pending
in a United States court of appeals, before judgment is en-
tered in that court, will be granted only upon a showing that
the case is of such imperative public importance as to justify
deviation from normal appellate practice and to require
immediate determination in this Court. See 28 U. S. C.
§ 2101(e).

Rule 12. Review on Certiorari: How Sought; Parties
   1. Except as provided in paragraph 2 of this Rule, the peti-
tioner shall file 40 copies of a petition for a writ of certiorari,
prepared as required by Rule 33.1, and shall pay the Rule
38(a) docket fee.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1205

   2. A petitioner proceeding in forma pauperis under Rule
39 shall file an original and 10 copies of a petition for a writ
of certiorari prepared as required by Rule 33.2, together
with an original and 10 copies of the motion for leave to
proceed in forma pauperis. A copy of the motion shall pre-
cede and be attached to each copy of the petition. An in-
mate confined in an institution, if proceeding in forma pau-
peris and not represented by counsel, need file only an
original petition and motion.
   3. Whether prepared under Rule 33.1 or Rule 33.2, the
petition shall comply in all respects with Rule 14 and shall
be submitted with proof of service as required by Rule 29.
The case then will be placed on the docket. It is the peti-
tioner’s duty to notify all respondents promptly, on a form
supplied by the Clerk, of the date of filing, the date the case
was placed on the docket, and the docket number of the case.
The notice shall be served as required by Rule 29.
   4. Parties interested jointly, severally, or otherwise in a
judgment may petition separately for a writ of certiorari; or
any two or more may join in a petition. A party not shown
on the petition as joined therein at the time the petition is
filed may not later join in that petition. When two or more
judgments are sought to be reviewed on a writ of certiorari
to the same court and involve identical or closely related
questions, a single petition for a writ of certiorari covering
all the judgments suffices. A petition for a writ of certiorari
may not be joined with any other pleading, except that any
motion for leave to proceed in forma pauperis shall be
attached.
   5. No more than 30 days after a case has been placed on
the docket, a respondent seeking to file a conditional cross-
petition (i. e., a cross-petition that otherwise would be un-
timely) shall file, with proof of service as required by Rule
29, 40 copies of the cross-petition prepared as required by
Rule 33.1, except that a cross-petitioner proceeding in forma
pauperis under Rule 39 shall comply with Rule 12.2. The
cross-petition shall comply in all respects with this Rule and
Rule 14, except that material already reproduced in the ap-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1206           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

pendix to the opening petition need not be reproduced again.
A cross-petitioning respondent shall pay the Rule 38(a)
docket fee or submit a motion for leave to proceed in forma
pauperis. The cover of the cross-petition shall indicate
clearly that it is a conditional cross-petition. The cross-
petition then will be placed on the docket, subject to the
provisions of Rule 13.4. It is the cross-petitioner’s duty to
notify all cross-respondents promptly, on a form supplied by
the Clerk, of the date of filing, the date the cross-petition
was placed on the docket, and the docket number of the
cross-petition. The notice shall be served as required by
Rule 29. A cross-petition for a writ of certiorari may not
be joined with any other pleading, except that any motion
for leave to proceed in forma pauperis shall be attached.
The time to file a cross-petition will not be extended.
   6. All parties to the proceeding in the court whose judg-
ment is sought to be reviewed are deemed parties entitled
to file documents in this Court, unless the petitioner notifies
the Clerk of this Court in writing of the petitioner’s belief
that one or more of the parties below have no interest in the
outcome of the petition. A copy of such notice shall be
served as required by Rule 29 on all parties to the proceed-
ing below. A party noted as no longer interested may re-
main a party by notifying the Clerk promptly, with service
on the other parties, of an intention to remain a party. All
parties other than the petitioner are considered respondents,
but any respondent who supports the position of a petitioner
shall meet the petitioner’s time schedule for filing docu-
ments, except that a response supporting the petition shall
be filed within 20 days after the case is placed on the docket,
and that time will not be extended. Parties who file no doc-
ument will not qualify for any relief from this Court.
   7. The clerk of the court having possession of the record
shall keep it until notified by the Clerk of this Court to cer-
tify and transmit it. In any document filed with this Court,
a party may cite or quote from the record, even if it has
not been transmitted to this Court. When requested by the
Clerk of this Court to certify and transmit the record, or any
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1207

part of it, the clerk of the court having possession of the
record shall number the documents to be certified and shall
transmit therewith a numbered list specifically identifying
each document transmitted. If the record, or stipulated por-
tions, have been printed for the use of the court below, that
printed record, plus the proceedings in the court below, may
be certified as the record unless one of the parties or the
Clerk of this Court requests otherwise. The record may
consist of certified copies, but if the lower court is of the
view that original documents of any kind should be seen by
this Court, that court may provide by order for the trans-
port, safekeeping, and return of such originals.

Rule 13. Review on Certiorari: Time for Petitioning
   1. Unless otherwise provided by law, a petition for a writ
of certiorari to review a judgment in any case, civil or crimi-
nal, entered by a state court of last resort or a United States
court of appeals (including the United States Court of Ap-
peals for the Armed Forces) is timely when it is filed with
the Clerk of this Court within 90 days after entry of the
judgment. A petition for a writ of certiorari seeking review
of a judgment of a lower state court that is subject to discre-
tionary review by the state court of last resort is timely
when it is filed with the Clerk within 90 days after entry of
the order denying discretionary review.
   2. The Clerk will not file any petition for a writ of cer-
tiorari that is jurisdictionally out of time. See, e. g., 28
U. S. C. § 2101(c).
   3. The time to file a petition for a writ of certiorari runs
from the date of entry of the judgment or order sought to be
reviewed, and not from the issuance date of the mandate (or
its equivalent under local practice). But if a petition for re-
hearing is timely filed in the lower court by any party, the
time to file the petition for a writ of certiorari for all parties
(whether or not they requested rehearing or joined in the
petition for rehearing) runs from the date of the denial of
the petition for rehearing or, if the petition for rehearing is
granted, the subsequent entry of judgment. A suggestion
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1208           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

made to a United States court of appeals for a rehearing en
banc is not a petition for rehearing within the meaning of
this Rule unless so treated by the United States court of
appeals.
   4. A cross-petition for a writ of certiorari is timely when
it is filed with the Clerk as provided in paragraphs 1, 3, and
5 of this Rule, or in Rule 12.5. However, a conditional
cross-petition (which except for Rule 12.5 would be untimely)
will not be granted unless another party’s timely petition for
a writ of certiorari is granted.
   5. For good cause, a Justice may extend the time to file a
petition for a writ of certiorari for a period not exceeding 60
days. An application to extend the time to file shall set out
the basis for jurisdiction in this Court, identify the judgment
sought to be reviewed, include a copy of the opinion and any
order respecting rehearing, and set out specific reasons why
an extension of time is justified. The application must be
received by the Clerk at least 10 days before the date the
petition is due, except in extraordinary circumstances. For
the time and manner of presenting the application, see Rules
21, 22, 30, and 33.2. An application to extend the time to
file a petition for a writ of certiorari is not favored.

Rule 14. Content of a Petition for a Writ of Certiorari
   1. A petition for a writ of certiorari shall contain, in the
order indicated:
   (a) The questions presented for review, expressed con-
cisely in relation to the circumstances of the case, without
unnecessary detail. The questions should be short and
should not be argumentative or repetitive. If the petitioner
or respondent is under a death sentence that may be affected
by the disposition of the petition, the notation “capital case”
shall precede the questions presented. The questions shall
be set out on the first page following the cover, and no other
information may appear on that page. The statement of any
question presented is deemed to comprise every subsidiary
question fairly included therein. Only the questions set out
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1209

in the petition, or fairly included therein, will be considered
by the Court.
   (b) A list of all parties to the proceeding in the court
whose judgment is sought to be reviewed (unless the caption
of the case contains the names of all the parties), and a list
of parent companies and nonwholly owned subsidiaries as
required by Rule 29.6.
   (c) If the petition exceeds five pages, a table of contents
and a table of cited authorities.
   (d) Citations of the official and unofficial reports of the
opinions and orders entered in the case by courts or admin-
istrative agencies.
   (e) A concise statement of the basis for jurisdiction in this
Court, showing:
        (i) the date the judgment or order sought to be re-
     viewed was entered (and, if applicable, a statement that
     the petition is filed under this Court’s Rule 11);
        (ii) the date of any order respecting rehearing, and
     the date and terms of any order granting an extension
     of time to file the petition for a writ of certiorari;
        (iii) express reliance on Rule 12.5, when a cross-
     petition for a writ of certiorari is filed under that Rule,
     and the date of docketing of the petition for a writ of
     certiorari in connection with which the cross-petition is
     filed;
        (iv) the statutory provision believed to confer on this
     Court jurisdiction to review on a writ of certiorari the
     judgment or order in question; and
        (v) if applicable, a statement that the notifications
     required by Rule 29.4(b) or (c) have been made.

  (f) The constitutional provisions, treaties, statutes, ordi-
nances, and regulations involved in the case, set out verba-
tim with appropriate citation. If the provisions involved are
lengthy, their citation alone suffices at this point, and their
pertinent text shall be set out in the appendix referred to in
subparagraph 1(i).
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1210            RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

  (g) A concise statement of the case setting out the facts
material to consideration of the questions presented, and also
containing the following:
          (i) If review of a state-court judgment is sought, spec-
       ification of the stage in the proceedings, both in the
       court of first instance and in the appellate courts, when
       the federal questions sought to be reviewed were raised;
       the method or manner of raising them and the way in
       which they were passed on by those courts; and perti-
       nent quotations of specific portions of the record or sum-
       mary thereof, with specific reference to the places in the
       record where the matter appears (e. g., court opinion,
       ruling on exception, portion of court’s charge and excep-
       tion thereto, assignment of error), so as to show that the
       federal question was timely and properly raised and that
       this Court has jurisdiction to review the judgment on a
       writ of certiorari. When the portions of the record re-
       lied on under this subparagraph are voluminous, they
       shall be included in the appendix referred to in subpara-
       graph 1(i).
          (ii) If review of a judgment of a United States court
       of appeals is sought, the basis for federal jurisdiction in
       the court of first instance.
  (h) A direct and concise argument amplifying the reasons
relied on for allowance of the writ. See Rule 10.
  (i) An appendix containing, in the order indicated:
          (i) the opinions, orders, findings of fact, and conclu-
       sions of law, whether written or orally given and tran-
       scribed, entered in conjunction with the judgment
       sought to be reviewed;
          (ii) any other opinions, orders, findings of fact, and
       conclusions of law entered in the case by courts or ad-
       ministrative agencies, and, if reference thereto is neces-
       sary to ascertain the grounds of the judgment, of those
       in companion cases (each document shall include the cap-
       tion showing the name of the issuing court or agency,
       the title and number of the case, and the date of entry);
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1211

       (iii) any order on rehearing, including the caption
     showing the name of the issuing court, the title and
     number of the case, and the date of entry;
       (iv) the judgment sought to be reviewed if the date
     of its entry is different from the date of the opinion
     or order required in sub-subparagraph (i) of this
     subparagraph;
       (v) material required by subparagraphs 1(f) or
     1(g)(i); and
       (vi) any other material the petitioner believes es-
     sential to understand the petition.
If the material required by this subparagraph is voluminous,
it may be presented in a separate volume or volumes with
appropriate covers.
   2. All contentions in support of a petition for a writ of
certiorari shall be set out in the body of the petition, as pro-
vided in subparagraph 1(h) of this Rule. No separate brief
in support of a petition for a writ of certiorari may be filed,
and the Clerk will not file any petition for a writ of certiorari
to which any supporting brief is annexed or appended.
   3. A petition for a writ of certiorari should be stated
briefly and in plain terms and may not exceed the page limi-
tations specified in Rule 33.
   4. The failure of a petitioner to present with accuracy,
brevity, and clarity whatever is essential to ready and ade-
quate understanding of the points requiring consideration is
sufficient reason for the Court to deny a petition.
   5. If the Clerk determines that a petition submitted timely
and in good faith is in a form that does not comply with this
Rule or with Rule 33 or Rule 34, the Clerk will return it
with a letter indicating the deficiency. A corrected petition
received no more than 60 days after the date of the Clerk’s
letter will be deemed timely.
Rule 15. Briefs in Opposition; Reply Briefs;
           Supplemental Briefs
  1. A brief in opposition to a petition for a writ of certiorari
may be filed by the respondent in any case, but is not man-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1212           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

datory except in a capital case, see Rule 14.1(a), or when
ordered by the Court.
   2. A brief in opposition should be stated briefly and in
plain terms and may not exceed the page limitations speci-
fied in Rule 33. In addition to presenting other arguments
for denying the petition, the brief in opposition should ad-
dress any perceived misstatement of fact or law in the peti-
tion that bears on what issues properly would be before the
Court if certiorari were granted. Counsel are admonished
that they have an obligation to the Court to point out in the
brief in opposition, and not later, any perceived misstatement
made in the petition. Any objection to consideration of a
question presented based on what occurred in the proceed-
ings below, if the objection does not go to jurisdiction, may
be deemed waived unless called to the Court’s attention in
the brief in opposition.
   3. Any brief in opposition shall be filed within 30 days
after the case is placed on the docket, unless the time is ex-
tended by the Court or a Justice, or by the Clerk under Rule
30.4. Forty copies shall be filed, except that a respondent
proceeding in forma pauperis under Rule 39, including an
inmate of an institution, shall file the number of copies re-
quired for a petition by such a person under Rule 12.2, to-
gether with a motion for leave to proceed in forma pauperis,
a copy of which shall precede and be attached to each copy
of the brief in opposition. If the petitioner is proceeding in
forma pauperis, the respondent may file an original and 10
copies of a brief in opposition prepared as required by Rule
33.2. Whether prepared under Rule 33.1 or Rule 33.2, the
brief in opposition shall comply with the requirements of
Rule 24 governing a respondent’s brief, except that no sum-
mary of the argument is required. A brief in opposition
may not be joined with any other pleading, except that any
motion for leave to proceed in forma pauperis shall be
attached. The brief in opposition shall be served as re-
quired by Rule 29.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1213

   4. No motion by a respondent to dismiss a petition for a
writ of certiorari may be filed. Any objections to the juris-
diction of the Court to grant a petition for a writ of certiorari
shall be included in the brief in opposition.
   5. The Clerk will distribute the petition to the Court for
its consideration upon receiving an express waiver of the
right to file a brief in opposition, or, if no waiver or brief in
opposition is filed, upon the expiration of the time allowed
for filing. If a brief in opposition is timely filed, the Clerk
will distribute the petition, brief in opposition, and any reply
brief to the Court for its consideration no less than 10 days
after the brief in opposition is filed.
   6. Any petitioner may file a reply brief addressed to new
points raised in the brief in opposition, but distribution and
consideration by the Court under paragraph 5 of this Rule
will not be deferred pending its receipt. Forty copies shall
be filed, except that petitioner proceeding in forma pauperis
under Rule 39, including an inmate of an institution, shall file
the number of copies required for a petition by such a person
under Rule 12.2. The reply brief shall be served as required
by Rule 29.
   7. If a cross-petition for a writ of certiorari has been dock-
eted, distribution of both petitions will be deferred until the
cross-petition is due for distribution under this Rule.
   8. Any party may file a supplemental brief at any time
while a petition for a writ of certiorari is pending, calling
attention to new cases, new legislation, or other intervening
matter not available at the time of the party’s last filing. A
supplemental brief shall be restricted to new matter and
shall follow, insofar as applicable, the form for a brief in oppo-
sition prescribed by this Rule. Forty copies shall be filed,
except that a party proceeding in forma pauperis under
Rule 39, including an inmate of an institution, shall file the
number of copies required for a petition by such a person
under Rule 12.2. The supplemental brief shall be served as
required by Rule 29.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1214           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Rule 16. Disposition of a Petition for a Writ of
            Certiorari
   1. After considering the documents distributed under
Rule 15, the Court will enter an appropriate order. The
order may be a summary disposition on the merits.
   2. Whenever the Court grants a petition for a writ of cer-
tiorari, the Clerk will prepare, sign, and enter an order to
that effect and will notify forthwith counsel of record and
the court whose judgment is to be reviewed. The case then
will be scheduled for briefing and oral argument. If the rec-
ord has not previously been filed in this Court, the Clerk will
request the clerk of the court having possession of the record
to certify and transmit it. A formal writ will not issue un-
less specially directed.
   3. Whenever the Court denies a petition for a writ of cer-
tiorari, the Clerk will prepare, sign, and enter an order to
that effect and will notify forthwith counsel of record and
the court whose judgment was sought to be reviewed. The
order of denial will not be suspended pending disposition of
a petition for rehearing except by order of the Court or a
Justice.

                PART IV. OTHER J URISDICTION

Rule 17. Procedure in an Original Action
   1. This Rule applies only to an action invoking the Court’s
original jurisdiction under Article III of the Constitution of
the United States. See also 28 U. S. C. § 1251 and U. S.
Const., Amdt. 11. A petition for an extraordinary writ in
aid of the Court’s appellate jurisdiction shall be filed as pro-
vided in Rule 20.
   2. The form of pleadings and motions prescribed by the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure is followed. In other
respects, those Rules and the Federal Rules of Evidence
may be taken as guides.
   3. The initial pleading shall be preceded by a motion for
leave to file, and may be accompanied by a brief in support
of the motion. Forty copies of each document shall be filed,
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1215

with proof of service. Service shall be as required by Rule
29, except that when an adverse party is a State, service
shall be made on both the Governor and the Attorney Gen-
eral of that State.
   4. The case will be placed on the docket when the motion
for leave to file and the initial pleading are filed with the
Clerk. The Rule 38(a) docket fee shall be paid at that time.
   5. No more than 60 days after receiving the motion for
leave to file and the initial pleading, an adverse party shall
file 40 copies of any brief in opposition to the motion, with
proof of service as required by Rule 29. The Clerk will dis-
tribute the filed documents to the Court for its consideration
upon receiving an express waiver of the right to file a brief
in opposition, or, if no waiver or brief is filed, upon the expi-
ration of the time allowed for filing. If a brief in opposition
is timely filed, the Clerk will distribute the filed documents
to the Court for its consideration no less than 10 days after
the brief in opposition is filed. A reply brief may be filed,
but consideration of the case will not be deferred pending
its receipt. The Court thereafter may grant or deny the
motion, set it for oral argument, direct that additional
documents be filed, or require that other proceedings be
conducted.
   6. A summons issued out of this Court shall be served
on the defendant 60 days before the return day specified
therein. If the defendant does not respond by the return
day, the plaintiff may proceed ex parte.
   7. Process against a State issued out of this Court shall be
served on both the Governor and the Attorney General of
that State.

Rule 18. Appeal from a United States District Court
  1. When a direct appeal from a decision of a United States
district court is authorized by law, the appeal is commenced
by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the district court
within the time provided by law after entry of the judgment
sought to be reviewed. The time to file may not be ex-
tended. The notice of appeal shall specify the parties taking
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1216           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

the appeal, designate the judgment, or part thereof, ap-
pealed from and the date of its entry, and specify the statute
or statutes under which the appeal is taken. A copy of the
notice of appeal shall be served on all parties to the proceed-
ing as required by Rule 29, and proof of service shall be filed
in the district court together with the notice of appeal.
   2. All parties to the proceeding in the district court are
deemed parties entitled to file documents in this Court, but
a party having no interest in the outcome of the appeal may
so notify the Clerk of this Court and shall serve a copy of
the notice on all other parties. Parties interested jointly,
severally, or otherwise in the judgment may appeal sepa-
rately, or any two or more may join in an appeal. When
two or more judgments involving identical or closely related
questions are sought to be reviewed on appeal from the same
court, a notice of appeal for each judgment shall be filed with
the clerk of the district court, but a single jurisdictional
statement covering all the judgments suffices. Parties who
file no document will not qualify for any relief from this
Court.
   3. No more than 60 days after filing the notice of appeal
in the district court, the appellant shall file 40 copies of a
jurisdictional statement and shall pay the Rule 38 docket fee,
except that an appellant proceeding in forma pauperis
under Rule 39, including an inmate of an institution, shall file
the number of copies required for a petition by such a person
under Rule 12.2, together with a motion for leave to proceed
in forma pauperis, a copy of which shall precede and be
attached to each copy of the jurisdictional statement. The
jurisdictional statement shall follow, insofar as applicable,
the form for a petition for a writ of certiorari prescribed by
Rule 14, and shall be served as required by Rule 29. The
appendix shall include a copy of the notice of appeal showing
the date it was filed in the district court. For good cause, a
Justice may extend the time to file a jurisdictional statement
for a period not exceeding 60 days. An application to ex-
tend the time to file a jurisdictional statement shall set out
the basis for jurisdiction in this Court; identify the judgment
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                  1217

sought to be reviewed; include a copy of the opinion, any
order respecting rehearing, and the notice of appeal; and set
out specific reasons why an extension of time is justified.
For the time and manner of presenting the application, see
Rules 21, 22, and 30. An application to extend the time to
file a jurisdictional statement is not favored.
   4. No more than 30 days after a case has been placed on
the docket, an appellee seeking to file a conditional cross-
appeal (i. e., a cross-appeal that otherwise would be un-
timely) shall file, with proof of service as required by Rule
29, a jurisdictional statement that complies in all respects
(including number of copies filed) with paragraph 3 of this
Rule, except that material already reproduced in the appen-
dix to the opening jurisdictional statement need not be re-
produced again. A cross-appealing appellee shall pay the
Rule 38 docket fee or submit a motion for leave to proceed
in forma pauperis. The cover of the cross-appeal shall indi-
cate clearly that it is a conditional cross-appeal. The cross-
appeal then will be placed on the docket. It is the cross-
appellant’s duty to notify all cross-appellees promptly, on a
form supplied by the Clerk, of the date of filing, the date the
cross-appeal was placed on the docket, and the docket num-
ber of the cross-appeal. The notice shall be served as re-
quired by Rule 29. A cross-appeal may not be joined with
any other pleading, except that any motion for leave to pro-
ceed in forma pauperis shall be attached. The time to file
a cross-appeal will not be extended.
   5. After a notice of appeal has been filed in the district
court, but before the case is placed on this Court’s docket,
the parties may dismiss the appeal by stipulation filed in the
district court, or the district court may dismiss the appeal
on the appellant’s motion, with notice to all parties. If a
notice of appeal has been filed, but the case has not been
placed on this Court’s docket within the time prescribed for
docketing, the district court may dismiss the appeal on the
appellee’s motion, with notice to all parties, and may make
any just order with respect to costs. If the district court
has denied the appellee’s motion to dismiss the appeal, the
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1218           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

appellee may move this Court to docket and dismiss the ap-
peal by filing an original and 10 copies of a motion presented
in conformity with Rules 21 and 33.2. The motion shall be
accompanied by proof of service as required by Rule 29, and
by a certificate from the clerk of the district court, certifying
that a notice of appeal was filed and that the appellee’s mo-
tion to dismiss was denied. The appellant may not thereaf-
ter file a jurisdictional statement without special leave of the
Court, and the Court may allow costs against the appellant.
   6. Within 30 days after the case is placed on this Court’s
docket, the appellee may file a motion to dismiss, to affirm,
or in the alternative to affirm or dismiss. Forty copies of
the motion shall be filed, except that an appellee proceeding
in forma pauperis under Rule 39, including an inmate of an
institution, shall file the number of copies required for a peti-
tion by such a person under Rule 12.2, together with a mo-
tion for leave to proceed in forma pauperis, a copy of which
shall precede and be attached to each copy of the motion to
dismiss, to affirm, or in the alternative to affirm or dismiss.
The motion shall follow, insofar as applicable, the form for a
brief in opposition prescribed by Rule 15, and shall comply
in all respects with Rule 21.
   7. The Clerk will distribute the jurisdictional statement to
the Court for its consideration upon receiving an express
waiver of the right to file a motion to dismiss or to affirm or,
if no waiver or motion is filed, upon the expiration of the
time allowed for filing. If a motion to dismiss or to affirm
is timely filed, the Clerk will distribute the jurisdictional
statement, motion, and any brief opposing the motion to the
Court for its consideration no less than 10 days after the
motion is filed.
   8. Any appellant may file a brief opposing a motion to dis-
miss or to affirm, but distribution and consideration by the
Court under paragraph 7 of this Rule will not be deferred
pending its receipt. Forty copies shall be filed, except that
an appellant proceeding in forma pauperis under Rule 39,
including an inmate of an institution, shall file the number of
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1219

copies required for a petition by such a person under Rule
12.2. The brief shall be served as required by Rule 29.
   9. If a cross-appeal has been docketed, distribution of both
jurisdictional statements will be deferred until the cross-
appeal is due for distribution under this Rule.
   10. Any party may file a supplemental brief at any time
while a jurisdictional statement is pending, calling attention
to new cases, new legislation, or other intervening matter
not available at the time of the party’s last filing. A supple-
mental brief shall be restricted to new matter and shall fol-
low, insofar as applicable, the form for a brief in opposition
prescribed by Rule 15. Forty copies shall be filed, except
that a party proceeding in forma pauperis under Rule 39,
including an inmate of an institution, shall file the number of
copies required for a petition by such a person under Rule
12.2. The supplemental brief shall be served as required by
Rule 29.
   11. The clerk of the district court shall retain possession
of the record until notified by the Clerk of this Court to cer-
tify and transmit it. See Rule 12.7.
   12. After considering the documents distributed under
this Rule, the Court may dispose summarily of the appeal on
the merits, note probable jurisdiction, or postpone consider-
ation of jurisdiction until a hearing of the case on the merits.
If not disposed of summarily, the case stands for briefing and
oral argument on the merits. If consideration of jurisdiction
is postponed, counsel, at the outset of their briefs and at oral
argument, shall address the question of jurisdiction. If the
record has not previously been filed in this Court, the Clerk
of this Court will request the clerk of the court in possession
of the record to certify and transmit it.
   13. If the Clerk determines that a jurisdictional statement
submitted timely and in good faith is in a form that does not
comply with this Rule or with Rule 33 or Rule 34, the Clerk
will return it with a letter indicating the deficiency. If a
corrected jurisdictional statement is received no more than
60 days after the date of the Clerk’s letter, its filing will be
deemed timely.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1220           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Rule 19. Procedure on a Certified Question
   1. A United States court of appeals may certify to this
Court a question or proposition of law on which it seeks in-
struction for the proper decision of a case. The certificate
shall contain a statement of the nature of the case and the
facts on which the question or proposition of law arises.
Only questions or propositions of law may be certified, and
they shall be stated separately and with precision. The cer-
tificate shall be prepared as required by Rule 33.2 and shall
be signed by the clerk of the court of appeals.
   2. When a question is certified by a United States court
of appeals, this Court, on its own motion or that of a party,
may consider and decide the entire matter in controversy.
See 28 U. S. C. § 1254(2).
   3. When a question is certified, the Clerk will notify the
parties and docket the case. Counsel shall then enter their
appearances. After docketing, the Clerk will submit the
certificate to the Court for a preliminary examination to de-
termine whether the case should be briefed, set for argu-
ment, or dismissed. No brief may be filed until the prelimi-
nary examination of the certificate is completed.
   4. If the Court orders the case briefed or set for argument,
the parties will be notified and permitted to file briefs. The
Clerk of this Court then will request the clerk of the court
in possession of the record to certify and transmit it. Any
portion of the record to which the parties wish to direct the
Court’s particular attention should be printed in a joint ap-
pendix, prepared in conformity with Rule 26 by the appellant
or petitioner in the court of appeals, but the fact that any
part of the record has not been printed does not prevent the
parties or the Court from relying on it.
   5. A brief on the merits in a case involving a certified
question shall comply with Rules 24, 25, and 33.1, except that
the brief for the party who is the appellant or petitioner
below shall be filed within 45 days of the order requiring
briefs or setting the case for argument.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1221

Rule 20. Procedure on a Petition for an Extraordinary
             Writ
   1. Issuance by the Court of an extraordinary writ author-
ized by 28 U. S. C. § 1651(a) is not a matter of right, but of
discretion sparingly exercised. To justify the granting of
any such writ, the petition must show that the writ will be
in aid of the Court’s appellate jurisdiction, that exceptional
circumstances warrant the exercise of the Court’s discretion-
ary powers, and that adequate relief cannot be obtained in
any other form or from any other court.
   2. A petition seeking a writ authorized by 28 U. S. C.
§ 1651(a), § 2241, or § 2254(a) shall be prepared in all respects
as required by Rules 33 and 34. The petition shall be cap-
tioned “In re [name of petitioner]” and shall follow, insofar
as applicable, the form of a petition for a writ of certiorari
prescribed by Rule 14. All contentions in support of the
petition shall be included in the petition. The case will be
placed on the docket when 40 copies of the petition are filed
with the Clerk and the docket fee is paid, except that a peti-
tioner proceeding in forma pauperis under Rule 39, includ-
ing an inmate of an institution, shall file the number of copies
required for a petition by such a person under Rule 12.2,
together with a motion for leave to proceed in forma pau-
peris, a copy of which shall precede and be attached to each
copy of the petition. The petition shall be served as re-
quired by Rule 29 (subject to subparagraph 4(b) of this Rule).
   3. (a) A petition seeking a writ of prohibition, a writ of
mandamus, or both in the alternative shall state the name
and office or function of every person against whom relief is
sought and shall set out with particularity why the relief
sought is not available in any other court. A copy of the
judgment with respect to which the writ is sought, including
any related opinion, shall be appended to the petition to-
gether with any other document essential to understanding
the petition.
   (b) The petition shall be served on every party to the pro-
ceeding with respect to which relief is sought. Within 30
days after the petition is placed on the docket, a party shall
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1222           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

file 40 copies of any brief or briefs in opposition thereto,
which shall comply fully with Rule 15. If a party named as
a respondent does not wish to respond to the petition, that
party may so advise the Clerk and all other parties by letter.
All persons served are deemed respondents for all purposes
in the proceedings in this Court.
   4. (a) A petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus shall
comply with the requirements of 28 U. S. C. §§ 2241 and 2242,
and in particular with the provision in the last paragraph of
§ 2242, which requires a statement of the “reasons for not
making application to the district court of the district in
which the applicant is held.” If the relief sought is from the
judgment of a state court, the petition shall set out specifi-
cally how and where the petitioner has exhausted available
remedies in the state courts or otherwise comes within the
provisions of 28 U. S. C. § 2254(b). To justify the granting
of a writ of habeas corpus, the petitioner must show that
exceptional circumstances warrant the exercise of the
Court’s discretionary powers, and that adequate relief cannot
be obtained in any other form or from any other court. This
writ is rarely granted.
   (b) Habeas corpus proceedings are ex parte, unless the
Court requires the respondent to show cause why the peti-
tion for a writ of habeas corpus should not be granted. A
response, if ordered, shall comply fully with Rule 15. Nei-
ther the denial of the petition, without more, nor an order of
transfer to a district court under the authority of 28 U. S. C.
§ 2241(b), is an adjudication on the merits, and therefore does
not preclude further application to another court for the re-
lief sought.
   5. The Clerk will distribute the documents to the Court
for its consideration when a brief in opposition under subpar-
agraph 3(b) of this Rule has been filed, when a response
under subparagraph 4(b) has been ordered and filed, when
the time to file has expired, or when the right to file has been
expressly waived.
   6. If the Court orders the case set for argument, the Clerk
will notify the parties whether additional briefs are required,
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                  1223

when they shall be filed, and, if the case involves a petition
for a common-law writ of certiorari, that the parties shall
prepare a joint appendix in accordance with Rule 26.

             PART V. MOTIONS AND APPLICATIONS

Rule 21. Motions to the Court
   1. Every motion to the Court shall clearly state its pur-
pose and the facts on which it is based and may present legal
argument in support thereof. No separate brief may be
filed. A motion should be concise and shall comply with any
applicable page limits. Rule 22 governs an application ad-
dressed to a single Justice.
   2. (a) A motion in any action within the Court’s original
jurisdiction shall comply with Rule 17.3.
   (b) A motion to dismiss as moot (or a suggestion of moot-
ness), a motion for leave to file a brief as amicus curiae, and
any motion the granting of which would dispose of the entire
case or would affect the final judgment to be entered (other
than a motion to docket and dismiss under Rule 18.5 or a
motion for voluntary dismissal under Rule 46) shall be pre-
pared as required by Rule 33.1, and 40 copies shall be filed,
except that a movant proceeding in forma pauperis under
Rule 39, including an inmate of an institution, shall file a
motion prepared as required by Rule 33.2, and shall file the
number of copies required for a petition by such a person
under Rule 12.2. The motion shall be served as required by
Rule 29.
   (c) Any other motion to the Court shall be prepared as
required by Rule 33.2; the moving party shall file an original
and 10 copies. The Court subsequently may order the mov-
ing party to prepare the motion as required by Rule 33.1; in
that event, the party shall file 40 copies.
   3. A motion to the Court shall be filed with the Clerk
and shall be accompanied by proof of service as required by
Rule 29. No motion may be presented in open Court, other
than a motion for admission to the Bar, except when the
proceeding to which it refers is being argued. Oral argu-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1224           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

ment on a motion will not be permitted unless the Court
so directs.
   4. Any response to a motion shall be filed as promptly as
possible considering the nature of the relief sought and any
asserted need for emergency action, and, in any event,
within 10 days of receipt, unless the Court or a Justice, or
the Clerk under Rule 30.4, orders otherwise. A response to
a motion prepared as required by Rule 33.1 shall be prepared
in the same manner if time permits. In an appropriate case,
the Court may act on a motion without waiting for a
response.

Rule 22. Applications to Individual Justices
   1. An application addressed to an individual Justice shall
be filed with the Clerk, who will transmit it promptly to the
Justice concerned if an individual Justice has authority to
grant the sought relief.
   2. The original and two copies of any application ad-
dressed to an individual Justice shall be prepared as required
by Rule 33.2, and shall be accompanied by proof of service
as required by Rule 29.
   3. An application shall be addressed to the Justice allotted
to the Circuit from which the case arises. When the Cir-
cuit Justice is unavailable for any reason, the application
addressed to that Justice will be distributed to the Justice
then available who is next junior to the Circuit Justice; the
turn of the Chief Justice follows that of the most junior
Justice.
   4. A Justice denying an application will note the denial
thereon. Thereafter, unless action thereon is restricted by
law to the Circuit Justice or is untimely under Rule 30.2,
the party making an application, except in the case of an
application for an extension of time, may renew it to any
other Justice, subject to the provisions of this Rule. Except
when the denial is without prejudice, a renewed application
is not favored. Renewed application is made by a letter to
the Clerk, designating the Justice to whom the application is
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1225

to be directed, and accompanied by 10 copies of the original
application and proof of service as required by Rule 29.
   5. A Justice to whom an application for a stay or for bail
is submitted may refer it to the Court for determination.
   6. The Clerk will advise all parties concerned, by ap-
propriately speedy means, of the disposition made of an
application.

Rule 23. Stays
   1. A stay may be granted by a Justice as permitted by law.
   2. A party to a judgment sought to be reviewed may pre-
sent to a Justice an application to stay the enforcement of
that judgment. See 28 U. S. C. § 2101(f).
   3. An application for a stay shall set out with particularity
why the relief sought is not available from any other court
or judge. Except in the most extraordinary circumstances,
an application for a stay will not be entertained unless the
relief requested was first sought in the appropriate court or
courts below or from a judge or judges thereof. An applica-
tion for a stay shall identify the judgment sought to be re-
viewed and have appended thereto a copy of the order and
opinion, if any, and a copy of the order, if any, of the court
or judge below denying the relief sought, and shall set out
specific reasons why a stay is justified. The form and con-
tent of an application for a stay are governed by Rules 22
and 33.2.
   4. A judge, court, or Justice granting an application for a
stay pending review by this Court may condition the stay on
the filing of a supersedeas bond having an approved surety
or sureties. The bond will be conditioned on the satisfaction
of the judgment in full, together with any costs, interest,
and damages for delay that may be awarded. If a part of
the judgment sought to be reviewed has already been satis-
fied, or is otherwise secured, the bond may be conditioned
on the satisfaction of the part of the judgment not otherwise
secured or satisfied, together with costs, interest, and
damages.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1226           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

   PART VI. BRIEFS ON THE MERITS AND ORAL ARGUMENT

Rule 24. Briefs on the Merits: In General
   1. A brief on the merits for a petitioner or an appellant
shall comply in all respects with Rules 33.1 and 34 and shall
contain in the order here indicated:
   (a) The questions presented for review under Rule 14.1(a).
The questions shall be set out on the first page following the
cover, and no other information may appear on that page.
The phrasing of the questions presented need not be identi-
cal with that in the petition for a writ of certiorari or the
jurisdictional statement, but the brief may not raise addi-
tional questions or change the substance of the questions
already presented in those documents. At its option, how-
ever, the Court may consider a plain error not among the
questions presented but evident from the record and other-
wise within its jurisdiction to decide.
   (b) A list of all parties to the proceeding in the court
whose judgment is under review (unless the caption of the
case in this Court contains the names of all parties). Any
amended list of parent companies and nonwholly owned sub-
sidiaries as required by Rule 29.6 shall be placed here.
   (c) If the brief exceeds five pages, a table of contents and
a table of cited authorities.
   (d) Citations of the official and unofficial reports of the
opinions and orders entered in the case by courts and admin-
istrative agencies.
   (e) A concise statement of the basis for jurisdiction in this
Court, including the statutory provisions and time factors on
which jurisdiction rests.
   (f) The constitutional provisions, treaties, statutes, ordi-
nances, and regulations involved in the case, set out verba-
tim with appropriate citation. If the provisions involved are
lengthy, their citation alone suffices at this point, and their
pertinent text, if not already set out in the petition for a
writ of certiorari, jurisdictional statement, or an appendix
to either document, shall be set out in an appendix to the
brief.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1227

   (g) A concise statement of the case, setting out the facts
material to the consideration of the questions presented,
with appropriate references to the joint appendix, e. g., App.
12, or to the record, e. g., Record 12.
   (h) A summary of the argument, suitably paragraphed.
The summary should be a clear and concise condensation of
the argument made in the body of the brief; mere repetition
of the headings under which the argument is arranged is
not sufficient.
   (i) The argument, exhibiting clearly the points of fact and
of law presented and citing the authorities and statutes re-
lied on.
   ( j) A conclusion specifying with particularity the relief
the party seeks.
   2. A brief on the merits for a respondent or an appellee
shall conform to the foregoing requirements, except that
items required by subparagraphs 1(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), and (g)
of this Rule need not be included unless the respondent or
appellee is dissatisfied with their presentation by the oppos-
ing party.
   3. A brief on the merits may not exceed the page limita-
tions specified in Rule 33.1(g). An appendix to a brief may
include only relevant material, and counsel are cautioned not
to include in an appendix arguments or citations that prop-
erly belong in the body of the brief.
   4. A reply brief shall conform to those portions of this
Rule applicable to the brief for a respondent or an appellee,
but, if appropriately divided by topical headings, need not
contain a summary of the argument.
   5. A reference to the joint appendix or to the record set
out in any brief shall indicate the appropriate page number.
If the reference is to an exhibit, the page numbers at which
the exhibit appears, at which it was offered in evidence, and
at which it was ruled on by the judge shall be indicated, e. g.,
Pl. Exh. 14, Record 199, 2134.
   6. A brief shall be concise, logically arranged with proper
headings, and free of irrelevant, immaterial, or scandalous
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1228           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

matter. The Court may disregard or strike a brief that does
not comply with this paragraph.

Rule 25. Briefs on the Merits: Number of Copies and
         Time to File
   1. The petitioner or appellant shall file 40 copies of the
brief on the merits within 45 days of the order granting the
writ of certiorari, noting probable jurisdiction, or postponing
consideration of jurisdiction.
   2. The respondent or appellee shall file 40 copies of the
brief on the merits within 30 days after receiving the brief
for the petitioner or appellant.
   3. The petitioner or appellant shall file 40 copies of the
reply brief, if any, within 30 days after receiving the brief
for the respondent or appellee, but any reply brief must actu-
ally be received by the Clerk no more than one week before
the date of oral argument.
   4. The time periods stated in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
Rule may be extended as provided in Rule 30. An applica-
tion to extend the time to file a brief on the merits is not
favored. If a case is advanced for hearing, the time to file
briefs on the merits may be abridged as circumstances re-
quire pursuant to an order of the Court on its own motion or
that of a party.
   5. A party wishing to present late authorities, newly
enacted legislation, or other intervening matter that was not
available in time to be included in a brief may file 40 copies
of a supplemental brief, restricted to such new matter and
otherwise presented in conformity with these Rules, up to
the time the case is called for oral argument or by leave of
the Court thereafter.
   6. After a case has been argued or submitted, the Clerk
will not file any brief, except that of a party filed by leave of
the Court.
   7. The Clerk will not file any brief that is not accompanied
by proof of service as required by Rule 29.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1229

Rule 26. Joint Appendix
   1. Unless the Clerk has allowed the parties to use the de-
ferred method described in paragraph 4 of this Rule, the
petitioner or appellant, within 45 days after entry of the
order granting the writ of certiorari, noting probable juris-
diction, or postponing consideration of jurisdiction, shall file
40 copies of a joint appendix, prepared as required by Rule
33.1. The joint appendix shall contain: (1) the relevant
docket entries in all the courts below; (2) any relevant plead-
ings, jury instructions, findings, conclusions, or opinions; (3)
the judgment, order, or decision under review; and (4) any
other parts of the record that the parties particularly wish to
bring to the Court’s attention. Any of the foregoing items
already reproduced in a petition for a writ of certiorari, ju-
risdictional statement, brief in opposition to a petition for a
writ of certiorari, motion to dismiss or affirm, or any appen-
dix to the foregoing, that was prepared as required by Rule
33.1, need not be reproduced again in the joint appendix.
The petitioner or appellant shall serve three copies of the
joint appendix on each of the other parties to the proceeding
as required by Rule 29.
   2. The parties are encouraged to agree on the contents of
the joint appendix. In the absence of agreement, the peti-
tioner or appellant, within 10 days after entry of the order
granting the writ of certiorari, noting probable jurisdiction,
or postponing consideration of jurisdiction, shall serve on the
respondent or appellee a designation of parts of the record
to be included in the joint appendix. Within 10 days after
receiving the designation, a respondent or appellee who con-
siders the parts of the record so designated insufficient shall
serve on the petitioner or appellant a designation of addi-
tional parts to be included in the joint appendix, and the
petitioner or appellant shall include the parts so designated.
If the Court has permitted the respondent or appellee to
proceed in forma pauperis, the petitioner or appellant may
seek by motion to be excused from printing portions of the
record the petitioner or appellant considers unnecessary. In
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1230           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

making these designations, counsel should include only those
materials the Court should examine; unnecessary designa-
tions should be avoided. The record is on file with the Clerk
and available to the Justices, and counsel may refer in briefs
and in oral argument to relevant portions of the record not
included in the joint appendix.
   3. When the joint appendix is filed, the petitioner or appel-
lant immediately shall file with the Clerk a statement of the
cost of printing 50 copies and shall serve a copy of the state-
ment on each of the other parties as required by Rule 29.
Unless the parties agree otherwise, the cost of producing
the joint appendix shall be paid initially by the petitioner or
appellant; but a petitioner or appellant who considers that
parts of the record designated by the respondent or appellee
are unnecessary for the determination of the issues pre-
sented may so advise the respondent or appellee, who then
shall advance the cost of printing the additional parts, unless
the Court or a Justice otherwise fixes the initial allocation of
the costs. The cost of printing the joint appendix is taxed
as a cost in the case, but if a party unnecessarily causes mat-
ter to be included in the joint appendix or prints excessive
copies, the Court may impose these costs on that party.
   4. (a) On the parties’ request, the Clerk may allow prepa-
ration of the joint appendix to be deferred until after the
briefs have been filed. In that event, the petitioner or ap-
pellant shall file the joint appendix no more than 14 days
after receiving the brief for the respondent or appellee. The
provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of this Rule shall be
followed, except that the designations referred to therein
shall be made by each party when that party’s brief is
served. Deferral of the joint appendix is not favored.
   (b) If the deferred method is used, the briefs on the merits
may refer to the pages of the record. In that event, the
joint appendix shall include in brackets on each page thereof
the page number of the record where that material may be
found. A party wishing to refer directly to the pages of the
joint appendix may serve and file copies of its brief prepared
as required by Rule 33.2 within the time provided by Rule
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1231

25, with appropriate references to the pages of the record.
In that event, within 10 days after the joint appendix is filed,
copies of the brief prepared as required by Rule 33.1 contain-
ing references to the pages of the joint appendix in place of,
or in addition to, the initial references to the pages of the
record, shall be served and filed. No other change may be
made in the brief as initially served and filed, except that
typographical errors may be corrected.
   5. The joint appendix shall be prefaced by a table of con-
tents showing the parts of the record that it contains, in the
order in which the parts are set out, with references to the
pages of the joint appendix at which each part begins. The
relevant docket entries shall be set out after the table of
contents, followed by the other parts of the record in chrono-
logical order. When testimony contained in the reporter’s
transcript of proceedings is set out in the joint appendix, the
page of the transcript at which the testimony appears shall
be indicated in brackets immediately before the statement
that is set out. Omissions in the transcript or in any other
document printed in the joint appendix shall be indicated by
asterisks. Immaterial formal matters (e. g., captions, sub-
scriptions, acknowledgments) shall be omitted. A question
and its answer may be contained in a single paragraph.
   6. Exhibits designated for inclusion in the joint appendix
may be contained in a separate volume or volumes suitably
indexed. The transcript of a proceeding before an adminis-
trative agency, board, commission, or officer used in an action
in a district court or court of appeals is regarded as an ex-
hibit for the purposes of this paragraph.
   7. The Court, on its own motion or that of a party, may
dispense with the requirement of a joint appendix and may
permit a case to be heard on the original record (with such
copies of the record, or relevant parts thereof, as the Court
may require) or on the appendix used in the court below, if
it conforms to the requirements of this Rule.
   8. For good cause, the time limits specified in this Rule
may be shortened or extended by the Court or a Justice, or
by the Clerk under Rule 30.4.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1232           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Rule 27. Calendar
  1. From time to time, the Clerk will prepare a calendar of
cases ready for argument. A case ordinarily will not be
called for argument less than two weeks after the brief on
the merits for the respondent or appellee is due.
  2. The Clerk will advise counsel when they are required
to appear for oral argument and will publish a hearing list
in advance of each argument session for the convenience of
counsel and the information of the public.
  3. The Court, on its own motion or that of a party, may
order that two or more cases involving the same or related
questions be argued together as one case or on such other
terms as the Court may prescribe.

Rule 28. Oral Argument
   1. Oral argument should emphasize and clarify the written
arguments in the briefs on the merits. Counsel should as-
sume that all Justices have read the briefs before oral argu-
ment. Oral argument read from a prepared text is not
favored.
   2. The petitioner or appellant shall open and may conclude
the argument. A cross-writ of certiorari or cross-appeal
will be argued with the initial writ of certiorari or appeal as
one case in the time allowed for that one case, and the Court
will advise the parties who shall open and close.
   3. Unless the Court directs otherwise, each side is allowed
one-half hour for argument. Counsel is not required to use
all the allotted time. Any request for additional time to
argue shall be presented by motion under Rule 21 no more
than 15 days after the petitioner’s or appellant’s brief on the
merits is filed, and shall set out specifically and concisely why
the case cannot be presented within the half-hour limitation.
Additional time is rarely accorded.
   4. Only one attorney will be heard for each side, except by
leave of the Court on motion filed no more than 15 days after
the respondent’s or appellee’s brief on the merits is filed.
Any request for divided argument shall be presented by mo-
tion under Rule 21 and shall set out specifically and concisely
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                  1233

why more than one attorney should be allowed to argue.
Divided argument is not favored.
   5. Regardless of the number of counsel participating in
oral argument, counsel making the opening argument shall
present the case fairly and completely and not reserve points
of substance for rebuttal.
   6. Oral argument will not be allowed on behalf of any
party for whom a brief has not been filed.
   7. By leave of the Court, and subject to paragraph 4 of
this Rule, counsel for an amicus curiae whose brief has been
filed as provided in Rule 37 may argue orally on the side of
a party, with the consent of that party. In the absence of
consent, counsel for an amicus curiae may seek leave of the
Court to argue orally by a motion setting out specifically and
concisely why oral argument would provide assistance to the
Court not otherwise available. Such a motion will be
granted only in the most extraordinary circumstances.

             PART VII. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

Rule 29. Filing and Service of Documents; Special
            Notifications; Corporate Listing
   1. Any document required or permitted to be presented to
the Court or to a Justice shall be filed with the Clerk.
   2. A document is timely filed if it is sent to the Clerk
through the United States Postal Service by first-class mail
(including express or priority mail), postage prepaid, and
bears a postmark showing that the document was mailed on
or before the last day for filing. Commercial postage meter
labels alone are not acceptable. If submitted by an inmate
confined in an institution, a document is timely filed if it is
deposited in the institution’s internal mail system on or be-
fore the last day for filing and is accompanied by a notarized
statement or declaration in compliance with 28 U. S. C. § 1746
setting out the date of deposit and stating that first-class
postage has been prepaid. If the postmark is missing or not
legible, the Clerk will require the person who mailed the
document to submit a notarized statement or declaration in
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1234           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

compliance with 28 U. S. C. § 1746 setting out the details of
the mailing and stating that the mailing took place on a par-
ticular date within the permitted time. A document also is
timely filed if it is forwarded through a private delivery or
courier service and is actually received by the Clerk within
the time permitted for filing.
   3. Any document required by these Rules to be served
may be served personally or by mail on each party to the
proceeding at or before the time of filing. If the document
has been prepared as required by Rule 33.1, three copies
shall be served on each other party separately represented
in the proceeding. If the document has been prepared as
required by Rule 33.2, service of a single copy on each other
separately represented party suffices. If personal service is
made, it shall consist of delivery at the office of the counsel
of record, either to counsel or to an employee therein. If
service is by mail, it shall consist of depositing the document
with the United States Postal Service, with no less than
first-class postage prepaid, addressed to counsel of record at
the proper post office address. When a party is not repre-
sented by counsel, service shall be made on the party, per-
sonally or by mail.
   4. (a) If the United States or any federal department,
office, agency, officer, or employee is a party to be served,
service shall be made on the Solicitor General of the United
States, Room 5614, Department of Justice, 10th St. and Con-
stitution Ave., N. W., Washington, DC 20530. When an
agency of the United States that is a party is authorized by
law to appear before this Court on its own behalf, or when
an officer or employee of the United States is a party, the
agency, officer, or employee shall be served in addition to the
Solicitor General.
   (b) In any proceeding in this Court in which the constitu-
tionality of an Act of Congress is drawn into question, and
neither the United States nor any federal department, office,
agency, officer, or employee is a party, the initial document
filed in this Court shall recite that 28 U. S. C. § 2403(a) may
apply and shall be served on the Solicitor General of the
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1235

United States, Room 5614, Department of Justice, 10th St.
and Constitution Ave., N. W., Washington, DC 20530. In
such a proceeding from any court of the United States, as
defined by 28 U. S. C. § 451, the initial document also shall
state whether that court, pursuant to 28 U. S. C. § 2403(a),
certified to the Attorney General the fact that the constitu-
tionality of an Act of Congress was drawn into question.
See Rule 14.1(e)(v).
   (c) In any proceeding in this Court in which the constitu-
tionality of any statute of a State is drawn into question, and
neither the State nor any agency, officer, or employee thereof
is a party, the initial document filed in this Court shall recite
that 28 U. S. C. § 2403(b) may apply and shall be served on
the Attorney General of that State. In such a proceeding
from any court of the United States, as defined by 28 U. S. C.
§ 451, the initial document also shall state whether that
court, pursuant to 28 U. S. C. § 2403(b), certified to the State
Attorney General the fact that the constitutionality of a
statute of that State was drawn into question. See Rule
14.1(e)(v).
   5. Proof of service, when required by these Rules, shall
accompany the document when it is presented to the Clerk
for filing and shall be separate from it. Proof of service
shall contain, or be accompanied by, a statement that all par-
ties required to be served have been served, together with
a list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
counsel indicating the name of the party or parties each
counsel represents. It is not necessary that service on each
party required to be served be made in the same manner or
evidenced by the same proof. Proof of service may consist
of any one of the following:
   (a) an acknowledgment of service, signed by counsel of
record for the party served;
   (b) a certificate of service, reciting the facts and circum-
stances of service in compliance with the appropriate para-
graph or paragraphs of this Rule, and signed by a member
of the Bar of this Court representing the party on whose
behalf service is made or by an attorney appointed to repre-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1236           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

sent that party under the Criminal Justice Act of 1964, see 18
U. S. C. § 3006A(d)(6), or under any other applicable federal
statute; or
  (c) a notarized affidavit or declaration in compliance with
28 U. S. C. § 1746, reciting the facts and circumstances of
service in accordance with the appropriate paragraph or
paragraphs of this Rule, whenever service is made by any
person not a member of the Bar of this Court and not an
attorney appointed to represent a party under the Criminal
Justice Act of 1964, see 18 U. S. C. § 3006A(d)(6), or under
any other applicable federal statute.
  6. Every document, except a joint appendix or amicus cu-
riae brief, filed by or on behalf of one or more corporations
shall list all parent companies and nonwholly owned subsidi-
aries of each of the corporate filers. If there is no parent or
subsidiary company to be listed, a notation to this effect shall
be included in the document. If a list has been included in
a document filed earlier in the case, reference may be made
to the earlier document (except when the earlier list ap-
peared in an application for an extension of time or for a
stay), and only amendments to the list to make it current
need be included in the document being filed.

Rule 30. Computation and Extension of Time
   1. In the computation of any period of time prescribed or
allowed by these Rules, by order of the Court, or by an appli-
cable statute, the day of the act, event, or default from which
the designated period begins to run is not included. The
last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Satur-
day, Sunday, federal legal holiday listed in 5 U. S. C. § 6103,
or day on which the Court building is closed by order of the
Court or the Chief Justice, in which event the period shall
extend until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, federal legal holiday, or day on which the Court
building is closed.
   2. Whenever a Justice or the Clerk is empowered by law
or these Rules to extend the time to file any document, an
application seeking an extension shall be filed within the pe-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                      1237

riod sought to be extended. An application to extend the
time to file a petition for a writ of certiorari or to file a juris-
dictional statement must be received by the Clerk at least
10 days before the specified final filing date as computed
under these Rules; if received less than 10 days before the
final filing date, such application will not be granted except
in the most extraordinary circumstances.
   3. An application to extend the time to file a petition for a
writ of certiorari, to file a jurisdictional statement, to file a
reply brief on the merits, or to file a petition for rehearing
shall be made to an individual Justice and presented and
served on all other parties as provided by Rule 22. Once
denied, such an application may not be renewed.
   4. An application to extend the time to file any document
or paper other than those specified in paragraph 3 of this
Rule may be presented in the form of a letter to the Clerk
setting out specific reasons why an extension of time is justi-
fied. The letter shall be served on all other parties as re-
quired by Rule 29. The application may be acted on by the
Clerk in the first instance, and any party aggrieved by the
Clerk’s action may request that the application be submitted
to a Justice or to the Court. The Clerk will report action
under this paragraph to the Court as instructed.

Rule 31. Translations
   Whenever any record to be transmitted to this Court con-
tains material written in a foreign language without a trans-
lation made under the authority of the lower court, or ad-
mitted to be correct, the clerk of the court transmitting the
record shall advise the Clerk of this Court immediately so
that this Court may order that a translation be supplied and,
if necessary, printed as part of the joint appendix.

Rule 32. Models, Diagrams, and Exhibits
   1. Models, diagrams, and exhibits of material forming part
of the evidence taken in a case and brought to this Court for
its inspection shall be placed in the custody of the Clerk at
least two weeks before the case is to be heard or submitted.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




1238           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

  2. All models, diagrams, and exhibits of material placed in
the custody of the Clerk shall be removed by the parties no
more than 40 days after the case is decided. If this is not
done, the Clerk will notify counsel to remove the articles
forthwith. If they are not removed within a reasonable
time thereafter, the Clerk will destroy them or dispose of
them in any other appropriate way.

Rule 33. Document Preparation: Booklet Format;
             81⁄2- by 11-Inch Paper Format
   1. Booklet Format: (a) Except for a document expressly
permitted by these Rules to be submitted on 81⁄2- by 11-inch
paper, see, e. g., Rules 21, 22, and 39, every document filed
with the Court shall be prepared using typesetting (e. g.,
wordprocessing, electronic publishing, or image setting) and
reproduced by offset printing, photocopying, or similar proc-
ess. The process used must produce a clear, black image on
white paper.
   (b) The text of every document, including any appendix
thereto, except a document permitted to be produced on
81⁄2- by 11-inch paper, shall be typeset in standard 11-point
or larger type with 2-point or more leading between lines.
The type size and face shall be no smaller than that con-
tained in the United States Reports beginning with Volume
453. Type size and face shall be consistent throughout. No
attempt should be made to reduce, compress, or condense
the typeface in a manner that would increase the content
of a document. Quotations in excess of three lines shall be
indented. Footnotes shall appear in print as standard 9-
point or larger type with 2-point or more leading between
lines. The text of the document must appear on both sides
of the page.
   (c) Every document, except one permitted to be produced
on 81⁄2- by 11-inch paper, shall be produced on paper that is
opaque, unglazed, 61⁄8 by 91⁄4 inches in size, and not less than
60 pounds in weight, and shall have margins of at least
three-fourths of an inch on all sides. The text field, includ-
ing footnotes, should be approximately 41⁄8 by 71⁄8 inches.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1239

The document shall be bound firmly in at least two places
along the left margin (saddle stitch or perfect binding pre-
ferred) so as to permit easy opening, and no part of the text
should be obscured by the binding. Spiral, plastic, metal,
and string bindings may not be used. Copies of patent docu-
ments, except opinions, may be duplicated in such size as is
necessary in a separate appendix.
   (d) Every document, except one permitted to be produced
on 81⁄2- by 11-inch paper, shall comply with the page limits
shown on the chart in subparagraph 1(g) of this Rule. The
page limits do not include the pages containing the questions
presented, the list of parties and corporate affiliates of the
filing party, the table of contents, the table of cited authori-
ties, or any appendix. Verbatim quotations required under
Rule 14.1(f), if set out in the text of a brief rather than in
the appendix, are also excluded. For good cause, the Court
or a Justice may grant leave to file a document in excess of
the page limits, but application for such leave is not favored.
An application to exceed page limits shall comply with Rule
22 and must be received by the Clerk at least 15 days before
the filing date of the document in question, except in the
most extraordinary circumstances.
   (e) Every document, except one permitted to be produced
on 81⁄2- by 11-inch paper, shall have a suitable cover consisting
of 65-pound weight paper in the color indicated on the chart
in subparagraph 1(g) of this Rule. If a separate appendix
to any document is filed, the color of its cover shall be the
same as that of the cover of the document it supports. The
Clerk will furnish a color chart upon request. Counsel shall
ensure that there is adequate contrast between the printing
and the color of the cover. A document filed by the United
States, or by any other federal party represented by the So-
licitor General, shall have a gray cover. A joint appendix,
answer to a bill of complaint, motion for leave to intervene,
and any other document not listed in subparagraph 1(g) of
this Rule shall have a tan cover.
   (f) Forty copies of a document prepared under this para-
graph shall be filed.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:00       PGT • USRULES




1240              RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

 (g) Page limits and cover colors for booklet-format docu-
ments are as follows:
                                                            Page     Color of
       Type of Document
                                                           Limits     Cover
    (i) Petition for a Writ of Certiorari (Rule 14); Mo-
        tion for Leave to File a Bill of Complaint and
        Brief in Support (Rule 17.3); Jurisdictional
        Statement (Rule 18.3); Petition for an Extraor-
        dinary Writ (Rule 20.2)                             30        white
   (ii) Brief in Opposition (Rule 15.3); Brief in Oppo-
        sition to Motion for Leave to File an Original
        Action (Rule 17.5); Motion to Dismiss or Affirm
        (Rule 18.6); Brief in Opposition to Mandamus
        or Prohibition (Rule 20.3(b)); Response to a
        Petition for Habeas Corpus (Rule 20.4)              30       orange
  (iii) Reply to Brief in Opposition (Rules 15.6 and
        17.5); Brief Opposing a Motion to Dismiss or
        Affirm (Rule 18.8)                                  10         tan
  (iv) Supplemental Brief (Rules 15.8, 17, 18.10, and
        25.5)                                               10         tan
   (v) Brief on the Merits for Petitioner or Appellant
        (Rule 24); Exceptions by Plaintiff to Report of
        Special Master (Rule 17)                            50      light blue
  (vi) Brief on the Merits for Respondent or Appel-
        lee (Rule 24.2); Brief on the Merits for Re-
        spondent or Appellee Supporting Petitioner
        or Appellant (Rule 12.6); Exceptions by Party
        Other Than Plaintiff to Report of Special Mas-
        ter (Rule 17)                                       50      light red
 (vii) Reply Brief on the Merits (Rule 24.4)                20        yellow
(viii) Reply to Plaintiff ’s Exceptions to Report of
        Special Master (Rule 17)                            50       orange
  (ix) Reply to Exceptions by Party Other Than
        Plaintiff to Report of Special Master (Rule 17)     50       yellow
   (x) Brief for an Amicus Curiae at the Petition
        Stage (Rule 37.2)                                   20       cream
  (xi) Brief for an Amicus Curiae in Support of the
        Plaintiff, Petitioner, or Appellant, or in Sup-
        port of Neither Party, on the Merits or in an
        Original Action at the Exceptions Stage                       light
        (Rule 37.3)                                         30        green
 (xii) Brief for an Amicus Curiae in Support of the
        Defendant, Respondent, or Appellee, on the
        Merits or in an Original Action at the Excep-                 dark
        tions Stage (Rule 37.3)                             30        green
(xiii) Petition for Rehearing (Rule 44)                     10         tan
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                 1241

   2. 81⁄2- by 11-Inch Paper Format: (a) The text of every
document, including any appendix thereto, expressly permit-
ted by these Rules to be presented to the Court on 81⁄2- by
11-inch paper shall appear double spaced, except for indented
quotations, which shall be single spaced, on opaque, un-
glazed, white paper. The document shall be stapled or
bound at the upper left-hand corner. Copies, if required,
shall be produced on the same type of paper and shall be
legible. The original of any such document (except a motion
to dismiss or affirm under Rule 18.6) shall be signed by the
party proceeding pro se or by counsel of record who must be
a member of the Bar of this Court or an attorney appointed
under the Criminal Justice Act of 1964, see 18 U. S. C.
§ 3006A(d)(6), or under any other applicable federal statute.
Subparagraph 1(g) of this Rule does not apply to documents
prepared under this paragraph.
   (b) Page limits for documents presented on 81⁄2- by 11-inch
paper are: 40 pages for a petition for a writ of certiorari,
jurisdictional statement, petition for an extraordinary writ,
brief in opposition, or motion to dismiss or affirm; and 15
pages for a reply to a brief in opposition, brief opposing a
motion to dismiss or affirm, supplemental brief, or petition
for rehearing. The page exclusions specified in subpara-
graph 1(d) of this Rule apply.

Rule 34. Document Preparation: General Requirements
  Every document, whether prepared under Rule 33.1 or
Rule 33.2, shall comply with the following provisions:
  1. Each document shall bear on its cover, in the order indi-
cated, from the top of the page:
  (a) the docket number of the case or, if there is none, a
space for one;
  (b) the name of this Court;
  (c) the October Term in which the document is filed (see
Rule 3);
  (d) the caption of the case as appropriate in this Court;
  (e) the nature of the proceeding and the name of the court
from which the action is brought (e. g., “On Petition for
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1242           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit”; or, for a merits brief, “On Writ of Cer-
tiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit”);
   (f) the title of the document (e. g., “Petition for Writ of
Certiorari,” “Brief for Respondent,” “Joint Appendix”);
   (g) the name of the attorney who is counsel of record for
the party concerned (who must be a member of the Bar of
this Court except as provided in Rule 33.2), and on whom
service is to be made, with a notation directly thereunder
identifying the attorney as counsel of record and setting out
counsel’s office address and telephone number. Only one
counsel of record may be noted on a single document. The
names of other members of the Bar of this Court or of
the bar of the highest court of a State acting as counsel,
and, if desired, their addresses, may be added, but counsel
of record shall be clearly identified. Names of persons
other than attorneys admitted to a state bar may not be
listed, unless the party is appearing pro se, in which case
the party’s name, address, and telephone number shall
appear. The foregoing shall be displayed in an appropriate
typographic manner and, except for the identification of
counsel, may not be set in type smaller than standard
11-point, if the document is prepared as required by Rule
33.1.
   2. Every document exceeding five pages (other than a joint
appendix), whether prepared under Rule 33.1 or Rule 33.2,
shall contain a table of contents and a table of cited authori-
ties (i. e., cases alphabetically arranged, constitutional provi-
sions, statutes, treatises, and other materials) with refer-
ences to the pages in the document where such authorities
are cited.
   3. The body of every document shall bear at its close the
name of counsel of record and such other counsel, identified
on the cover of the document in conformity with subpara-
graph 1(g) of this Rule, as may be desired.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1243

Rule 35. Death, Substitution, and Revivor; Public
         Officers
   1. If a party dies after filing a petition for a writ of cer-
tiorari to this Court, or after filing a notice of appeal, the
authorized representative of the deceased party may appear
and, on motion, be substituted as a party. If the representa-
tive does not voluntarily become a party, any other party
may suggest the death on the record and, on motion, seek an
order requiring the representative to become a party within
a designated time. If the representative then fails to be-
come a party, the party so moving, if a respondent or appel-
lee, is entitled to have the petition for a writ of certiorari or
the appeal dismissed, and if a petitioner or appellant, is enti-
tled to proceed as in any other case of nonappearance by a
respondent or appellee. If the substitution of a representa-
tive of the deceased is not made within six months after the
death of the party, the case shall abate.
   2. Whenever a case cannot be revived in the court whose
judgment is sought to be reviewed, because the deceased
party’s authorized representative is not subject to that
court’s jurisdiction, proceedings will be conducted as this
Court may direct.
   3. When a public officer who is a party to a proceeding in
this Court in an official capacity dies, resigns, or otherwise
ceases to hold office, the action does not abate and any
successor in office is automatically substituted as a party.
The parties shall notify the Clerk in writing of any such
successions. Proceedings following the substitution shall
be in the name of the substituted party, but any misnomer
not affecting substantial rights of the parties will be
disregarded.
   4. A public officer who is a party to a proceeding in this
Court in an official capacity may be described as a party by
the officer’s official title rather than by name, but the Court
may require the name to be added.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1244           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

Rule 36. Custody of Prisoners in Habeas Corpus
         Proceedings
   1. Pending review in this Court of a decision in a habeas
corpus proceeding commenced before a court, Justice, or
judge of the United States, the person having custody of the
prisoner may not transfer custody to another person unless
the transfer is authorized under this Rule.
   2. Upon application by a custodian, the court, Justice, or
judge who entered the decision under review may authorize
transfer and the substitution of a successor custodian as a
party.
   3. (a) Pending review of a decision failing or refusing to
release a prisoner, the prisoner may be detained in the cus-
tody from which release is sought or in other appropriate
custody or may be enlarged on personal recognizance or bail,
as may appear appropriate to the court, Justice, or judge
who entered the decision, or to the court of appeals, this
Court, or a judge or Justice of either court.
   (b) Pending review of a decision ordering release, the pris-
oner shall be enlarged on personal recognizance or bail, un-
less the court, Justice, or judge who entered the decision, or
the court of appeals, this Court, or a judge or Justice of
either court, orders otherwise.
   4. An initial order respecting the custody or enlargement
of the prisoner, and any recognizance or surety taken, shall
continue in effect pending review in the court of appeals and
in this Court unless for reasons shown to the court of ap-
peals, this Court, or a judge or Justice of either court, the
order is modified or an independent order respecting custody,
enlargement, or surety is entered.

Rule 37. Brief for an Amicus Curiae
   1. An amicus curiae brief that brings to the attention of
the Court relevant matter not already brought to its atten-
tion by the parties may be of considerable help to the Court.
An amicus curiae brief that does not serve this purpose bur-
dens the Court, and its filing is not favored.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                     1245

   2. (a) An amicus curiae brief submitted before the
Court’s consideration of a petition for a writ of certiorari,
motion for leave to file a bill of complaint, jurisdictional
statement, or petition for an extraordinary writ, may be filed
if accompanied by the written consent of all parties, or if the
Court grants leave to file under subparagraph 2(b) of this
Rule. The brief shall be submitted within the time allowed
for filing a brief in opposition or for filing a motion to dismiss
or affirm. The amicus curiae brief shall specify whether
consent was granted, and its cover shall identify the party
supported.
   (b) When a party to the case has withheld consent, a
motion for leave to file an amicus curiae brief before the
Court’s consideration of a petition for a writ of certiorari,
motion for leave to file a bill of complaint, jurisdictional
statement, or petition for an extraordinary writ may be pre-
sented to the Court. The motion, prepared as required by
Rule 33.1 and as one document with the brief sought to be
filed, shall be submitted within the time allowed for filing an
amicus curiae brief, and shall indicate the party or parties
who have withheld consent and state the nature of the mov-
ant’s interest. Such a motion is not favored.
   3. (a) An amicus curiae brief in a case before the Court
for oral argument may be filed if accompanied by the written
consent of all parties, or if the Court grants leave to file
under subparagraph 3(b) of this Rule. The brief shall be
submitted within the time allowed for filing the brief for the
party supported, or if in support of neither party, within the
time allowed for filing the petitioner’s or appellant’s brief.
The amicus curiae brief shall specify whether consent was
granted, and its cover shall identify the party supported or
indicate whether it suggests affirmance or reversal. The
Clerk will not file a reply brief for an amicus curiae, or a
brief for an amicus curiae in support of, or in opposition to,
a petition for rehearing.
   (b) When a party to a case before the Court for oral argu-
ment has withheld consent, a motion for leave to file an ami-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1246           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

cus curiae brief may be presented to the Court. The mo-
tion, prepared as required by Rule 33.1 and as one document
with the brief sought to be filed, shall be submitted within
the time allowed for filing an amicus curiae brief, and shall
indicate the party or parties who have withheld consent and
state the nature of the movant’s interest.
   4. No motion for leave to file an amicus curiae brief is
necessary if the brief is presented on behalf of the United
States by the Solicitor General; on behalf of any agency of
the United States allowed by law to appear before this Court
when submitted by the agency’s authorized legal representa-
tive; on behalf of a State, Commonwealth, Territory, or Pos-
session when submitted by its Attorney General; or on behalf
of a city, county, town, or similar entity when submitted by
its authorized law officer.
   5. A brief or motion filed under this Rule shall be accom-
panied by proof of service as required by Rule 29, and shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Rules 21, 24, and
33.1 (except that it suffices to set out in the brief the interest
of the amicus curiae, the summary of the argument, the ar-
gument, and the conclusion). A motion for leave to file may
not exceed five pages. A party served with the motion may
file an objection thereto, stating concisely the reasons for
withholding consent; the objection shall be prepared as re-
quired by Rule 33.2.

Rule 38. Fees
  Under 28 U. S. C. § 1911, the fees charged by the Clerk
are:
  (a) for docketing a case on a petition for a writ of certio-
rari or on appeal or for docketing any other proceeding, ex-
cept a certified question or a motion to docket and dismiss
an appeal under Rule 18.5, $300;
  (b) for filing a petition for rehearing or a motion for leave
to file a petition for rehearing, $200;
  (c) for reproducing and certifying any record or paper,
$1 per page; and for comparing with the original thereof
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                   1247

any photographic reproduction of any record or paper, when
furnished by the person requesting its certification, $.50
per page;
  (d) for a certificate bearing the seal of the Court, $10; and
  (e) for a check paid to the Court, Clerk, or Marshal that is
returned for lack of funds, $35.

Rule 39. Proceedings In Forma Pauperis
   1. A party seeking to proceed in forma pauperis shall file
a motion for leave to do so, together with the party’s nota-
rized affidavit or declaration (in compliance with 28 U. S. C.
§ 1746) in the form prescribed by the Federal Rules of Appel-
late Procedure, Form 4. See 28 U. S. C. § 1915. The motion
shall state whether leave to proceed in forma pauperis was
sought in any other court and, if so, whether leave was
granted. If the United States district court or the United
States court of appeals has appointed counsel under the
Criminal Justice Act of 1964, 18 U. S. C. § 3006A, or under
any other applicable federal statute, no affidavit or declara-
tion is required, but the motion shall cite the statute under
which counsel was appointed.
   2. If leave to proceed in forma pauperis is sought for the
purpose of filing a document, the motion, and an affidavit
or declaration if required, shall be filed together with that
document and shall comply in every respect with Rule 21.
As provided in that Rule, it suffices to file an original and 10
copies, unless the party is an inmate confined in an institu-
tion and is not represented by counsel, in which case the
original, alone, suffices. A copy of the motion shall precede
and be attached to each copy of the accompanying document.
   3. Except when these Rules expressly provide that a docu-
ment shall be prepared as required by Rule 33.1, every docu-
ment presented by a party proceeding under this Rule shall
be prepared as required by Rule 33.2 (unless such prepa-
ration is impossible). Every document shall be legible.
While making due allowance for any case presented under
this Rule by a person appearing pro se, the Clerk will not
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1248           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

file any document if it does not comply with the substance of
these Rules or is jurisdictionally out of time.
   4. When the documents required by paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this Rule are presented to the Clerk, accompanied by proof
of service as required by Rule 29, they will be placed on the
docket without the payment of a docket fee or any other fee.
   5. The respondent or appellee in a case filed in forma pau-
peris shall respond in the same manner and within the same
time as in any other case of the same nature, except that the
filing of an original and 10 copies of a response prepared as
required by Rule 33.2, with proof of service as required by
Rule 29, suffices. The respondent or appellee may challenge
the grounds for the motion for leave to proceed in forma
pauperis in a separate document or in the response itself.
   6. Whenever the Court appoints counsel for an indigent
party in a case set for oral argument, the briefs on the merits
submitted by that counsel, unless otherwise requested, shall
be prepared under the Clerk’s supervision. The Clerk also
will reimburse appointed counsel for any necessary travel
expenses to Washington, D. C., and return in connection with
the argument.
   7. In a case in which certiorari has been granted, probable
jurisdiction noted, or consideration of jurisdiction postponed,
this Court may appoint counsel to represent a party finan-
cially unable to afford an attorney to the extent authorized
by the Criminal Justice Act of 1964, 18 U. S. C. § 3006A, or
by any other applicable federal statute.
   8. If satisfied that a petition for a writ of certiorari, juris-
dictional statement, or petition for an extraordinary writ is
frivolous or malicious, the Court may deny leave to proceed
in forma pauperis.

Rule 40. Veterans, Seamen, and Military Cases
  1. A veteran suing to establish reemployment rights
under 38 U. S. C. § 2022, or under any other provision of law
exempting veterans from the payment of fees or court costs,
may file a motion for leave to proceed on papers prepared as
required by Rule 33.2. The motion shall ask leave to pro-
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                  1249

ceed as a veteran and be accompanied by an affidavit or dec-
laration setting out the moving party’s veteran status. A
copy of the motion shall precede and be attached to each
copy of the petition for a writ of certiorari or other substan-
tive document filed by the veteran.
   2. A seaman suing under 28 U. S. C. § 1916 may proceed
without prepayment of fees or costs or furnishing security
therefor, but is not entitled to proceed under Rule 33.2, ex-
cept as authorized by the Court on separate motion under
Rule 39.
   3. An accused person petitioning for a writ of certiorari to
review a decision of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Armed Forces under 28 U. S. C. § 1259 may proceed with-
out prepayment of fees or costs or furnishing security there-
for and without filing an affidavit of indigency, but is not
entitled to proceed on papers prepared as required by Rule
33.2, except as authorized by the Court on separate motion
under Rule 39.

              PART VIII. DISPOSITION OF CASES

Rule 41. Opinions of the Court
  Opinions of the Court will be released by the Clerk imme-
diately upon their announcement from the bench, or as the
Court otherwise directs. Thereafter, the Clerk will cause
the opinions to be issued in slip form, and the Reporter of
Decisions will prepare them for publication in the prelimi-
nary prints and bound volumes of the United States Reports.

Rule 42. Interest and Damages
  1. If a judgment for money in a civil case is affirmed, any
interest allowed by law is payable from the date the judg-
ment under review was entered. If a judgment is modified
or reversed with a direction that a judgment for money be
entered below, the mandate will contain instructions with
respect to the allowance of interest. Interest in cases aris-
ing in a state court is allowed at the same rate that similar
judgments bear interest in the courts of the State in which
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1250           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

judgment is directed to be entered. Interest in cases aris-
ing in a court of the United States is allowed at the interest
rate authorized by law.
  2. When a petition for a writ of certiorari, an appeal, or
an application for other relief is frivolous, the Court may
award the respondent or appellee just damages, and single
or double costs under Rule 43. Damages or costs may be
awarded against the petitioner, appellant, or applicant,
against the party’s counsel, or against both party and
counsel.

Rule 43. Costs
  1. If the Court affirms a judgment, the petitioner or appel-
lant shall pay costs unless the Court otherwise orders.
  2. If the Court reverses or vacates a judgment, the re-
spondent or appellee shall pay costs unless the Court other-
wise orders.
  3. The Clerk’s fees and the cost of printing the joint ap-
pendix are the only taxable items in this Court. The cost of
the transcript of the record from the court below is also a
taxable item, but shall be taxable in that court as costs in the
case. The expenses of printing briefs, motions, petitions, or
jurisdictional statements are not taxable.
  4. In a case involving a certified question, costs are equally
divided unless the Court otherwise orders, except that if the
Court decides the whole matter in controversy, as permitted
by Rule 19.2, costs are allowed as provided in paragraphs 1
and 2 of this Rule.
  5. To the extent permitted by 28 U. S. C. § 2412, costs
under this Rule are allowed for or against the United States
or an officer or agent thereof, unless expressly waived or
unless the Court otherwise orders.
  6. When costs are allowed in this Court, the Clerk will
insert an itemization of the costs in the body of the mandate
or judgment sent to the court below. The prevailing side
may not submit a bill of costs.
  7. In extraordinary circumstances the Court may adjudge
double costs.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                    1251

Rule 44. Rehearing
   1. Any petition for the rehearing of any judgment or deci-
sion of the Court on the merits shall be filed within 25 days
after entry of the judgment or decision, unless the Court or
a Justice shortens or extends the time. The petitioner shall
file 40 copies of the rehearing petition and shall pay the filing
fee prescribed by Rule 38(b), except that a petitioner pro-
ceeding in forma pauperis under Rule 39, including an in-
mate of an institution, shall file the number of copies re-
quired for a petition by such a person under Rule 12.2. The
petition shall state its grounds briefly and distinctly and
shall be served as required by Rule 29. The petition shall
be presented together with certification of counsel (or of a
party unrepresented by counsel) that it is presented in good
faith and not for delay; one copy of the certificate shall bear
the signature of counsel (or of a party unrepresented by
counsel). A copy of the certificate shall follow and be
attached to each copy of the petition. A petition for rehear-
ing is not subject to oral argument and will not be granted
except by a majority of the Court, at the instance of a Justice
who concurred in the judgment or decision.
   2. Any petition for the rehearing of an order denying a
petition for a writ of certiorari or extraordinary writ shall
be filed within 25 days after the date of the order of denial
and shall comply with all the form and filing requirements of
paragraph 1 of this Rule, including the payment of the filing
fee if required, but its grounds shall be limited to intervening
circumstances of a substantial or controlling effect or to
other substantial grounds not previously presented. The
petition shall be presented together with certification of
counsel (or of a party unrepresented by counsel) that it is
restricted to the grounds specified in this paragraph and that
it is presented in good faith and not for delay; one copy of
the certificate shall bear the signature of counsel (or of a
party unrepresented by counsel). A copy of the certificate
shall follow and be attached to each copy of the petition.
The Clerk will not file a petition without a certificate. The
petition is not subject to oral argument.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1252           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

   3. The Clerk will not file any response to a petition for
rehearing unless the Court requests a response. In the ab-
sence of extraordinary circumstances, the Court will not
grant a petition for rehearing without first requesting a
response.
   4. The Clerk will not file consecutive petitions and peti-
tions that are out of time under this Rule.
   5. The Clerk will not file any brief for an amicus curiae
in support of, or in opposition to, a petition for rehearing.

Rule 45. Process; Mandates
   1. All process of this Court issues in the name of the Presi-
dent of the United States.
   2. In a case on review from a state court, the mandate
issues 25 days after entry of the judgment, unless the Court
or a Justice shortens or extends the time, or unless the par-
ties stipulate that it issue sooner. The filing of a petition for
rehearing stays the mandate until disposition of the petition,
unless the Court orders otherwise. If the petition is denied,
the mandate issues forthwith.
   3. In a case on review from any court of the United States,
as defined by 28 U. S. C. § 451, a formal mandate does not
issue unless specially directed; instead, the Clerk of this
Court will send the clerk of the lower court a copy of the
opinion or order of this Court and a certified copy of the
judgment. The certified copy of the judgment, prepared
and signed by this Court’s Clerk, will provide for costs if
any are awarded. In all other respects, the provisions of
paragraph 2 of this Rule apply.

Rule 46. Dismissing Cases
   1. At any stage of the proceedings, whenever all parties
file with the Clerk an agreement in writing that a case be
dismissed, specifying the terms for payment of costs, and pay
to the Clerk any fees then due, the Clerk, without further
reference to the Court, will enter an order of dismissal.
   2. (a) A petitioner or appellant may file a motion to
dismiss the case, with proof of service as required by Rule
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




               RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT                  1253

29, tendering to the Clerk any fees due and costs payable.
No more than 15 days after service thereof, an adverse
party may file an objection, limited to the amount of damages
and costs in this Court alleged to be payable or to showing
that the moving party does not represent all petitioners or
appellants. The Clerk will not file any objection not so
limited.
   (b) When the objection asserts that the moving party does
not represent all the petitioners or appellants, the party
moving for dismissal may file a reply within 10 days, after
which time the matter will be submitted to the Court for
its determination.
   (c) If no objection is filed—or if upon objection going only
to the amount of damages and costs in this Court, the party
moving for dismissal tenders the additional damages and
costs in full within 10 days of the demand therefor—the
Clerk, without further reference to the Court, will enter an
order of dismissal. If, after objection as to the amount of
damages and costs in this Court, the moving party does not
respond by a tender within 10 days, the Clerk will report
the matter to the Court for its determination.
   3. No mandate or other process will issue on a dismissal
under this Rule without an order of the Court.

        PART IX. DEFINITIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATE

Rule 47. Reference to “State Court” and “State Law”
  The term “state court,” when used in these Rules, includes
the District of Columbia Court of Appeals and the Supreme
Court of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. See 28 U. S. C.
§§ 1257 and 1258. References in these Rules to the common
law and statutes of a State include the common law and stat-
utes of the District of Columbia and of the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico.

Rule 48. Effective Date of Rules
  1. These Rules, adopted July 26, 1995, will be effective
October 2, 1995.
515us3urul 07-10-97 16:49:01   PGT • USRULES




1254           RULES OF THE SUPREME COURT

  2. The Rules govern all proceedings after their effective
date except to the extent that, in the opinion of the Court,
their application to a pending matter would not be feasible
or would work an injustice, in which event the former proce-
dure applies.
