5 Il. „ 
hi Mad 1 
No. 95-668 1 


Ci 
IN THE 3 22 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., 


Petitioner, 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 


Joux D. O'REILLY, III RICHARD H. SEAMON 
(Counsel of Record) ASSISTANT TO 

O'REILLY & GROSSO THE SOLICITOR GENERAL 
77 Turnpike Road U.S. Department of Justice 
Post Office Box 3118 Washington, D.C. 20530 
Southborough, MA 01745 (202) 514-3344 
(508) 460-1500 Counsel for Respondent. 
Counsel for Petitioner. 


Wesington.O C + THIEL PRESS «+ (202) 328.3286 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED OCT. 19, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED JAN. 19, 1996 


(i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
APPENDIX A 
Chronological List Of Relevant Docket Entries 


APPENDIX B 


Excerpts from Transcript of Proceedings of 
June 21, 1989 


Excerpts from Transcript of Proceedings of 


APPENDIX C 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 5 — Employer letter to 
employees dated October 14, 1988 enclosing 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 7 — Union telegram to 
Employer dated November 17, 1988, announc- 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 8 — Employer telegram 
to Union withdrawing Union recognition 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 14 — List of employees 
of Auciello before strike 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 15 — List of employees 
reviewed by Employer on November 28, 1988 


General Counsel’s Exhibit 17 — NLRB Certification 
of March 30, 1977 


APPENDIX D 


Respondent’s Exhibit 2a — Resignation from Union 
of Steven Brodeur, October 13, 1988 


Respondent’s Exhibit 2b — Resignation from Union 
of Nguyen Sang Trung, October 13, 1988 


Respondent’s Exhibit 2c — Resignation from Union 
of Phuc Van Tran, October 13, 1988 


(u) 


Respondent's Exhibit 2d — Resignation from Union 


of Giao Huynh, October 13, 19882. 


Respondent's Exhibit $a — Resignation from Union 


of James Chiasson, October 14, 1988 ........... 


Respondent's Exhibit 3b — Resignation from Union 


of Paul N. Greenglass, October 14,1988 ......... 


Respondent’s Exhibit 3c — Resignation from Union 


of John Duckworth, October 14, 1988 .......... 


Respondent's Exhibit 3d — Resignation from Union 


of Michael G. Barbour, October 17, 1988......... 


Respondent’s Exhibit 3e — Resignation from Union 


of Robert Cibelli, November 21, 19889. 


Respondent's Exhibit 3f — Resignation from Union 


of Quang Nguyen, November 21, 1988 .......... 


Respondent's Exhibit 3g — Resignation from Union 


of Gary F. Boudreau, November 21, 1988 


Respondent's Exhibit 3h — Resignation from Union 


of D. A. Duplisea, November 23, 1988 ......... 


Respondent’s Exhibit 4 — Resignation from Union 


of Frank J. Tomolillo, October 14, 1988........ 


APPENDIX E 


Letter dated January 19, 1996 from Supreme Court 
of the United States notifying Counsel for Peti- 
tioner that Petition for Writ of Certiorari has 


been granted... c... „ 0 6 6 00 


sec Cen 


la 


APPENDIX A 


CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


Board Case No. 1-CA-25969 


In the Matter of: Auciello lron Works, Inc. 


Date 


12/1/88 
1/17/89 
1/20/89 
2/3/89 
6/8/89 
6/21/89 
8/9/89 


11/24/89 


1/29/90 
6/27/91 
9/5/91 

9/30/92 
4/22/93 


5/7/93 
5/28/93 
5/9/95 

7/21/95 
7/21/95 


10/19/95 


1/19/96 


Documents 


Charge 

First Amended Charge 

Complaint and Notice of Hearing 

Answer to Complaint 

Order Rescheduling Hearing 

Hearing Opened 

Hearing Closed 

Administrative Law Judge’s Decision 

Respondent’s Exceptions 

Board’s Decision and Order 

Application for Enforcement 

Decision of the Court of Appeals and Remand 

Letter advising parties of Board’s acceptance 
of Court of Appeals’ remand 

General Counsel’s Statement of Position 

Respondent’s Supplemental Brief 

Board’s Supplemental Decision and Order 

Decision of the Court of Appeals 

Judgment of the Court of Appeals 

Petition for writ of certiorari filed 

Petition for writ of certiorari granted 


2a 
APPENDIX B 


EXCERPTS FROM TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 
OF JUNE 21, 1989 


ROBERT THOMAS 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[37] Q. Let me show you what’s been admitted as 
General Counsel’s No. 5. This is a letter with an attach- 
ment. Have you seen this before? 

A. Yes, I have. 

Q. When did you first see that? 

A. When I became aware of it, Mr. Mortimer called me 
after one of the employees had received it and I probably 
saw a copy of it sometime during that week. Mr. Mort- 
imer provided me with a copy of it. 

Q. Did Mr. Mortimer tell you who got this letter? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What did he tell you? 

MR. O’REILLY: Objection. 
[38] JUDGE ZANKEL: Overruled. 

Q. What did he tell you? 

A. He told me that it had been sent by the company to 
all employees. 

Q. And just so we have on the record the continuity, 
this letter concerned what? 

A. Well, it concerned the company’s opinion on where 
the parties were regarding negotiations and included a 
form so that the employees could resign and go to work. 


[42] Q. (By Mr. Herbster.) Were there any other bar- 
gaining sessions? 


3a 


A. Yes, there was one on November 17th. 

Q. So there were no sessions from the 26th to the 
17th? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. Do you know why there were no sessions between 
that time period? 

A. Well, at the conclusion of the meeting on the 18th, 
and my understanding it was the same on the 26th when 
I didn’t attend, was that it was left up to the Federal 
Mediator to attempt to schedule a meeting. 

Q. Did you attend the meeting on the 17th? 

A. Yes, I did. 


[43] Q. (By Mr. Herbster.) What else was discussed, 
specifically with regard to bargaining proposals, Mr. 
Thomas? 

A. Well, Mr. O’Reilly indicated that he had a proposal 
to present on behalf of the company, which he did make 
the proposal verbally, and then at some point he pre- 
sented a [44] written proposal. 

Q. Let me show you what’s been introduced into evi- 
dence as General Counsel’s No. 6, with a notation of 
November 17. Do you know who wrote that? 

A. Yes. I did. 

Q. And is that the proposal you referred to? 

A. That is the written proposal, yes. 

Q. Now im addition you say there was an oral pro- 
posal? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And what was the oral proposal? 

A. Part of his proposal was the IRA contribution, 
which had been previously agreed to when he resubmit- 
ted it. 


4a 


He submitted a proposal on wages of three percent the 
first year, four percent the second year and five percent 
the third year. 

His proposal on the cost of welfare coverage was that 
employers would pay the full cost of all the welfare 
coverage. 

He also stipulated a proposal on an overtime premium 
pay in which the time and a half provision after eight 
hours would be increased to time and a half after forty 
hours. 

That was the gist, as I recall, of his economic proposal, 
other than a written proposal that he submitted. 

Q. So is the written proposal in addition to the oral 
proposal that you’ve just testified to? 

[45] A. Yes. 

Q. That was the Employer’s proposal entirely? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You mentioned the wage rates. I believe you testi- 
fied three percent, four percent and five percent was the 
Employer’s proposal for the three years. Is that your 
testimony? 

A. That’s my recollection, yes. 

Q. Okay. 

Let me show you a one-page document with the 
notation of November 17th, 88. Is this in your hand- 
writing? 

A. Yes, it is. 

Q. And are these your bargaining notes? 

A. Yes, they are. 

Q. In looking at this, I notice it says, Company Pro- 
posal’’, and there is a notation next to wages. 

A. Mm-hmm. 

Q. Okay. Take a look at that, and what does that 
state? 

A. That states a four percent increase in the first year, 


5a 


a four percent in the second and a five percent in the 
third. 

Q. Does that refresh your recollection as to the Com- 
pany Proposal? 

A. Yes, it does. 

Q. So that is the correct proposal, four, four and 
five? 

A. Yes. 

[46] Q. And it wasn’t three percent the third year? 

A. No. 

Q. For the first year, I’m sorry. 

A. No. 

Q. When did you write down those bargaining notes? 

A. During the meeting. 

Q. After you got that entire Company Proposal, the 
written and the oral proposal that you just testified to, 
what did you do? 

A. We asked for a caucus so that the Union committee 
could briefly study the proposal. 

Q. And what happened? 

A. Well, we spent some time reviewing it as best we 
could because of the extensive written proposal and the 
areas that it touched on, such as management rights and 
management prerogatives, grievance and arbitration pro- 
visions. We decided if nothing else, we needed some time 
to study it to find out what the substance was. 

Q. Then what happened? 

A. We called the Mediator back into the meeting and 
told him it was our recommendation that we adjourn the 
meeting and that we were going to review the company’s 
proposal and that we would leave it up to him to sched- 
ule further meetings. 

Q. Did you ever at that bargaining session tell the Med- 
iator or anyone from the company that you rejected that 
[47] Company Proposal? 

A. I did not. 


6a 


Q. Did you ever use any word like “reject”? 

A. No, I dic>’t. 

Q. What occurred next? 

A. Following the adjournment, the Union committee 
went downstairs in the lobby of the hotel and we spent 
some time down there discussing the company’s proposal. 

Q. Was there any result of that conversation after you 
discussed it with the committee? 

A. No, only our concern that the company now was 
opening up provisions of the contract that we'd had 
agreement on, and we were kind of concerned about that. 

Q. What were those provisions? 

A. Well, they were overtime provisions, grievance of 
arbitration, management prerogatives, employee classifi- 
cations. 

Q. What happened next? 

A. We all went our separate way and, as I recall, I had 
an assignment in another area out of town. I contacted 
Mr. O’Reilly probably within two or three days of that 
meeting, in a private telephone conversation, and I talked 
with him and questioned him on whether there would be 
any advantage to sitting down and negotiating and trying 
to come up with a mutually satisfactory package for an 
agreement. 

Q. What did he say? 

[48] A. He said to me that that was not impossible, 
that the company had taken a stand and in his opinion 
they were not going to change it, and whether he advised 
them or not, they weren’t going to change their position. 

Q. Did you say in this conversation that you rejected 
that last Company Proposal? 

A. I did not. 

Q. Did Mr. O’Reilly say that the proposal was with- 
drawn? 

A. No, he didn’t. 


— 


7a 


Q. Did he make any indication that would lead you to 
believe that this was withdrawn? 

A. No. 

Q. What happened next? 

A. I contacted Mr. Mortimer and asked him to contact 
all of the employees and explain — advise them of the 
results of the last conference with the company, and 
recommend to them that we accept the last proposal and 
end the strike. 

Q. What occurred after you told Mr. Mortimer to do 
that? 

A. He contacted me by telephone about five days or so 
after that. 

Q. When would this date be, approximately? 

A. Probably around the 26th of November. I recall 
that because I think it was — I think it was a Saturday. 
He contacted me from home. He contacted me at my 
home. 

Q. During this week, from the time of the 18th or so 
until [49] the 26th, where were you. Were you — 

A. I was traveling. If I recall, I think I was — had an 
assignment in Albany, New York. If memory serves me. 

Q. So you spoke to Mr. Mortimer on approximately 
the 26th? 

A. We may have had some conversation in the interim 
with him advising me of what was happening with the 
contracts, but the final conversation when the contracts 
had been made was on the 26th, when he called. 

Q. And what was your conversation with Mr. Mortimer 
on the 26th? 

A. He advised me that his contacts and those made by 
Joe Parenti, the steward, clearly indicated that the 
employees agreed that it was time to accept the proposal 
and end the strike and go back to work. 

MR. O’REILLY: Your Honor, if that is being 
offered for the truth of the statement, I object to it — 


JUDGE ZANKEL: How is it being offered? 

MR. HERBSTER: Not necessarily for the truth of 
it, but for the fact to show what led up basically to the 
next act. I mean, it didn’t come in a vacuum. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Overruled. 

Q. (By Mr. Herbster.) There was no ratification meet- 
ing at this time, was there? 

A. No, there wasn’t. 

Q. Why not? 

[50] A. Well, we felt under the circumstances that 
time was important and it was time that the strike was 
concluded. 

The employees, economically, were suffering. They 
had indicated that they had wanted to get back to work 
if we could get a contract and if we'd have used the pro- 
cedure that we sometimes use in notifying people and 
trying to get a hall, it might have taken three or four 
days. And we felt this way, by phoning people, it would 
serve the same purpose. 


R * * 


[51] Q. At anytime during these negotiations, did any 
employees tell you that they didn’t want the Union to 
represent them? 

A. No. 

Q. Had you gotten any reports from Mr. Mortimer or 
from [52] any other Union Representative that the 
employees had told him or anyone else that they didn’t 
want the Union to represent them? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you get any reports at anytime during these 
negotiations in any words to show that the Union had 
rejected — I’m sorry, that the employees had rejected 
the Union in any way? 

A. No. 


9a 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 


What did Mr. Mortimer tell you about employees 
[53] resigning and crossing the picket line — resigning 
from the Local Union, crossing the picket line and return- 
ing to work at Auciello? 

A. Well in some cases he told me that the employees 
that had resigned had in fact contacted him and said 
that although they had signed a resignation, it was not 
an indication for lack of support from the Local Union. 
They needed to go back to work because they needed 
the money. 

Q. And they were saying that they were resigning from 
the Union because they wanted to go back to work and 
they needed the money? 

A. Yes, that’s what he — 

Q. What’s what Mr. Mortimer quoted them as saying? 

A. Mm-hmm. 

Q. And who was he quoting, do you recall? 

A. I have no idea. 

Q. Did you verify the fact at any point that in fact a 
number of Auciello employees during the course of a 
strike in fact did resign from the Local Union? 

A. I’ve seen some of the resignations. 

Q. I see. 

And have you verified with Mr. Mortimer the fact 
that a number of employees did in fact cross the picket 
line and come back to work during the strike? 

A. Yeah, I think I mentioned that, yes. 


R * * 


[71] Now, on the last meeting, that was November 
17th; [72] am I correct? 
A. Ves, I think that's correct. 
Q. At the Park West or whatever the hotel was in Marl- 
boro? 


10a 


A. Yes. 

Q. You were given a proposal by the Company in writ- 
ing and orally, and the written portion of that proposal is 
General Counsel’s No. 6. As an International Represen- 
tative and General Organizer for, I think you said 25 
years, what was in there that you didn’t understand and 
you felt called for an indefinite recess? 

A. Well, a change in grievance and arbitration. 

Q. You didn’t understand that? 

A. Not initially, no. 

Q. And how long did it take you before you were able 
to understand that? 

A. Well I think I spent some time the following day 
or the day after reviewing it. 

Q. Following — Do you recall what time it was of the 
day? Was it morning or afternoon that this meeting took 
place? 

A. I recall it was afternoon. 

Q. If I suggest to you it was in the morning, would 
that be of any assistance to you? 

A. 9:30 a.m. 

Q. Nine-thirty. All right. 

And when did you break off the negotiations that 
[73] day? It was — 

A. I don’t have the adjournment time, but I would be 

surprised if we there at the meeting more than an hour. 


XR * * 


[78] Q. (By Mr. O'Reilly.) You had a discussion with 
me and did I not indicate to you that I didn’t envision 
any foreseeable change in management’s then current 
position? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. Okay. And did you then — By the way, did you 
have any questions in that — Did you ask me to explain 


lla 


any of these written proposals that you indicated you 
had difficulty in understanding? ; 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. And at that point did you ask the conciliator 
to reconvene the parties? 

A. No, because that wasn’t the understanding. The 
understanding was he would reconvene the parties when 
he thought it was appropriate. 

Q. Oh, okay. But you made no requests of him to 
reconvene the parties; is that correct? 


A. Not after the meeting. We told him that we'd be 
available though. 


EXCERPTS FROM TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 
OF AUGUST 8, 1989 


CORRECTIONS TO TRANSCRIPT OF 6/21/89 


[88] Before we have the hearing in full scale today, 
I have my own preliminary matter. I have examined the 
transcript of the proceedings of June 21, and with the 
counsel’s permission, I would like to have the record 
today reflect three small transcript corrections. I want to 
discuss it off the record first with counsel so that there 
won’t be any difficulty honoring it. Off the record. 

(Off the record.) 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Counsel and I have agreed to 
make [89] the following changes in the transcript. On 
page 14, line 20, after the words to me, that’s t-o, m-e, 
add the words, the material is remotely relevant, so that 
the sentence on page 14 that’s being in corrected, and 


12a 


which starts on line 19 will read, quote, I find on the 
basis of Mr. Herbster's narration to me, the material is 
remotely relevant and GC #9. Exhibit No. 9, is received. 
End quote. 

The next change in the transcript that we agreed 
to is on page 28 of the transcript, line 3. To delete the 
word petition and substitute the word, quote, constitu- 
tion, end quote. 

The next change in the transcript is on page 44, 
line 3. To delete the word October on line 3 and to sub- 
stitute the word November. 

And the last page to be corrected by agreement of 
the parties and the Judge is page 82, line 5 and 6. With 
respect to line 5, the word purposively, p-u-r-p-o-s-i-v-e- 


Ly, should be deleted. And the word purportedly, p-u-r- 


p-o-r-t-e-d-l-y, should be substituted. And on page 82, 
line 6, the word auditing, a-u-d-i-t-i-n-g, should be deleted. 
And the word, quote, negotiating, end quote, n-e-g-o- 
t-i-a-t-i-n-g, end quote should be inserted. 

Also on page 82, line 22, we have agreed to delete 
the words, the settlement’s. It’s s-e-t-t-l-e-m-e-n-t- apos- 
trophe-s, drawn, d-r-a-w-n. And substitute for those 
[90] words, quote, which are, a-r-e, withdrawn, one 
word, w-i-t-h-d-r-a-w-n, so that the entire sentence which 
starts on line 20, page 82 will read, both parties repre- 
sented will have the opportunity and obligation to do so. 
And I expect that these documents which are with- 
drawn will be delivered at the end of that same day’s 
session to the appropriate player. 

Have I correctly stated the corrections in the trans- 
script, Mr. Herbster? 

MR. HERBSTER: Yes, your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Mr. O’Reilly? 

MR. O’REILLY: Yes, your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Okay. The transcript is so cor- 
rected. Thank you for your cooperation. Okay, Mr. 


13a 


Herbster, you may proceed with your presentation. Vou 
can continue with your presentation of your case. 


XR * * 


DAVID MORTIMER 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[107] Q. Now, you said some people had to resign. 
You mean from the union, correct? 
A. Yes. 


Q. Okay. Did you have any conversations with anyone 
about resigning from the union? 

A. Not about resigning, no. I talked to other people 
to see what — nobody said they were going to resign. 
People I talked with said they had to go to work and 
they just couldn’t stay on strike because of economic 
problems. But they weren’t resigning or quitting their 
employment. They were just getting part-time work. 
Even if it was full-time, you know, they still had reasons 
to go back to work once the strike was settled. 

Q. You say that when they got part-time work, some 


employees got part-time work. Where would that have 
been? 


A. In the area. 
Q. At other employers? 
A. Yes. 


R * * 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


[110] Q. And in prior negotiations, you would have 
yourself, a steward, and perhaps an international repre- 
sentative as the negotiating committee. Am I correct? 

A. Right. 

Q. And have there been any prior problems in your 
relationship with the company, with negotiations? 


l4a 


A. Not that I recall. 

Q. And would I be correct if I characterize the rela- 
tionship in negotiations as several fairly friendly meet- 
ings, shaking hands, and then your committee would 
bring it back for ratification with a recommendation? 

111] A. Yes. 


R * * 


[132] Q. And the picketing had stopped on that Fri- 
day, is that correct? 
A. Veah. 


XR * * 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


[138] Q. Did any of those employees ever tell you, or 
did you hear from any source, that the employees who 
resigned did not wish the union to represent them? 

A. No. 

MR. O’REILLY: What was that answer sir? 1 
couldn’t hear you. 

THE WITNESS: No. 

MR. O’REILLY: Thank you. 

BY MR. HERBSTER: 

Q. Did you hear from those employees or from any 
source that those employees who resigned had any nega- 
tive feelings against the union? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you ever discuss with any employees whether 
or not they should resign from the union? 

A. I think in brief on November 21st, thereabouts, | 
had talked to a few of them, went back to work. 

Q. Do you remember what you said to them? 

[139] A. I talked — yes. I told them. 

MR. O’REILLY: Would you identify who are the 
employees you’re talking about? 


15a 


THE WITNESS: I talked to Eddy Windsor. And | 
talked to Cibelli. Eddy Windsor was concerned, and | 
think Cibelli was also, about his age. And it would be 
tough to get reemployed full time elsewhere. And they 
were getting tight on money, | suppose. Something to 
that effect. We had little showing on the picket line 
because of people working. I just said they could go 
back, there would be no problem. 

BY MR. HERBSTER: 

Q. They could go back to work — 
A. They could go back to work. 


8 * * 


RECROSS EXAMINATION 


[152] Q. Did you not do that, sir? Did you not 
cause charges to be filed against the individuals who 
resigned from the union and subsequent to the resigna- 
tion, crossed the picket line? 

A. I filed charges against everybody that resigned. 

Q. And everybody, including those individuals who 
resigned on the 13th, the day before the picket line went 
up? 

A. o. I don't believe I did that. 

Q. Some people had resigned on the 13th, is the [sic] 
correct? 

A. I don’t believe I filed charges on the 13th. 

(Pause) 

Q. I'm just going to show you Respondent's Exhibits 
2A through 2D, the resignations of Stephen Brodeur, 
Sang [153] Trung, Phuc Van Tan, and Giao Huynh, or 
something to that effect. Did you not file charges 
against those individuals? 

A. I'd have to check my records. I don't believe | 
did. 


16a 


Q. Would you please? 

A. I'm not sure — it's been dragging on for so long 
here. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: Off the record. 

(Off the record 
BY MR. O'REILLY: 

A. I don’t have any copies of charges to these people. 

Q. How about the people who resigned on the 14th — 
the first day of the picket line — did you file charges 
against them? 

A. Yes because the picket line was up. 

Q. And they resigned on that day, did they not? 

A. They are dated the 14th, yes. 

Q. And you filed charges against these men who 
crossed the picket line the same day they resigned? 

A. Right. 

Q. Weren’t you told by your steward that they physi- 
cally gave their resignations to the steward before they 
crossed the picket line? 

A. No. 

[154] Q. The steward did not tell you that? 

A. No, I received them in the mail. 

Q. And your steward then told you that he was also 
given copies of the resignations? 

A. I can’t recall that. 

E * * 


FURTHER REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


Q. Were the internal union charges completed in some 
way? 

A. They were withdrawn. 

[155] Q. By whom? 

A. By myself, the local union. 

Q. So no employees ever had to face any proceedings 
against them by the union, is that correct? 


17a 


A. That's correct. 
Q. No employees were even fined? 
A. That’s correct. 
Q. No employees ever had their work relationship in 
any way restricted? 
A. That’s correct. 
*> * * 


RALPH AUCIELLO 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[164] Q. Now, there has been placed in evidence a 
communication from — it’s General Counsel’s Exhibit 7. 
A communication, a mailgram to you from David Mort- 
imer. Do you recall receiving that? 

A. Yes, I do. 

Q. And how did you receive it? Was it physically 
given to you, or was it called in? 

A. It was telephoned to my home on a Sunday. 


[165] Q. Now sir, I’m going to mention some of the 
names of your employees to you. And when I do, I 
would ask you to indicate to the Judge what if any 
grounds you then had for believing that that particular 
named employee no longer wished to be represented by 
Ironworkers Local 501. 

[166] The first name is Rocco Aliberti. 

A. Rocco Aliberti. It was clear to me that he was not 
a union supporter because on the 18th, which was that 
Friday that the picketing stopped, he came into the shop. 
He came over to me and he was picking up his tools. And 
he told me that he was very sorry the way things worked 
out. However, if there were, in his mind, going to be a 
union vote, he would definitely vote against the union. 


18a 


He told me he felt — and he said this in front of 
myself and Mike Auciello, my brother — that he felt the 
men no longer supported the union. He also told me that 
previous to negotiations, he had been a leader in an effort 
to remove the union from the shop. And again, he wishes 
us luck. 

He mentioned to us that there were three remaining 
picketers — this was the morning of the 18th — out there. 
And he knew that they wanted to come back to work 
and was going to go out and talk to them and say — and 
he asked me if I wanted them back. I said, of course 1 
do. And he said he would go out and relay that they 
would be welcome back at Auciello Iron Works. So 
that’s the way I remember Rocco. 

Q. And did he say why [sic] was coming to pick up his 
tools? 

A. He indicated he would be working elsewhere. 

Q. All right. Salvatore Morle. 

[167] A. Salvatore Morle. After a few days of pick- 
eting, he came into the shop. Again, he saw me. He was 
very upset that he wasn’t able to cross the picket line, he 
said, because he was very concerned about his own per- 
sonal safety. He mentioned to me that he had no use for 
the union anymore. 

MR. HERBSTER: Your Honor, at this time I’m 
going to object. I have listened to the evidence on the 
first one, but I am going to object on the basis of hear- 
say. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Well — 

MR. O'Reilly: It’s not hearsay. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Overruled. 

BY MR. O’REILLY: 

A. He told me this directly that he felt the union did 
not represent him. He further told me that he did not 
feel — I’m repeating myself — that the union just plain 


19a 


didn’t represent him. And he stressed the personal safety 
thing two or three times. I said, Sal, are you sure? What 
makes you think you won't be safe? He said, just the 
way the men were talking out there, he had a feeling that 
he couldn’t take a chance on his safety. 

Q. And what did he say specifically if anything about 
his own feelings about supporting or not supporting the 
union? 

A. He said he wouldn’t go for the union if he had the 
opportunity. He would not go for it. 

[168] Q. Let's go back a second. Aliberti's duties 
were what? 

A. He was a maintenance foreman. 

Q. And Mr. Morle’s duties? 

A. He was a lay-out man, working foreman and lay-out 
man. 

Q. All right. Richard DeLarda. What were his duties? 

A. Richard DeLarda was a welder. 

Q. And what information did you have when you got 
these telegrams about Mr. DeLarda? 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Excuse me. Can we be sure the 
spelling is correct? It’s capital D-e, capital L-a-r-d-a? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Thank you. 

BY MR. O’REILLY: 

A. Richard DeLarda did not speak to me personally. 
I heard through my secretary, Pat Ferrera, that he had 
told her that he would not be coming back to work for 
our company. 

MR. HERBSTER: Objection. Motion to strike. 
MR. O’REILLY: Your Honor, may I indicate that 


the secretary that made the comment is in the room and 


is prepared to testify if that becomes a problem. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: And then what you're telling 
me is [169] that the material is not being offered for its 


20a 


use of what Mr. DeLarda purportedly said? 

MR. O’REILLY: It’s only being offered as an indi- 
cation of the reasonableness of the company’s belief 
that, based on that information, it did not feel that Mr. 
DeLarda would be considered any longer an employee of 
the company. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Mr. Herbster, do you want to say 
anything more about this particular objection? 

MR. HERBSTER: | still have a standing objection, 
your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Well, the evidence is not being 
offered for the truth of what this witness or rather appar- 
ently said. I’m going to have to receive it. Overruled. 

(Pause) 

BY. MR. O’REILLY: 

Q. And had that information been conveyed to you 
prior to your meeting on the 28th? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Of November? 

A. Yes. 

Q. John Duckworth. What's his position? 

A. John Duckworth is the working foreman for the 
shipping department. 

[170] Q. And as working foreman, what are his func- 
tions in the shipping department? 

A. He would schedule the men for driving. He would 
recommend disciplines or recommend hiring or disciplin- 
ary action. His main function was scheduling the men in 
the shop. 

Q. Who supervises the men in their day-to-day opera- 
tions? 

A. John Duckworth. 

Q. And if the men have personal problems at home and 
want time off, who do they go to see? 

A. John Duckworth. 


21a 


Q. And if the men have vacation problems, who do 
they go to see? 
A. John Duckworth. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Excuse me, Mr. O’Reilly. On 
General Counsel 10 Duckworth is listed as a unit 
employee. 

MR. O’REILLY: That’s correct, your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: And identified as a driver. 

MR. O’REILLY: That's correct, your Honor. He's 
a driver in the shipping — 

JUDGE ZANKEL: I’m saying what he’s identified 
as on GC-10. 

MR. O’REILLY: That’s correct, your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Is it the Respondent’s position 
he [171] is not a unit employee? 

MR. O’REILLY: No, that’s not our position. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Then what’s the point of this 
interrogation? It’s confusing, in my view. 

MR. O’REILLY: He's an employee who wears two 
hats. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Well, why do we have to know 
his non-unit hat? 

MR. O’REILLY: Because, as I understand, some of 
the recent board decisions, there would be evidence that 
Mr. Duckworth passed on to upper management repre- 
sentatives information concerning the sentiments of other 
unit employees. And the Board decisions seem to say 
that if that comes from this source of an individual who 
does wear at least a management hat in addition to his 
bargaining unit hat, it can be utilized by managmeent as 
a legitimate, good faith basis for believing that those 
referenced employees no longer support the union. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Thank you. 

MR. O’REILLY: As opposed to information coming 
from a rank and file bargaining unit employee. 


22a 


JUDGE ZANKEL: Thank you for the explanation. 
BY MR. O’REILLY: 

Q. And how long has Mr. Duckworth been a working 
foreman at the facility? 

[172] A. Approximately two to three years. 

Q. And does he occasionally attend management 
meetings on various sales, promotions on manufacturing 
points? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And did Mr. Duckworth work during the picketing? 

A. Yes, he did. 

Q. And what did you ascertain with regard to Mr. 
Duckworth’s support or non-support of the unit? 

A. John Duckworth has always been critical of the 
union. He has oftentimes told me that he really felt the 
union wasn’t representing the men. He didn’t want a 
union. And he told me also that his entire shipping 
department felt the same way he did on this matter. 
And John Duckworth resigned, I believe, immediately on 
the strike and continually crossed the picket line. 

Q. And did he advise you that he had resigned immed- 
iately? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Now, when he indicated to you that his entire ship- 
ping department did not support the union, how many 
people — first of all, when was that? 

A. Right immediately — well, immediately when the 
strike started. But previous to the strike, he would often 
make comments to that effect. 

[173] Q. Okay. And how many people were then in 
the shipping department? And if you could, recall them 
by name. 

A. Well, let’s see. Their names were James Chiasson, 
Stephen Brodeur, Dave Duplisea, Mike Barbour. Let's 
see. I belive that’s it. 


— — — 


— oe 


23a 


Q. So the shipping department — 

A. At the beginning of the strike? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Okay, yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Excuse me. Can I have a spelling 
of those names for the record? 

MR. O’REILLY: Chiasson is C-h-i-a-s-s-o-n. Brodeur 
is B-r-o-d-e-u-r. Duplisea is D--u-p-l-i-s-e-a. And Barbour 
is B-a-r-b-o-u-r. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Thank you. 

BY MR. O’REILLY: 

A. J just remembered another gentlemen. It was 
Richard Boudreau. 

Q. And that’s B-o-u-d-r-e-a-u? 

A. Correct. I believe that’s all. 

Q. So when your foreman indicated to you the men in 
the shipping department did not support the union, all of 
these gentlemen you just listed were in the shipping 
department? 

A. Yes. | 

[174] Q. Robert Cibelli. What did you ascertain about 
his feelings? 

A. Robert Cibelli was one of the three remaining pick- 
eters. 

Q. As of when? 

A. As of November 18th. So he and the other two 
picketers came into the office, wanting to speak to Man- 
lio and me. 

Q. When did they do that? 

A. On the 18th. 

Q. This was the last day of picketing? 

A. Yes. 

Q. All right. 

A. This was the day Rocco Aliberti went on his way 
and talked to them. Anyway, they came back into the 
shop — 


24a 


Q. Now, was this after Mr. Aliberti had the discus- 
sions you described earlier with you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. All right. 

A. And wanted to come back to work. And he told 
me that he could not bring himself to cross the picket 
line because of fear, physical fear. But he wanted to 
come back to work and wanted to know if he was wel- 
come. I said, of course you’re welcome. Come on any- 
time you want. He said he would come back the follow- 
ing Monday, and he was going to [175] resign from the 
union. 

Q. Did he in fact come back to work the following 
Monday, which would be the 21st of November? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And did he indicate to you at that time that he had 
resigned from the union? 

A. I don’t recall. 

Q. Did he ever indicate to you that he had resigned 
from the union? 

A. Yes, during that week. He made the same state- 
ment to my brother Anthony Auciello about being fear- 
ful of crossing the picket line. 

Q. Was this in your presence? 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. Now, had he made any comments, other 
than what you just mentioned with regard to his personal 
feelings about the union? 

A. Yes. When he came in on the 18th he said he had 
really lost, whatever the word, respect for the union and 
was no longer a union supporter. 

Q. Now, was there anyone else present when this was 
said? 

A>Y¥ts, Manlio DeGrandis, my shop superintendent. 

Q. All right. 


— 


25a 


A. And the other two picketers, Gary Boudreau and 
Ed [176] Windsor. 

Q. The three of them — 

A. The three of them came together. 

Q. Okay. 

A. And talked to me. 

Q.On any other occasion, did Mr. Cibelli either 
state sentiments indicating support or lack of support for 
the union? 

A. Well, after he came back to work, he was just plain 
happy that there was no union there anymore. 

Q. And did he say that to you? 

A. He mentioned that — this is a much nicer shop now 
without a union. 

Q. And was this said prior to your telegram being sent 
to the union? 

A. Yes, the week before the telegram. That’s why I 
was so surprised to see the telegram. 

Q. Okay. Joseph Parenti. Was he the steward? 

A. Yes, he was the steward. 

Q. What information as of the 28th of November, 
when you sent the telegram, what information did you 
have with regard to the status of Mr. Parenti? 

A. I heard, not from himself personally but from my 
shop superintendent — 

Q. That’s — 

[177] A. Manlio DeGrandis. 

Q. Why don’t you spell that for the record? 

A. That's DeGrandis, capital D- e, capital G-r-a-n-d-i-s. 

Q. And his first name? 

A. Manlio, M-a-n-l-i-o. He had called Manlio on the 
telephone and stated that he would not be coming back 
to work. He had gotten a full-time job at Wyman Gordon 
and was very happy there. And told him that that was it, 
basically. And I heard that confirmation of his working 


26a 


there from another worker, Paul McCarthy, who came in 
on that same day, the 18th, to tell us he wouldn’t be 
coming back. And he mentioned the fact — when he saw 
Manlio and me together, that Joe Parenti was working 
full-time and wouldn’t be coming back. And also Kenny 
Seaver, another fellow who was working full-time, | 
believe at Antonelli at that time, and wouldn’t be coming 
back. 

Q. And just for the record, Wyman Gordon is located 
where? 

A. Grafton or Worcester. I’m not sure. 

Q. And that’s approximately how far from your plant? 

A. Oh, 25 minutes, I guess. 

Q. And Antonelli is located where? 

A. Antonelli is down in, were [sic] located in Quincy. 

Q. What’s [sic] about what? 

[178] A. An hour. 

Q. From your plant? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Edward Windsor. 

A. Ed Windsor was one of those three fellows that 
came in together. And he essentially stated the same 
thing that Bob Cibelli said. That he wanted to come back 
to work and asked if it would be okay if he didn’t come 
back the following Monday, but the next Monday, which 
would have been the 28th of November, because it was 
his birthday, and he wouldn’t reach a certain age — he 
didn’t want to jeopardize his union pension. So Manlio 
and I said, sure. And that’s when he did in fact come 
back on the — he had promised us on the 18th that he 
would be back on the 28th. 

Q. And did he come back on the 28th? 

A. On the 28th he came back. 

Q. And do you know did he ever resign from the 
union? 


— 


— 


27a 


A. I don't know. 

Q. Did he ever indicate to you that he intended to 
resign from the union? 

A. I don’t recall. 

Q. James Chiasson. 

A. James Chaisson was one of the drivers, and he 
resigned I believe immediately. 

Q. From the union? 

[179] A. Yes, immediately when the strike started. 
And he crossed the picket line and worked throughout 
the strike. I heard, not from him directly but through his 
supervisor, John Duckworth, that he no longer wished to 
have a union in there. 

Q. And did you hear that during the course of the 
strike? 

A. From John Duckworth. 

Q. Yeah, that’s what I meant. 

A. Yes. 

Q. All right. Stephen Brodeur. 

A. Stephen Brodeur, essentially the same thing as 
James Chiasson. He was a driver. He was even more out- 
spoken. He used to talk about how the union was [sic] 

joke. This I heard directly from him and John Duckworth. 
And how he was just so happy that the union wasn’t 
there anymore. He also resigned immediately and crossed 
the picket line and worked throughout the strike. 

Q. And these comments with regards to his feelings 
concerning the union — were they made during the strike 
to you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Paul McCarthy. 

A. Paul McCarthy came in the morning of the 18th — 

Q. First, what’s his position? 

[180] A. He is a welder. 

Q. All right. 


28a 


A. He came in the morning of the 18th and again told 
Manlio and me together that he would not be coming 
back, was working in a machine shop and applied for a 
full-time position as a Postman, I believe. 

Q. Did he say what the [sic] machine shop was that — 

A. No. He might have, but I forgot. 

Q. Okay. All right. 

A. There again, he was regretful that things worked 
out the way they did. He wished us the best of luck, 
volunteered that information that I said about Kenny 
Seaver working at Antonelli, Joe Parenti was working at 
Wyman Gordon. He said he would be happy to work for 
us part-time if we wanted him to. He indicated and told 
me that as far as he could tell, most of the men that he 
talked to had no longer wished to have a union in the 
company. They were quite upset about the way the 
union handled it, telling the men was [sic] going on and 
so forth. And he indicated that if there were an election, 
he would vote against it and felt that most of the men 
would also. 

I also heard there again, not directly but from my 
brother Anthony, that he had told Anthony that he was 
afraid to cross the picket line. 

Q. And was this discussion with Paul McCarthy that 
[181] you had just related — was that prior to your 
sending the telegram to the union? 

A. Yes, I believe it was the morning of the 18th. 

Q. The next employee is Giao, G-i-a-o, Huynh, H-u-y- 
n-h. 

A. Giao is a welder in the shop. He resigned imme di- 
ately. 

Q. When you say he resigned — 

A. Well, he told my shop superintendent that he 
resigned. And my shop superintendent told me — 

Q.When you say resigned, are you talking about 


29a 


resigned from the company or from the union? 

A. From the union. And he crossed the picket line 
and worked throughout the strike. He told Manlio, my 
shop superintendent, that he didn’t want a union there. 
He was happy there was no union there. 

Q.And your shop superintendent conveyed this 
information to you? 

A. To me. 

Q. And did he convey that information to you prior 
to your sending the telegram on the 28th? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Gary Boudreau. 

A. Gary Boudreau was one of the three men again who 
came in the office that day. And he was quite disgusted, 
[182] very disgusted with the union. The union wasn’t 
talking to him, wasn’t telling him anything. He wanted 
to come back to work. And again, we said fine, come 
whenever. He came back the following Monday and told 
me that he was going to resign on Friday and then | 
believe during that week he said yes, I think I heard from 
Manlio that he had resigned. 

Q. And that’s the week of November 21st? 

A. He came back on the 21st. 

Q. So as of the time you had sent the telegram, he had 
made these comments to you, had come back to work 
and had stated to managment that he had resigned from 
the union? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Kien Nguyen. And the spelling of that is K-i-e-n, 
N-g-u-y-e-n. 

A. Kien came back on the 28th. But he told us he was 
coming back on the 28th on [sic] the 18th. Again, he 
came in on the 18th. 

Q. This was the 18th of November? 

A. The 18th of November. And said that all along he 


30a 


had said he would come back to work when Eddy Wind- 

sor came back to work. Eddy Windsor was his working 

foreman. And when he heard that Ed was going to come 

back on the 28th, he said I'll come back on the 28th 

also. 
(Pause for tape change) 

[183] Q. And he said this to you on the 18th? 

A. He said this to Mr. Manlio and me, right. He came 
in the shop. And he told us that he had resigned the 
same night. He had told us that he had resigned that 
very same night, the same night of the strike vote. 

Q. So that’s back to October 13th, correct? 

A. Yes, that’s what he told us. He said, I already 
resigned. I just want to come back to work. 

Q. Sang Nguyen, S-a-n-g, N-g-u-y-e-n. 

A. Again, Sang resigned right away. 

Q. Again, please indicate on the record when you say 
resigned, are you referring to resigning from the company 
or from the union? 

A. From the union. There again, from my shop super- 
intendent I found out he resigned. I know he immedi- 
ately crossed the picket line and worked throughout the 
strike. Again, through my shop superintendent I would 
hear that he was very happy that there was not a union 
there anymore. 

Q. And the shop superintendent is? 

A. Manlio DeGrandis. 

Q. Okay. Kenneth Seaver. What was his position? 

A. He was a layout man. He picketed right up until 
the last day of picketing, which was the 18th. He came 
in that morning to pick up his tools. He was one of the 
few [184] men who had some of his own tools in the 
shop. He came in to pick up his tools and saw me in the 
morning. He said he wouldn’t be coming back. He was 
going to Florida. 


312 


He came back a little while later in the morning and 
told my shop superintendent that he had inadvertently 
left some more tools there and came to pick them up. He 
told him that he was going to work at Antonelli Iron 
Works and he would definitely not be back, and he used 
very strong language. 

(Pause) 

Q. On Richard Boudreau, what information did you 
have concerning him when you sent the telegram? 

A. Well, I remember about Richard Boudreau that he 
was another person who was interested in getting rid of 
the union. 

Q. And how did this come to your attention? 

A. Through my shipping supervisor, John Duckworth, 
and also Gerald Sauer, our accountant, had told me that 
he had come to him to find out how to go about getting 
rid of the union. And he said, well, he had given him 
the name of the NLRB. 

Q. Who gave — 

A. Gerald Sauer. 

Q. Gave to Mr. Boudreau the name of the NLRB? 

A. Right. 

[185] Q. And who indicated that to you? 

A. Both John Duckworth and Gerry Sauer. 

Q. And did they indicate when all of this happenes [ sic] ? 

A. Well, this was around the month of September, 
before the negotiations took place. 

Q. Now, Mr. Boudreau — did he work at all during the 
strike? 

A. No. 

Q. David Duplisea. 

A. David Duplisea came back to work after the picket 
line was through. He was afarid to cross the picket line, 
according to what he told Scott Duplisea, his brother 

who is a management person in our company. That he 


32a 


was afraid to cross the picket line because he worked as 
a — his main job wa [sic] a fireman. He belonged to the 
fireman’s union. He was a part-time truckdriver for us. 
And then he was a PFO, or whatever the union measures 
are from one union to another. He indicated also through 
Scott, his brother, that he was against the union in this 
company of ours — that we didn’t need one. And he 
would have voted against it if he had the opportunity. 

Q. And Mr. Duplisea, is it your understanding he 
resigned from the union? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And this was after the picketing was over, is that 
[186] correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. But prior to your telegram of the 28th of Novem- 
ber? 

A. Correct. 

Q. And were you aware of that fact when you sent the 
telegram on the 28th? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Michael Coyne, C-o-y-n-e. 

A. Michael Coyne. Um, he came into the shop, again 
around — I’m going to guess the middle of November or 
before the 28th. And he just wished me luck. He said 
he’s sorry the way things worked out, but he had found 
another job elsewhere and would not be coming back. 

Q. And did they have personal lockers there for tools 
and — 

A. Weil, he was picking up some — he was one of the 
fellows that had some tools, and he was picking up his 
tools at the same time. 

Q. Did he indicate where this other position was that 
he had? 

A. It was a shop in Worcester. And no, he did not. 
It was just a small shop. That's all he said. 


33a 


Q. Paul Greenglass. 

A. Paul is very, very outspoken. 

[187] Q. Well first, what was his position? 

A. Paul, which? 

Q. Greenglass. 

A. Greenglass was a welder. He was very, very out- 
spoken against the union. The night the strike vote was 
taken, he came back talking about how crazy those guys 
are that support the union. The company would be bet- 
ter off without a union. He continuously — he crossed 
the picket line and worked throughout the strike. He 
made these remarks not only to me, but to other people 
in the company — Manlio, Scott Duplisea, Michael J. 
Auciello. He was very, very outspoken. 

Q. And — 

A. It was clear in my mind he was not a union sup- 
porter. 

Q. And did he continue to work during the picketing? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And did you have information concerning whether 
he had resigned from the union? 

A. He reportedly told my supervisor, the superin- 
tendent, that he had resigned. So I had reason to believe 
he had. 

Q. And were you aware of this prior to sending the 
telegram? 

A. Yes. 

[188] Q. Quang Nguyen, Q-u-a-n-g, N-g-u-y-e-n. 

A. Quang came in on the 18th. 

Q. November 18th? 

A. November 18th. He indicated that he had been 
afraid to cross that line again for personal safety reasons. 

Q. Who did he say this to? 

A. To me and Manlio together. 


Q. All right. 


34a 


A. And that he would be back to work for us on the 
28th of November, the week after — a week from the fol- 
lowing Monday. And he also indicated that he was going 
to resign from the union. 

Q. Now, does he have contact with John Duckworth at 
allꝰ 

A. Not really. He's not in his department. However, 
all the men talk to each other up there in the shop. 

Q. Had Mr. Duckworth passed any information on to 
you concerning Quang Nguyen? 

A. There was a time when, yes. Out at the coffee 
truck Quang made some remarks about how he really 
thought the union was a mistake and a joke, we didn’t 
need one — that type of thing. 

Q. And was this information passed on to you by Mr. 
Duckworth? 

A. Yes. 

[189] Q. And were you aware of that information 
when you sent the telegram of November 28th? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Michael Barbour. 

A. Michael Barbour worked in John Duckworth’s 
department. He was on vacation on the day of the strike. 
And John Duckworth told me that he had called him, 
told him what had happened and told him about the 
strike. And Mike indicated he would be back to work on 
the Monday following. And in fact he did. He crossed 
the picket line, came to work. And John told me he had 
resigned I believe on that Monday from the union. 

Q. Just on your last sentence. Do I understand that 
John Duckworth told you that Michael Barbour had 
stated he had resigned from the union? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And you were aware of that information when you 
sent your telegram? 


0 — 


35a 


A. Ves. 

Q. Phuc Tran, P.-h- u- c, T-r-a-n. What information do 
you have with regard to him, or what information did 
you have as of the 28th of November? 

A. Well, I know that he had crossed the picket line 
and worked throughout the duration of the strike. | 
knew from Manlio, he had told Manlio that he had 
resigned I think [190] right away from the union. He 
was another fellow that used to make comments to Man- 
lio, Manlio told me, about how this place was a much 
happier shop without the union. 

Q. And were you aware of that prior to sending the 
telegram on the 28th? 

A. Ves. 

Q. Frank Tomolillo. 

A. Frank Tomolillo picketed the first half day on the 
Friday when the strike started. He came in at noontime. 
He said, I’ve had it with this union. I’m going to resign 
right away. 

Q. Who did he say this to? 

A. Me. He said it to me. And that was it. He didn’t 
picket anymore, and he worked throughout the strike. 

Q. He crossed the picket line every day? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did he ever make any comments with regard to 
his feelings concerning the union? 

A. He was not — general comments about, this union is 
for the birds, What do we have this union for? He would 
say things like that to me often. He’d say things like that 
to my brother Mike quite a bit. 

Q. Now. Mr. Tomolillo — would you describe his dut- 
ies? Was he a member of the union, to your knowledge? 

A. Well, originally he was a layout man throughout 
[191] the shop. 

Q. Why don’t you just describe to the Judge what a 
layout man does? 


36a 


A. A layout man is a man who reads a blueprint and 
assembles things and gets them ready for the welder. 
He’s kind of like a very crucial experienced type of 
person. 

Q. He doesn’t do any actual welding — 

A. No, no. He would do tack welding, assembly type 
welding. And the welder would do the finished bulk of 
the welding. 

Q. Okay. 

A. He was a layout man for many years, then he 
became a working foreman. He has been with the com- 
pany for many, many years. And more recently, in the 
last ten years or so, he has been in the estimating depart- 
ment. But he retained his union membership so that he 
on occasion could go out and work in the shop as a lay- 
out man. 

Q. Have there been occasions in the last ten years 
where he does go out and do work in the shop? 

A. Ves. 

Q. And can you give us some examples of those? 

A. Well, I can’t remember the jobs specifically. But 
when his experience was needed, when we were short 
handed or whatever, we would ask him to go out in the 
shop and do some layout work. 

[192] Q. And would he work with the layout men as 
far as preparing their jobs for the layout men? 

A. He would probably work with a mechanic when he 
was doing this. 

Q. I see. And has he been — all the benefits that are 
set forth in the collective bargaining agreement, vaca- 
tions, holidays — does he receive those benefits? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And does he have his dues paid under the contract 
with the union? 


37a 


A. Ves. He's paying dues forever. He's always been 
part of the welding team there. 

Q. Now, after the commencement of the picketing 
activity, did you engage supplementary employees? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And was one of those employees Gerardo Mazzola? 

A. Right, correct. Gerardo Mazzola. 

Q. When was he employed? 

A. He was retired from our company. 

Q. He had worked for you in the past — 

A. Yes. 

Q. He had retired? 

A. He had worked — we asked him to come back and 
work part-time after the strike started to help get the 
work out the door. 

[193] Q. And did he have peculiar restrictions as to 
the amount of hours that he could work for you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What were those? 

A. He could only work, I believe, less than 40 hours 
in any one month. 

Q. And was that related to his pension eligibility? 

A. That, I believe, was the reason. 

Q. That if he worked more than 40 hours a month 
in the trade, he would be jeopardizing his pension. Is 
that correct? 

A. That’s as I understand it. 

Q. All right. So did he work the 39 hours or so on a 
monthly basis — 

A. Right. 

Q. Durin [sic] the course of the picketing? 

A. Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Can you spell his name please? 
THE WITNESS: T-o-m-o-1-i-l-l-o. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: No, Mazzola. 


38a 


THE WITNESS: Oh, I’m sorry. M.-a-z-z-o-l — one 
1? 

MR. O’REILLY: Two L’s. 

THE WITNESS: It’s supposed to be one L. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Two Z’s, one L. 

MR. O’REILLY: Right. That seems to be the [194] 
consensus, your Honor. Two Z’s and one L. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Isn’t that like the margerine 
[sic]? Same spelling? Okay. 

BY MR. O’REILLY: 

Q. And did he continue working — was he employed 
during the first week of the picketing? 

A. I believe he was. 

Q. And did he continue on this 39-hour basis? At 
least was he still employed at the end of the picketing? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And was he still employed at the time of your tele- 
gram? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Now, during the course of the time that he was 
working for you on the basis you have just described, 
did he make any comments with regard to his feelings 
concerning the union? 

A. Gerry Mazzola was very outspoken throughout his 
career at Auciello Iron Works about anti-union feelings. 

Q. And what type of work was he doing? 

A. He was a layout man. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: The question was, during the 
period of the strike. Was he saying something some- 
thing about the union? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, your Honor, He made fre- 
quent [195] remarks of what’s going on with those guys? 
Why do they need a union here? He was just very clearly 
anti-union. 


\ 


2 


39a 


BY. MR. O’REILLY: 

Q. Did he make any comments about his own personal 
feelings concerning the support or lack of support for a 
union? 

A. Yes, he did. 

Q. What were those? 

A. He said if he had the occasion, he would vote 
against the union. And he did not feel — 

Q. Did he say this to you? 

A. He did not feel that — he did not want a union him- 
self and that a lot of the men felt the same way. 

Q. Now, did he say this to you? 

A. Yes. He told me that many a time. And he told 
Manlio that. He told Mike Auciello that. They told me 
he told them that. 

Q. ANd [sic] he crossed the picket line each day that 
he worked, is that correct? 

A. He crossed the picket line to work. I believe it 
was starting the first week of the strike. 

Q. Van Lee, V-a-n, L-e-e. 

A. Van Lee was a welder. He did not — he had applied 
to work at Auciello Iron Works before the strike, I 
believe a week before the strike started. And he came to 
work, [196] started working for us I believe the first 
week of the strike. He crossed the picket line and 
worked throughout the strike. 

Q. And did he ever join the union, to your knowledge? 

A. No, he never joined. Again, through Manlio, he 
would make remarks that he was not a union supporter. 

Q. And did Manlio pass this on to you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And you were aware of those remarks when you 
sent the telegram on the 28th? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Michael Connolly. 


40a 


A. Michael Connolly was hired I believe in the first 
week or two following the strike. He was hired to 
replace one of the men in the receiving department. John 
Duckworth — 

Q. And the receiving department is part of the original 
bargaining unit? 

A. Yes, the shipping/receiving department. There 
again, John Duckworth made remarks to me that Con- 
nolly wasn’t a union brother. 

Q. And he crossed the picket line each day? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did he ever join the union? 

A. No. 

[197] Q. And was he employed as of the 28th of 
November? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And by the way, Van Lee, was he also employed 
on that same 28th? 

A. Yes, he was. 

Q. Clayton White. 

A. Clayton White. He answered an ad that we had 
placed in the newspaper during the strike. He worked in 
the yard, a yard man under Manlio DeGrandis. 

Q. And under Massachusetts law, did you take steps 
to place any notation on the newspaper ad concerning 
the existence of a labor dispute? 

A. Yes. On the bottom of our ad we had labor dis- 
pute. 

Q. And Clayton White responded to that ad? 

A. He responded to the ad, crossed the picket line, 
worked throughout the strike. And again, I heard 
through Manlio that Clayton White was a gentleman 
who did not wish to have a union represent him. 

Q. And is that the — and Clayton White, was he still 
employed by your company as of the 28th of November, 


4la 


when you sent a telegram that is marked as General 
Counsel’s Exhibit 8, was sent to Local 501? 

A. Yes, the telegram you showed me? 

Q. Yes. 

[198] A. Yes. The telegram that we sent that follow- 
ing Monday? 

Q. That’s correct. 

A. Ves. 

Q. Okay. And is the information concerning what you 
have just testified, was that the basis for your belief as 
of the 28th that a union did not represent a majority of 
the Auciello employees? 

A. Yes, it was clear in my mind. 


R * * 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


Q. Mr. Auciello, it seems like you heard some reports 
and had some employees speak to you about their union 
sentiments. You just testified to that. That’s correct, 
right? 

A. Correct. 

[199] Q. And this had been an ongoing thing, this 
speaking to you about the union, isn’t that correct? 

A. No. 

Q. When did it occur? I thought it was ongoing. 

A. No, this all started with the strike. 

Q. Can you recall the first date that you found out 
that people didn’t support the union? 

A. The night of the strike, when men crossed the 
picket line. 

Q. When was the last conversation that you had with 
someone that they didn’t support the union? 

A. I can’t recall the last one. 

(Pause) 


42a 


Q. Do you know whether it was November Ist or 
December Ist or any time frame at all? 

A. The discussions about remarks made to me were 
ongoing during the strike. And I don’t really recall the 
last time someone gave me an anti-type of remark. 


R * * 


Q. Did you have any conversations with anyone or 
learn about their sentiments after the 17th? 

A. Yes. As I indicated the next day, the 18th, quite 
a few discussions took place. 

[200] Q. Did you have any conversations that you can 
recall now after the 18th? 

A. During that week of the 21st there were discussions, 
comments that I have indicated. 

Q. When did it come to your attention that the union 
didn’t represent in your mind the majority of the 
employees? 

A. It became a serious discussion the morning after we 
received the telegram indicating that the union had 
accepted our latest proposal. And we sat down and had 
a conference, as I indicated, to discuss the telegram that 
was sent to us. And since in that telegram it had stated — 
through all our experience of negotiating, we were always 
told that the men had the last say and the men are the 
deciding factor. And we went down the list of them and 
in our minds, what we knew then who had crossed the 
picket line, who had come back to work, who had told us 
they worked elsewhere and so forth, and it was just a 
logical way to respond to that telegram. In our minds, 
the union no longer represented by a large majority the 
wishes of the men. So in order to be able to say that in 
our telegram, we wanted to logically — we logically dis- 
cussed it, in other words, at that time. 


R * * 


— = = 


— eer at nl 


43a 


[203] Q. You wanted employees to resign from the 
union, didn’t you? 

A. I wanted employees to work for Auciello Iron 
Works. 

Q. Didn’t you want them to resign from the union 
before they came back to work? 

A. I wanted the men to work Auciello Iron Works. 

Q. Would you answer the question, Mr. Auciello? 

A. No. Resigning was not a condition of working. 

Q. Didn't you suggest to them to them [sic] through a 
letter in October that they should resign and come back 
to work? 

A. No. I gave them the option of resigning to prevent 
possible union claims. 

Q. Do you recall that you wrote under your signature 
on October 14th about resigning from the union? 

A. I recall a letter which mentions in it the option of 
resigning. I wish you'd stop putting words in my mouth. 

Q. I’m just trying to get the facts from you, sir. And 
let me show you this. There is a typewritten addendum 
with a resignation. 

[204] A. Yes. 

Q. Did you prepare that? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Why did you prepare that, Mr. Auciello. 

MR. O’REILLY: Your Honor, I think at this point 
I'm going to object to discussing this particular docu- 
ment. I think the court, your Honor ruled that it was 
remotely — might be remotely material. But apparently, 
it’s going to be the subject matter of lengthy cross exam- 
ination. And I’m going to again raise the objection as to 
its materiality. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Overruled. Please answer the 
question. 


44a 


BY MR. HERBSTER: 

A. Yes, I prepared the statement. 

Q. Why did you prepare that, Mr. Auciello? 

A. So that if an individual wished to resign from the 
union, they could use that format. 

Q. Did any employee ask you to prepare such a resig- 
nation form? 

A. What the employees did do was indicate a willing- 
ness to cross the picket line and work. And upon hearing 
that, I called up my attorney and stated that to him. 
And he told me some of the possible repercussions of 
my men doing that could be that they could be fined. 
And if those men wished to avoid the possibility of a 
fine, they [205] may resign from the union. And we dis- 
cussed how could they resign. And he said, they may 
make this type of a statement. I said, would it be okay if 
I drafted that for their resignation if they wish to resign? 
And he said, that’s perfectly fine. 

Q. So then your answer would be, if I am correct, 
that no employee asked you to draft that particular type- 
written note? 

A. They asked me how could they come back to work 
without suffering repercussions. 

Q. I take it your answer is no, that no one asked you 
to draft it. 

A. They did not say in those words, draft me a let- 
ter. I don’t see how they could say that. 

Q. Let me show you What's been marked as Respond- 
ent's Exhibit 2B. Have you seen that before? That's a 
handwritten resignatiion [sic]. 

A. Yes, that’s correct. 

Q. Do you know who prepared that handwritten form 
without the name or signature filled in? 

A. I did, after the conversation I just explained. 

Q. And that’s your handwriting? 

A. Yes, it is. 


—— te - 


45a 


Q. Had anyone on October 13th or before that time 
asked you — any employee asked you how to resign from 
the [206] union? 

A. No. 


[228] Q. You had some conversations with Stephen 
Brodeur about the union? 

A. Stephen Brodeur? Um, more so through his super- 
visor, John Duckworth. 

Q. So you didn’t have any direct conversations with 
Stephen Brodeur about the union? 

[229] A. I did recall one time, once or twice where 
Stephen would tell me that he thought the union was a 
joke. But this was volunteered to me. We didn’t explore 
the comment. 

Q. Is that all he said, that he thought the union was 
a joke? 

A. He thought it was unnecessary — it was a joke. 

Q. And that was it? 

A. Yeah, something like that, yeah. 

Q. Did he ever tell you, or Duckworth ever tell you 
that he was happy the union wasn’t there anymore? 

A. John Duckworth told me that Stephen Brodeur did 
not like the union — words to that effect that he thought 
the union was a joke. That's the way he would say it. 

Q. But the specific question was, did he ever say that — 
did either Duckworth or Brodeur say to you that Brodeur 
was happy the union wasn’t there anymore? 

A. No, I don’t recall those exact words. 

Q. Did you testify on direct examination that Mr. 
Brodeur told you or Mr. Duckworth told you that Mr. 
Brodeur said that he was happy that the union wasn’t 
there anymore? 

A. If I did, I don’t recall saying those exact words. 


46a 


Q. When would it have been, Mr. Auciello, that Mr. 
Brodeur told you that the union was a joke or that Mr. 
Duckworth told you that Mr. Brodeur said the union was 
a joke? 

[230] MR. O’REILLY: Well, which is it? 

MR. HERBSTER: I don’t know. I’m asking — 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Try each statement separately, if 
you don’t mind. 

MR. HERBSTER: Okay. Maybe I should clarify. 

BY MR. HERBSTER: 

Q. Did Mr. Brodeur tell you directly that the union 
was a joke, or was it otherwise? 

A. It was through John Duckworth. 

Q. Just for clarification — I don’t want to beat a dead 
horse — but Mr. Duckworth then told you that Mr. 
Brodeur thought the union was a joke. Is that correct? 

A. Um-hum. Yes. 

Q. When did Mr. Duckworth tell you this? 

A. This would have been immediately following the 
first few days after the strike started. 

Q. Did Mr. Duckworth tell you when Mr. Brodeur 
said that? 

A. Um, not specifically. I can’t recall that he said — 
no, I can’t recall that he had told me when he had told 
him that. 

Q. So you don’t know whether Mr. Brodeur told Mr. 
Duckworth that that day or six months before, correct? 

A. Correct. 


I 


47a 


PATRICIA FERRERA 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[238] Q. And directing your attention to he week of 
November 18th, 1988, did you have occasion to see Mr. 
DeLarda? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. And what was the occasion, and if you had a dis- 
cussion with Mr. DeLarda, would you relate what that 
discussion was? 

A. Yes, sir. He was in the office at the time. And I 
ran into him in the hall. And we just had a few words. 
I asked him if he was going to be coming back to work 
for us. He said no, that he had another job somewhere 
else and that he would not be back to work for Auciello. 


Q. And was that the same day that the picket line 
finally went down? 


8 * * 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


[240] JUDGE ZANKEL: Ms. Ferrera, can you tell us 


with greater certainty what day you spoke with Mr. 
DeLarda? 


THE WITNESS: I want to say it was around the 18th 
of November. 


48a 


EXCERPTS FROM TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 
OF AUGUST 9, 1989 


RALPH AUCIELLO (RECALLED) 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


[253] Q. Now, Mr. Auciello, you say that with regard 
to General Counsel 14 — the one with Auciello Iron 
Works on the top — you saw that on November 28th, 
1988. Correct? 

A. I believe I did. 

Q. Do you know if you saw it before that day? 

A. I don’t believe I did. 

Q. Who made those check marks, if you know? 

A. I believe it was Attorney O'Reilly. 

Q. And how did he come to make those check marks? 

A. We were having — discussing the telegram. We were 
having a meeting, and we were discussing the names of 
the employees, and how we felt they felt about [254] 
the union, and he was making these check marks. 

Q. After those check marks were made, did that docu- 
ment come back to your possession? 

A. Well, I had this in my files. So I must have retained 
a copy of it. 

Q. And you had it in your files with the check marks? 

A. Yes, just as — like this. 

Q. After the check marks were made, you looked at 
the check marks and the document. Didn’t you? 

A. I be — I must have. 

Q. The check marks on the left — to the left of the 
names — 

A. Yes. 

Q. — what do they mean? 

A. I believe they would indicate our opinion as to an 
individual, who if there were an election, would vote 
against the union. 


49a 


Q. The check marks on the right — to the right of the 
name, what do they mean? 
A. In our opinion, the individuals who would vote for 
the union. 
*_* * 


256] Q. Directing your attention to General Coun- 
sel’s Exhibit No. 15, which is the shop employees with 
the yes, no, will notes — those words on the top, have 
you seen that before? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When did you see that? 

A. Well, this — this — I made — these were my own 
check marks, and I don’t remember the date that I — that 
I made these marks. 

Q. Well, was it before the document we referred to, 
General Counsel’s 14? 

A. Yes. Must have been before. 

Q. Why do you say it must have been? 

A. Because there are some individuals on this list who 
we felt less sure of, as to their decision, than there were 
on this document. 

R * * 


[257] MR. HERBSTER: Let's just see if we under- 
stand that document 15, Mr. Auciello. 

There are four columns, and there is a — a column 
headed Yes, with some words crossed out, and check 
marks. 

BY MR. HERBSTER: 

Q. What does that column mean? 

A. Those were the individuals — at the time of this 
meeting, whenever this was held, that we felt very sure 
would vote against the union, were there an election to 
be held. 

Q. When you say “we’’, whom do you mean by we? 


50a 


A. We, the members of that meeting. 

Q. Who was at that meeting, if you can recall? 

A. Most probably myself, Attorney O'Reilly, and 
members of management. 

Q. Those check marks are your check marks, [258] 
though. Correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And the column No, what does that mean? 

A. That’s the column — at that time, that if we had 
any doubt at all, in your minds, no matter how slight. 
If any of the individuals in that meeting had doubt in 
their mind, we would — I — I put a check on that col- 
umn. 

Q. Doubt as to what? 

A. How they would — if there were to be an election 
held, how they would vote. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: You inserted the check marks 
on GC-15? 
THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. Yes, Your Honor. 


R * * 


[259] Q. Now, you based your decision as to where to 
put the check marks on this document, General Counsel 
15 — you based on [sic] that on a number of factors. 
Didn’t you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you base where to put the check marks [260] 
on your conversations with employees about their union 
sentiments? 

A. I based it upon the opinion of the people in the 
room at that time. 

Q. And the opinion of the people in the room, that 
was based on conversations that they had with employ- 
ees? Is that one thing it was — 

A. That was — 


5la 


Q. — based on? 

A. — one of the — that was one of the reasons. 

Q. And was it, also, based on resignations from the 
union? 

A. That would have been another indication. 

Q. Was it based on people who didn’t strike? Was that 
what it was based on, also? 

A. That — 

Q. Whether they did or didn’t strike, was that one of 
the factors? 

A. That — well, the fact that — yes, that would have 
been another factor. 

Q. And reports that you got from other employees — 
that supervisors may have gotten from other employees, 
as to a person’s union sentiments, not their own? Was 
that one of the factors used to — 

[261] THE WITNESS: That was the first — the 
first question, right, was how the people in the room 
rendered their opinions? 

MR. HERBSTER: The first question was — well, let 
me rephrase it just to make it clear. 

BY MR. HERBSTER: 

Q. Some people spoke directly to you. Correct? Some 
employees? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And whatever they said to you, that was one of 
the factors that you — 

A. Yes. 


R * * 


[291] Q. Now, let me turn to Mr. Richard Boudreau. 
Do you remember him? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I believe you testified that he had tried to get rid 
of the union, prior to the strike? 

A. I testified that that was reported to me. Yes. 


52a 


Q. And he did strike? He was a picket. Correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You saw him on the picket line? 

A. Yes. 2 

Q. In fact, there was a newspaper article published in 
the local paper sometime in October about the strike. 
Did you see that at the time that came out? 

A. Ves, I did. 

Q. You read that, and did you see Mr. Boudreau 
quoted in there? 

[292] A. Yes, I did. 

Q. And his comments were in favor of the union in 
that article. Weren’t they? 

A. I don’t recall his comments. 


R * * 


[294] JUDGE ZANKEL: Okay. Do you remember 
the question? 

THE WITNESS: Was this comment in favor of the 
union? Is that your question? 

MR. HERBSTER: Yes. 

A. I guess so. 

Q. And when you read that, you knew that — at that 
time, that you had heard that Mr. Boudreau had tried to 
get rid of the union? 

MR. O’REILLY: Well, there is no evidence that he 
read this back in November. 
[295] MR. HERBSTER: I asked him that. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: He asked him. 
THE WITNESS: No, I — I had read this. 
MR. O’REILLY: Oh, okay. 
BY MR. HERBSTER: 
Q. In October? 
MR. O’REILLY: I'm sorry. 


— — I 


53a 


BY MR. HERBSTER: 
Q. Correct? 
A. Yes, I was aware of this article. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: Right. Right. That’s exactly 
what he said before — 
MR. O’REILLY: Okay. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: — Mr. O'Reilly. 
MR. O’REILLY: I withdraw that. 
JUDGE ZANKEL: Okay. 
A. And I guess that it appears that he was in favor. He 
was out there picketing. 
Q. And that was at a time after you had heard that he 
was trying to get rid of the union? Correct? 
A. That’s correct. 
R * * 


RECROSS EXAMINATION 


[321] JUDGE ZANKEL: Okay. You have General 
Counsel’s 14 and 15 in front of you? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: All right. Now, I recognize you 
indicated earlier when I questioned you that you are not 
sure of the precise date General Counsel’s 15 [322] was 
worked on, that is when — the date you put the check 
marks on. Right? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. ‘ 

JUDGE ZANKEL: But it was at a meeting among 
the managerial personnel of the respondent? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, Your Honor. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: And that was a separate meeting 
from the meeting that you had with those same managers 
on the 28th of November? 

THE WITNESS: To the best of my recollection, it 
is, Your Honor. 


54a 


JUDGE ZANKEL: But Mr. O’Reilly was not at that 
first meeting — 

THE WITNESS: No. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: — is that correct? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, he was. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: He was? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: He was at both? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Can you give us approximately — 
are you talking in terms of a week, two weeks, or what, 
something like that? Approximately how long before the 
28th did you work on GC-15, at that other meeting? 

[323] (Pause.) 

THE WITNESS: One to two weeks it the best I 
can, honestly, remember. I know it had to be toward 
the end. 

XR X * 


[325] JUDGE ZANKEL: All right. At the time of 
[sic] just after General Counsel’s 15 was prepared, was — 
was there, at that meeting, a discussion of whether or 
not the respondent should advise the union that it 
doubted its majority? 

THE WITNESS: No, I don’t recall that being a dis- 
cussion. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: Was there a discussion, at that 
particular meeting, among the managers, that the results 
of tallying General Counsel’s 15 reflected that the union 
lost its majority? 

THE WITNESS: I recall it being in the context of a 
would there be — if we could have an election today type 
of scenario, how would the election [326] turn out, and 
then we said, well, let’s find out how we think it would 
turn out, and that’s when I recall the check mark score 


card thing here. | 
Xx * * 


55 


[328] JUDGE ZANKEL: Was there any decision 
made, as to what the next move of the employer would 
be at that point? 

THE WITNESS: No. 


XR XR * 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


[344] Q. Of the employees, that had — in the Labor 
Board Certification for Local 501, of the employees 
that had, in 19 — in September and October of 1988, 
how many of those employees were involved and worked 
for your company at the time of the election? 

THE WITNESS: In the bargaining unit? 
MR. O’REILLY: Yes. 

A. In the bargaining unit, none. 

Q. None. All right. Now, the Judge asked you sev- 
eral questions concerning General Counsel’s 14 and 
15. General Counsel 14, which is on the Auciello Iron 
Works letterhead, do I understand that that was put 
together sometime prior or the day that you sent the tele- 
gram for the purposes of your own in-house [345] deter- 
mination as to whether or not employees supported or 
did not support the union? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And do I gather that you met with three or four 
management people, plus your attorney, and — is that 
correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And was it the consensus of this group reflected in 
this General Counsel’s 14? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Now, the earlier document, General Counsel’s 15, 
which is not on your letterhead and has the names plus 
four columns, for what purpose was that put together? 
Was that put together for assessing their overall feeling 


56a 


of management as to the union sentiment among the 
employees or was that done with regard to a worst case 
scenario for an election? 

A. Yes. As I indicated, we were — the worst case 
scenario. 

Q. And if you felt that the — in any one of the names 
reflected in General Counsel’s 15, if you felt that there 
was even the slightest possibility of that union — that 
employee voting for the union, where did you put the 
check next to his name? 

A. In the second column. 

[346] Q. Okay. So do I gather from that that there 
might be employees that you've checked off in the 
second column that you felt actually did not support 
the union but that weren’t 100% sure of? 

A. That’s exactly correct. 

+ * * 


MANLIO DEGRANDIS 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[353] Q. All right. On Stephen Brodeur, during the 
[354] period of the negotiations and the strike, did you 
have occasion to discuss with him his feelings concerning 
the union? 

A. Stephen Brodeur worked for John Duckworth. 

Q. Yes. 

A. John Duckworth’s office and my office connect, 
like one big room. 

Q. Yes? 

A. And one day — 

Q. Excuse me, Mr. Duckworth has his own office 
there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Ya, and they was [sic] Steve Brodeur came in the 


57a 


morning, and he mention about the union, and all the 
problem they have and walked down the stairs where he 
was talking vou know, he don't care about the union, 
but previous the negotiations this year, several time he 
mention to me personal that he don’t — he doesn't like 
the union. He doesn’t want the union. 

Q. Mr. Brodeur said that to you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. And did you pass all of that information 
on to — 

[355] A. Ves. 

Q. — Mr. Auciello? 


Q.On Paul McCarthy, had he obtained a job else- 
where? Do you know? 

A. Yes, the morning of the 18 — 

Q. Is this still November 18th? 

A. November 18, 1988. 

Q. Okay. Yes? 


Q. Okay. And did he — either in that discussion or 
at any other time that year — state to you his feelings 
either for or against the union? 

A. He was against the union. The main reason was 
because all the years the people was paid the dues, 
[356] they never saw not a percent of it. Only the time 
there with the — for the judge of the contract. The only 
people they saw all the time was the steward. 

Q. And when did he say that to you? 

A. Oh, maybe in the summer of the 1988. 

Q. Okay. And did you pass all of that information 
on to Mr. Auciello? 

A. Yes. When we was to do the meeting. Yes. 


58a 


[358] Q. Okay. On Sang Nguyen — spelled S-A-N-G 
N-G-U-Y-E-N — did you have occasion to discuss with 
him, during the period of negotiations and the strike — 

A. Sang was one of the three guys that resign the first 
night, and approach me if he could work because lang- 
uage barrier he has for communication, like I do. 

I told — I think so, but I will check, and I mention 
it to Ralph, if the guys could go back to work right — 
right away, and Ralph said to me, that he has to check 
with you, and they draw — typed the letter the way for 
resign from the union and will have no — that way they 
have no trouble with the union. 

8 6 ¢ 


[359] Q. Now, did Mr. Nyugen [sic] ever indicate to 
you, at that time or any other time, how he felt about 
the union? 

A. He doesn’t like a union. At the time he mention to 
me guys complaining was — I can’t remember exactly 
word, but just because we talking everyday, the way 
express himself, I know full fact he — he doesn’t like the 
union. 

Q. And did he say this to you directly, or did you hear 
it from other — 

A. No, directly. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Becuase see when I — after hours I see this guy. 

Q. Okay. And was this during the period of the nego- 
tiations and the strike? 

A. Previous and during the — the — the strike. 

Q. Okay. And did you discuss this and pass this infor- 
mation on to — 

A. I mention to — 

Q. — Ralph? 

A. — Ralph, the same was one other guy. 


59a 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


[362] Q. Mr. Degrandis, you say that some people 
talked to you about how they felt about the union? 

A. Yes. 

[363] Q. Did you ever ask anyone how they felt about 
the union? 

A. No. 

Q. Let’s take the last person you talked about, Quang 
Nguyen. He told you what, again, about the union? 

A. What I just mention before. 

Q. You just said it a couple of minutes ago? 

A. Ya. 

Q. Can you repeat it, again, for me, please? 

A. F“ the union. Was nice was no longer the union 
there. It was on a coffee time — coffee break. 

Q. And that was about what day? 

A. Oh, the day come back to work. I don’t know if it 
was first day come back to work or the second day come 
back to work. 

Q. The day he came back to work. Was that during 
the strike? 

A. I just mentioned to Mr. O'Reilly, I don’t remem- 
ber if he come back before the strike or if the strike was 
over. 

S „ „* 


[370] JUDGE ZANKEL: If I were Mr. Morle, I 
would say to you that I have no use for this union? Is 
that [sic] kind of thing you say he told you? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: When? 

THE WITNESS: Several time, even before the strike, 
way before the strike. 


60a 


[372] JUDGE ZANKEL: — do you remember 
whether Mr. Cibelli told you that he had no respect for 
the union? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

JUDGE ZANKEL: When did he say that? 

THE WITNESS: When he come back to the 18 — 
the 18 — November 18, when he have the meeting, and 
even previous — before. 


** 


GERALD SAUER 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


[410] Q. Okay. Prior to the negotiations, did you 
receive any information concerning employee dissatis- 
faction with the union? 

A. The only person that talked to me about dissatis- 
faction was Dick Boudreau. 

[411] Q. And what did he say to you 

A. He — 

Q. — and about when was this? 

A. It was prior to the negotiations, either around the 
end of August or the [sic] around the beginning of 
September. Somewhere around the early part. 

He — he came in with John Duckworth, and asked 
me what they needed to do to get rid of the union, and 
I told them to call up the NLRB. 

Q. Okay. 

A. They had — they were not — they asked me to look 
it up in the telephone book. I looked it up in the phone 
book. They had a photostat copy of the telephone num- 
ber, and put the book away, and handed the photostat 
copy to John Duckworth. 

Q. Did you make any further efforts to ascertain what, 
if anything — what was the gentleman’s name again? 

A. Richard Boudreau. 


6la 


Q. What Mr. Boudreau did with this information? 

A. He told me that he — 

Q. I’m just asking you did you or did you not make 
any further inquiry? 

A. No, I did not. 

[412] Q. And did you ever hear anything further in 
that regard? 

A. He — he told me that he called up the NLRB and 
got the paperwork on it. 

Q. Okay. And did you make any further inquiry after 
that? 

A. No, I did not. 


62a 
APPENDIX C 
[General Counsel’s Exhibit 5] 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS INC. 


METAL FABRICATORS 


560 MAIN STREET INDUSTRIAL 
P.O BOX 424 STRUCTURAL 
HUDSON, MASSACHUSETTS 01749 ORNAMENTAL 
508-568-8382 


October 14, 1988 


To: Fellow Employees of Auciello lron Works, Inc. 


For the first time in the 56 years of my family’s operat- 
ing this company, (the union has forced our employees 
to go out on strike against the company. It is my inform- 
ation that our employees have been misinformed as to 
the scope of the management offer to settle this contro- 
versy,) Management is faced with a drastic increase in the 
cost of a medical program representing approximately 
7% to 8% of the wage scale. The recently expired union 
agreement called for 25% of that increase to be absorbed 
by the employees with 75% to be absorbed by the com- 
pany. The approximate cost of this increase is estimated 
to be between 8. 75 and 58.85 per hour for each employee. 
In an effort to resolve this controversy, management yes- 
terday offered to absorb that entire increase with nothing 
to be absorbed by the employees. In addition to this 
7% to 8% increase, management offered to pay a 3% wage 
increase bringing the total package increase for the 
first year of this contract to over 10%, Additionally, 
management offered to pay a 4% increase in the second 
year and a 5% increase in the third year. This total pack- 
age increase would be the highest in the industry. To our 


63a 


amazement the union rejected that proposal and has now 
forced our employees into a strike position. 


It appears this will be a long strike as we are not in a com- 
petitive position to pay more than what has already been 
proposed by management. Many of our employees have 
privately expressed a desire to continue working as they 
do not feel the union is representing their interests. My 
advice to any of you who wish to continue working is to 
take every step to avoid the union plan to assess fines 
against employees who work during this strike. Our 
attorney advises us that in the past the Union has been 
held in various cases to be entitled to impose fines on 
members working during the strikes, However, the Sup- 
reme Court has recently determined that in order to 
avoid fines by the Union, employees may tender their 
immediate resignations to the Union and may, thus, 


1. Continue working during the strike and 


2. Avoid any ability of the Union to retaliate against 
them by imposing fines. 

Should any employee wish to take advantage of this pro- 
cedure I have made available to each of you resignation 
forms. I do wish to make it clear, however, that while | 
welcome any employee who wishes to work during this 
strike, it is not a condition of your continuing to work 
that you resign from the Union and you are welcome to 
continue working whether you resign or not. 


I am hopeful that we will eventually work all of these 
problems out either with or without the Union. 


Sincrely, 


Ralph Auciello 


64a 


Date: 
To Local 501 


(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


65a 
General Counsel’s Exhibit 7] 
Western Union 
MAILGRAM SERVICE CENTER MAILGRAM 
MIDDLETOWN, VA. 22645 — 


27 AM 


4-0060308332002 11/27/88 ICS IPMMTZZ CSP BSNB 
1 6178491688 MGM TDMT SOUTH BRAINTREE MA 
11-17 0153P EST 


SHOPMANS LOCAL UNION NUMBER 501 
826 WASHINGTON ST 
SOUTH BRAINTREE MA 02184 


THIS IS A CONFIRMATION COPY OF THE FOLLOW. 
ING MESSAGE: 


6178491688 FRB TDMT SOUTH BRAINTREE MA 56 
11-27 0153P EST 

ICS IPMFONE 

RALPH AUCIELLO, 5088352441 


33 KINGS MOUNTIAN DR 
WEST BOYLSTON MA 01583 
DEAR SIRS 


AFTER CAREFUL CONSIDERATION THE PRO. 
POSED CONTRACT SUBMITTED BY YOUR COM. 
PANY ON NOVEMBER 17 1988 TO LOCAL UNION 
501 HAS UNANIMOUSLY RATIFIED IN ITS ENTIRE- 
TY BY OUR NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE, THE 
STRIKE AT YOUR PLANT HAS CONCLUDED AS 
OF THIS DATE AND EMPLOYEES HAVE BEEN 
ADVISED TO RETURN TO WORK ON MONDAY 
NOVEMBER 28, 1988, SIGNED 
DAVID M MORTIMER PRESIDENT OF LOCAL 
UNION NUMBER 501 


13:54 EST 
MGMCOMP 


66a 67a 


[General Counsel’s Exhibit 8] Western Union [General Counsel’s Exhibit 14] 
OREILLY AND GROSSO BC MAILGRAM AUCIELLO IRON WORKS INC. 
1300 A WORCESTER RD 
FRAMINGHAM MA 01701 28AM enn ae 
4-0252688333003 11/28/88 ICS IPMBNGZ CSP B8NB 1 ny — — 7 INDUSTRIAL 
2 5088751220 MGM TDBN FRAMINGHAM MA STRUCTURAL 

11-28 -331P EST 22 — — — 4 n ORNAMENTAL 
IRONWORKERS LOCAL 501 BEFORE STRIKE 
826 WASHINGTON ST 
BRAINTREE MA 02184 * 

Salvatore Hor le 

THIS IS A CONFIRMATION COPY OF A TELEGRAM Richard DeLarda © 
ADDRESSED TO YOU: r 
RE: AUCIELLO IRON WORKS S eee D 
EMPLOYER POSITION IN RESPONSE TO YOUR Joseph Parenti ~ 
NOTICE OF NOVEMBER 27 IS AS FOLLOWS: 1. 7 Winsor 
EMPLOYER OFFER OF NOVEMBER 17 WAS RE. 4 Big served a 
JECTED BY LOCAL 501 AND IS NO LONGER OPEN | Seeak MeCarthy 
FOR UNILATERAL ACCEPTANCE. 2. IN ANY / Giao Huynh 
EVENT YOUR CLAIMED RATIFICAATION LIMITED / Cary Boudress 
TO NEGOATIATING COMMITTEE AND EXCLUDING v Kien Nguyen 
RANK AND FILE MEMBERSHIP IS INSUFFICIENT, | V Sang Nguyen 1 
EMPLOYER NOW HAS REASON TO BELIEVE THAT Kenneth Seaver 
LOCAL 501 NO LONGER REPRESENTS A MAJORITY | / Richard Boudreau 
OF EMPLOYEES IN THE APPROPRIATE UNIT AND Dave Duplisea 5 
THEREFORE DISAVOWS ANY OBLIGATION TO ‘tah Shean 
CARRY ON FURTHER NEGOTIATIONS. ) Aang — 2 

JOHN D O’REILLY II “Michael Barbour 

COUNCIL FOR AUCIELLO IRON WORK Phuc Tran 

1300A WORCESTER RD — 


FRAMINGHAM MA 01701 


15:32 EST X 5 
MGMCOMP 


68a 


[General Counsel’s Exhibit 15] 


CLOCK 


* 


19 

24 

26 

64 

67 

101 
142 
144 
164 
172 
178 
179 
188 
192 
196 
201 
202 
204 
210 
211 
213 
216 
223 


SHOP 
EMPLOYEES 


Aliberti, Rocco 
Morle, Salvatore 
DeLarda, Richard 
Hanagan, James 
Duckworth, John 
Cibelli, Robert 
Parenti, Joseph 
Winsor, Edward 
Brodeur, Stephen 
McCarthy, Paul 
Huynh, Giao Van 
Boudreau, Gary 
Nguyen, Kien 
Nguyen, Sung 
Seaver, Kenneth 
Duplisea, David 
Boudreau, Richard 
Coyne, Michael 
Chaisson, James 
Greenglass, Paul 
Nguyen, Quang 
Barbour, Mike 
Tran, Phuc Van 


LEE (NEW MAN) 


CLAYTON 


MIKE CONLEY 


YES 


CROSSED 
PICKET 


2 


O 
O 


| 
| 

| 

| 
1 
| 

| 
0 
| 

| 
O 
| 

| 

| 

| 
3 


LINE 


NO 


WILL NOT 
COME BACK 


(HAS 


ANOTHER 


JOB) 


7 


7 
7 


.. 


WILL START DEC 5 


23 


69a 
[General Counsel’s Exhibit 17] 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


TYPE OF ELECTION 
(Check one) 

© Consent Agreement 

OQ Stipulation 

© Board Direction 

RD Direction 


(Also check box 
below where 
appropriate 
0 8(b)(7) 


Case No. 1-RC-14,914 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. 
Employer 


and 


SHOPMEN’S IRONWORKERS LOCAL UNION 
NO. 501 OF THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
OF BRIDGE, STRUCTURAL AND ORNAMENTAL 

IRONWORKERS, AFL-CIO 


Petitioner 


CERTIFICATION OF REPRESENTATIVE 


An election having been conducted in the above matter 
under the supervision of the Regional Director of the 
National Labor Relations Board in accordance with the 
Rules and Regulations of the Board; and it appearing 
from the Tally of Ballots that a collective bargaining rep- 
resentative has been selected; and no obj ctions having 
been filed to the Tally of Ballots furnished to the parties, 


or to the conduct of the election, within the time pro- 
vided therefor; 


70a 


Pursuant to authority vested in the undersigned by 
the National Labor Relations Board, IT IS HEREBY 
CERTIFIED that a majority of the valid ballots have 
been cast for 


Shopmen’s Ironworkers Local Union No. 501 
of the International Association of Bridge, 
Structural and Ornamental Lronworkers, 
AFL-CIO 


and that, pursuant to Section 9(a) of the National Labor 
Relations Act, as amended, the said labor organization is 
the exclusive representative of all the employees in the 
unit set forth below, found to be appropriate for the pur- 
poses of collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, 
wages, hours of employment, or other conditions of 
employment. 
UNIT: 
All production and maintenance employees of the 
Employer’s plant located in Brighton, Massachu- 
setts, but excluding office clerical employees, pro- 
fessional employees, guards and supervisors as 
defined in the Act. 


Signed at Boston, Massachusetts 
On the 30th day of March 1977 


On behalf of 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


/s/ Robert R. Fuchs 
Regional Director, Region One 
National Labor Relations Board 


[SEAL] 


7la 


[Respondent's Exhibit 2a] 


Date: Oct. 13, 1988 


To Local 501 

9 Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. lron Work- 
ers 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately | am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ Stephen C. Brodeur 
STEPHEN C. BRODEUR 


(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


[Respondent's Exhibit 2b] 
DATE: 10 13, 1988 


TO LOCAL 501 

(INTERNATIONAL ASSOC. OF BRIDGE, STRUC., & 
ORN. IRON WORKERS) 

826 WASHINGTON STREET 

BRAINTREE, MA. 02184 


EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY I AM RESIGNING FROM 
THE UNION. 


SIGNED, 
/s/ Nguyen Sang Trung 
NGUYEN SANG TRUNG 


(AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., HUDSON, MA.) 


72a 


[Respondent's Exhibit 2c] 
DATE: 10 - 13 - 1988 
TO LOCAL 501 


(INTERNATIONAL ASSOC. OF BRIDGE, STRUC., & 
ORN. IRON WORKERS) 

826 WASHINGTON STREET 

BRAINTREE, MA. 02184 


EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY I AM RESIGNING FROM 
THE UNION. 


SIGNED, 
/s/ Phuc Van Tran 
PHUC VAN TRAN 


(AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., HUDSON, MA.) 


| Respondent’s Exhibit 2d] 
DATE: OCT,13 - 88 
TO LOCAL 501 


(INTERNATIONAL ASSOC. OF BRIDGE, STRUC., & 
ORN. IRON WORKERS) 

826 WASHINGTON STREET 

BRAINTREE, MA. 02184 


EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY I AM RESIGNING FROM 
THE UNION. 


SIGNED, 
/s/ Giao Huynh 
(AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., HUDSON, MA.) 


73a 


[Respondent’s Exhibit 3a] 

Date: Oct 14/88 

To Local 501 

(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning ing from the union. 


Signed: /s/ James P. Chiasson 
JAMES P. CHIASSON 


(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


[ Respondent's Exhibit 3b] 

Date: 10/14/88 

To Local 501 

(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 


826 Washington St. 
Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ Paul N. Greenglass 
PAUL N. GREENGLASS 


(Avciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


74a 


[Respondent’s Exhibit 3c} 

Date: 10 - 14-88 

To Local 501 

(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) : 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ John Duckworth 
JOHN DUCKWORTH 


(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


| Respondent’s Exhibit 3d] 
Date: OCT 17, 1988 
To Local 501 


(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 


ers) 
826 Washington St. 
Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 
Signed: /s/ Michael G. Barbour 

MICHAEL G. BARBOUR 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


75a 


[Respondent’s Exhibit 3e] 
Date: NOV 21, 1988 


To Local 501 
(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 


826 Washington St. 
Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 
Signed: /s/ Robert Cibelli 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


Respondent's Exhibit 3f] 
Date: NOV 21 / 88 


To Local 501 
(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 


826 Washington St. 
Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ Quang Nguyen 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


76a 
[Respondent’s Exhibit 3g 
Date: 11/21/88 


To Local 501 

(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ Gary F. Boudreau 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


[ Respondent’s Exhibit 3h] 
Date: 11 - 23 - 88 


To Local 501 

(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 

826 Washington St. 

Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed /s/ [Illegible] Duplisea 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


77a 
[Respondent’s Exhibit 4] 
Date: 10 — 14 — 88 
To Local 501 


(International Assoc. of Bridge, Struc., & Orn. Iron Work- 
ers) 


826 Washington St. 
Braintree, MA 02184 


Efective Immediately I am resigning from the union. 


Signed: /s/ Frank J. Tomolillo 
(Auciello Iron Works, Inc., Hudson, MA) 


vy 


78a 


APPENDIX E 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OFFICE OF THE CLERK 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20543 


January 19, 1996 
Mr. John D. O'Reilly III 
77 Turnpike Road 
Post Office Box 3118 
Southborough, MA 01745-0118 


Re: Auciello Iron Works, Inc. 
v. National Labor Relations Board 
No. 95-668 


Dear Mr. O'Reilly: 


The Court today entered the following order in the 
above entitled case: 


The petition for a writ of certiorari is granted. The 
brief of petitioner is to be filed with the Clerk and served 
upon opposing counsel on or before 3 p.m., Friday, 
March 1, 1996. The brief of respondent is to be filed 
with the Clerk and served upon opposing counsel on or 
before 3 p.m., Friday, March 29, 1996. A reply brief, 
if any, is to be filed pursuant to Rule 25.3. Rule 29.2 
does not apply. 


Sincerely, 
/s/ William K. Suter 
William K. Suter, Clerk 


E 8 rr 


