          DAGGS v. PHŒNIX NATIONAL BANK.                                549

                         Statement of the Case.



        DAGGS v. PHŒNIX NATIONAL BANK.

APPEAL FROM THE SUPREME COURT OF THE TERRITORY OF ARIZONA.

         No. 138. Submitted January 30,1900. — Decided April 30,1900.

In the provision in Rev. Stat. §5197 that when no rate of interest “is fixed
  by the laws of the State, or Territory, or District ” in which a bank is
  situated it “ may take, receive, reserve or charge a rate not exceeding
  seven percent,” the words “fixed by the laws” must be construed to
  mean “ allowed by the laws.”

   This cause embraces three suits brought by the Phoenix Na-
tional Bank against A. J. and R. E. Daggs, defendants in error.
They were respectively numbered 2554, 2555 and 2556, and
were consolidated by stipulations of the parties.
    They were brought to recover on three promissory notes, ag-
gregating the sum of $9741.73, signed by A. J. Daggs, one of
the appellants. Each note was dated November 1, 1894, and
payable on or before one year from date, with interest at the
rate of ten per cent per annum. Also, to foreclose certain
mortgages executed to secure the notes—one executed by R. E.
 Daggs on the 28th of November, 1894, on certain real estate in
 Maricopa County, Arizona, and on four water rights of the Con-
 solidated Canal Company, represented by certificates ; two ex-
 ecuted by A. J. Daggs on same day, on certain other real estate
 situate in the same county.
    The answers were substantially the same in all of the cases.
    They admitted the making of the notes and mortgages, but
 alleged that the interest charge was usurious, and in violation
 of sections 5197 and 5198 of the Revised Statutes of the United
 States.
     As a counter-claim it was alleged that thé plaintiff (appellee)
 was indebted to the defendant (appellant) upon a certain prom-
 issory note, executed by W. A. Daggs and P. P. Daggs, as co-
 partners and as individuals, and delivered to Thomas Arm-
  strong, Jr., and assigned by him to the plaintiff in blank, and
   y t e latter, on the 28th of November, 1894, for a valuable
550                  OCTOBER TERM, 1899.

                       Statement of the Case.

consideration, to the defendant, A. J. Daggs, at which time the
makers were, and ever since have been, notoriously insolvent,
all of which the plaintiff knew.
   The note was as follows, marked “ Exhibit A,” and made
part of the counter-claim:

                   “ No. 1340.   Due Sept. 1st.
   “ $5000.00.              Phocn ix , Arizo na , July 1st, 1893.
   “On the 1st day of September, 1893, without grace, we or
either of us, for value received, promise to pay to Thos. Arm-
strong, Jr., at the Phoenix National Bank, at their office in
Phoenix, Arizona, five thousand dollars ($5000) in United States
gold coin, with interest at the rate of 1 and | per cent per
month, until paid. In case of legal proceedings hereon, we or
either of us agree to pay 10 per cent of amount due hereon as
attorney’s fees.
                                    “ W. A. and P. P. Dag gs .
   “ Secured by chattel mortgage of even date herewith.
                                                “ W. A. Dagg s .
                                                “ P. P. Dagg s .”

   It was also alleged that no part of the note was paid, and
that there was due thereon the sum of $7076.91. And judg-
ment was prayed for the amount and interest.
   For another defence, it was alleged that at the time of the
execution of the three promissory notes sued on, the plaintiff
(appellee) and the defendant, A. J. Daggs, entered into a con-
tract in writing (a copy of which is attached to the answer,
marked “ Exhibit B ”) wherein the plaintiff as part of the con-
sideration for the said three notes, sold and assigned and ex-
pressly stipulated that the three notes should be received in pay-
ment for all its rights, title and interest in and to that certain
right in action, wherein Hugh McCrum was plaintiff and W.
and P. A. Daggs were defendants, and plaintiff was intervenor,
over that certain five thousand dollar note marked “ Exhibit
herein, and the mortgage securing the same.
  That at said time the makers of said note were actually in
solvent, which plaintiff knew, and it was agreed that plain i
         DAGGS v. PHCENIX NATIONAL BANK.                     551

                     Statement of the Case.

should carry on the said litigation in its name until the cause
of action should be determined and settled, and pay . all costs
accruing prior to November 1, 1894, and the defendant to pay
those accruing thereafter. And it was alleged that the defend-
ant paid out large sums of money in the prosecution of said
suit, to wit, $45.65, as transcript fee from the court below, and
$500 as costs, and expended work and labor of the reasonable
value of $500, and has performed all the conditions of said con-
tract, but that plaintiff (appellant) has failed to perform the
conditions on its part to the damage of defendant in the sum
$10,122.55.
   For another defence, it was alleged that the defendant pledged
certain water stock in the Tempe Irrigating Canal as security
for said promissory notes, which was reasonably worth $4000,
and that the plaintiff (appellee) has converted it to its own use,
to defendant’s damage in the sum of $4000, wherefore defend-
ant prayed that he be relieved from the payment of interest on
said notes, for his expenditures in said suit; the amount of said
five thousand dollar note for four thousand dollars value of the
water stock pledged, and for two thousand dollars damages.
   In case No. 2555 the defendants filed a plea in abatement on
account of the pendency of case No. 2554, and a like plea in
case No. 2556. The pleas were overruled.
   And in case No. 2555 A. J. Daggs moved for judgment upon
his counter-claim on the ground that it was confessed, because
no reply was made to it.
   A similar motion was made in case No. 2556.
   Testimony was taken and judgment was entered for the
 plaintiff, the Phoenix National Bank, against the defendant,
 A. J. Daggs, for the principal of the three notes and interest,
 and decreeing a foreclosure of the mortgages and the sale of
 the property mortgaged. A motion for a new trial was made
 and denied. On writ of error to the Supreme Court of the
   erritory the judgment was affirmed, (53 P. 201,) and an ap-
 peal was then taken to this court.
    In passing on the case the Supreme Court of the Territory

    At the outset we are compelled to call attention to the
552                 OCTOBER TERM, 1899.

                       Statement of the Case.

 omission of counsel to comply with the statute and the rules
 of this court on the subject of assignments of error.
   “ These are imperative and must be observed. It is not our
 business to search the record if perchance we may find reversi-
 ble error. It is our duty to examine into such alleged errors
 and only such as are distinctly pointed out in the record. The
assignments made by plaintiffs in error in their brief are, for
the most part, so general in character and so wanting in defi-
niteness that they cannot be considered. Although defective
as assignments, we have, by liberal construction, found that
two of them present questions for our review.
   “ The first of these reads as follows:
   “‘The court erred in not giving judgment for plaintiffs in
error on their pleas in bar of the recovery of any interest for
the reason that the contract with the national bank for ten per
cent interest is ultra vires?
    *       *        *        *      *        *      *          *
   “ The second assignment of error made by plaintiffs in error,
reads: ‘ The court erred in overruling the plaintiffs in error
motion for judgment on the pleadings for the reason that there
was no reply to plaintiffs in error verified counter-claim. ’ ’
   No statement of facts in the nature of a special verdict being
certified with the record, the plaintiffs in error moved for and
obtained from this court a certiorari to supply the defect, and
in response thereto a statement of facts, which had been made
by the Supreme Court of the Territory was certified to this
court, in which was recited Act No. 71 of the Territory, regu-
lating appeals and writs of error to the Supreme Court, the
judgment of foreclosure and sale, the assignments of error of
appellants, and concluded as follows:
   “ Under the assignments of error thus made and presented
in the record this court could and did make no determination
of the facts of the case, except such as appeared in the plead-
ings and judgment, for the reason that such of the assignments
as were sufficient in form to raise any question presented none
for our consideration which necessitated the further finding o
facts in the case. We are unable to determine from the recorc
presented in this court, in the absence of a bill of exceptions
          DAGGS v.'PHOENIX NATIONAL BANK.                       553

                       Statement of the Case.

and a statement of facts, what the facts were which were put
in evidence on the trial in the court below, further than as they
are shown by the transcript of the reporter’s notes, and from
such review of the record the judgment of the district court
was affirmed as follows:
    “ ‘ In the Supreme Court of the Territory of Arizona.
     “ ‘ R. E. Daggs  OO A.
                 OO and  / J. Daggs, Plaintiffs
                                            7   in Error,
                                V8.
    Phoenix National Bank, a Corporation, Defendants
                        in Error.

   “ ‘ This cause having been heretofore submitted and by the
court taken under consideration, and the court having considered
the same and being fully advised in the premises, it is ordered
that the judgment of the district court herein be, and the same
is hereby, affirmed.
   “‘It is further ordered and adjudged that the defendant in
error herein do have and recover of and from the plaintiffs in
error, R. E. Daggs and A. J. Daggs, as principals, and R. F. Doll,
 W. M. Billups, and the London Company, as sureties, on cost
bond its costs in this court, taxed at forty-three and       ($43.10)
dollars.’
   “ By the court:
                                     “ Webs ter Str ee t , C. J.
                                     a Rich ard E. Sloa n , A. J.
                                     “Fletche r M. Doa n , C. J.
                                     “Geo . R. Davi s , A. J”
   Asserting that the statement did not embody a finding of
•fact according to law, plaintiffs in error moved for a rule to
show cause why a mandamus should not issue, commanding the
Supreme Court of the Territory to make and certify a statement
of the facts in the nature of a special verdict, and also the rul-
ings of the district court on the admission and rejection of evi-
dence excepted to.
   Plaintiffs in error submitted with the motion a statement
"hich they claimed the record justified.
   The motion was denied January 29, 1900.
 554                  OCTOBER TERM, 1899.

                         Opinion of the Court.

   Mr. A. J. Daggs for appellants.

   Mr. Addis B. Browne and Mr. Alexander Britton for appellee.

  Mr . Justi ce Mc Kenna , after makino; the foregoing statement,
delivered the opinion of the court.

    We are confined by the record to the points passed on by the
  Supreme Court of the Territory, to wit, the defence of usury,
 and the motion for judgment on the counter-claim.
    (1.) By section 5197 of the Revised Statutes of the United
  States a national bank may charge on any note interest at the
 rate allowed by the laws of the State or Territory where it is
 situated. It is further provided, however, that if no rate is fixed
 by such laws the bank may not charge a greater rate than 7 per
 cent, and if a greater rate be knowingly charged, the entire
 interest agreed to be paid shall be forfeited. (Sec. 5198.)
    The laws of the Territory are as follows:
    “2161. Sec . 1. When there is no express agreement fixing a
 different rate of interest, interest shall be allowed at the rate of
 seven per cent per annum on all moneys after they become due
 on any bond, bill, promissory note or other instrument in writing,
 or any judgment recovered in any court in this Territory, for
 money lent, for money due on any settlement of accounts from
 the day on which the balance is ascertained and for money re-
 ceived for the use of another.”
    “ 2162. Sec . 2. Parties may agree in writing for the payment
 of any rate of interest whatever on money due or to become due
 on any contract; any judgment rendered on such contract shall
 conform thereto, and shall bear the rate of interest agreed upon
 by the parties, and whch shall be specified in the judgment.
    The contention of appellant is that the rate of interest is no
fixed by the laws of the Territory. It permits the parties to o
 so, but does not do so itself. In other words, it is urge t a
 the rate is fixed by permission of the laws, and not by the av s,
 and upon this distinction a power which every person and e\ erj
bank in the Territory has, it is contended, the nationa an rs
do not have.
         DAGGS v. PHCENIX NATIONAL BANK.                      555

                      Opinion of the Court.

   We cannot accept this as a correct interpretation of either
the spirit or the words of the national banking act. By that
act, certainly no discrimination was intended against national
banks, and that the interpretation contended for would seriously
embarrass their business is manifest.
    We said in Tiffany n . National Bank of Missouri, 18 Wall.
409, that national banks “ were established for the purpose, in
part, of providing a currency for the whole country, and in part
to create a market for the loans of the general government.
It could not have been intended, therefore, to expose them to
the hazard of unfriendly legislation by the States, or to ruinous
competition with state banks.”
    The language of the Revised Statutes is that national banks
 “may take, receive, reserve and charge on any loan . . .
 upon any note . . . interest allowed by the laws of the
 State, Territory or district ” where located, “ and no more, ex-
 cept that where by the laws of any State a different rate is
 limited for banks of issue organized under state laws, the rate
 so limited shall be allowed for associations organized or existing
 in any such State under this title.” The italics are ours.
    The meaning of these provisions is unmistakable. A national
 bank may charge interest at the rate allowed by the laws of
 the State or Territory where it is located; and equality is care-
 fully secured with local banks.
    The clear meaning and purpose of these provisions remove
 the ambiguity of those which follow, if there is any ambiguity.
 “ Where no rate is fixed by the laws of the State or Territory
 or district, the bank may take, secure, reserve or charge a rate
 not exceeding seven per centum. . . .” “ Fixed by the laws ”
  must be construed to mean “ allowed by the lawsfi not a rate
  expressed in the laws. In instances it might be that, but not
  necessarily. The intention of the national law is to adopt the
  state law, and permit to national banks what the state law
  allows to its citizens and to the banks organized by it. Tiffany
  v. National Bank of Missouri, supra.
      It is urged, however that National Bank v. Johnson, 104
     • 8. 271, is in conflict with these views.
       n that case the defendant, a national bank doing business in
556                 OCTOBER TERM, 1899.

                       Opinion of the Court.

 the State of New York, discounted for the plaintiff in the case,
at the rate of twelve per cent per annum, commercial paper
and promissory notes, amounting to $158,003. The interest
 which the bank knowingly charged amounted to $6564.88, an
excess of $2735.36 beyond the rate allowed by the general laws
of the State. Judgment was rendered for twice the amount of
the interest, which was affirmed by this court upon the statute
of the State, which established the rate of interest for the loan
or forbearance of money at seven per cent.
   Meeting the arguments of counsel upon a supposed difference
between loans and discounts, and usurious and non-usurious con-
tracts under the laws of the State in the transactions of natural
persons, the learned justice, who delivered the opinion of the
court, made some remarks which seemed to imply that a rate
allowed by a state law was not a rate fixed by a state law. The
remarks, however, were not necessary to the decision, and can-
not be considered as expressing the judgment of the court.
   (2.) The counter-claims of plaintiffs in error present these
facts:
   The making of the five thousand dollar note by W. A. and P. P.
Daggs, and its delivery to Thomas Armstrong, Jr.; its assign-
ment by the latter to the Phoenix National Bank, (appellee,)
and by the bank, in writing, for a valuable consideration to the
defendant, A. J. Daggs (one of the appellants); the insolvency
of the makers, W. A. and P. P. Daggs, and the non-payment of
the note or any part of it.
   To the counter-claim there was a demurrer for insufficiency,
and a denial of each and every one of its allegations. The denial
was not verified. The Supreme Court of the Territory, consid-
ering an error assigned on the overruling of appellants’ motion
for judgment on the counter-claim, held it insufficient because
it did not allege that due diligence to collect the note had been
exercised, as required by the statute of the Territory, or that
any effort had been made to collect the same.
   By this ruling it is urged that the court assumed that the
counter-claim was based on the rights of a surety instead of
upon the direct obligation of the Phoenix Bank, as assignor o
the Armstrong note on account of Armstrongs insolvency
Articles 122, 1226 and 788 of the Arizona Statutes.
         DAGGS v. PHCENIX NATIONAL BANK.                         557

                       Opinion of the Court.

   Assuming without deciding that appellants are correct in their
construction of the Arizona statutes, and assuming that the an-
swer to the counter-claim did not put in issue the making of
the Armstrong note, and its assignment to plaintiff in error,
nevertheless the answer to the counter-claim did put in issue
the other facts alleged, to wit, the insolvency of the makers of
the note and its non-payment.
    But it is said that the contract marked “ Exhibit B ” shows
the insolvency. It certainly does not. It recites the transfer
of the Armstrong note to A. J. Daggs, and that it is secured
by a mortgage on 3500 sheep; that the note is in litigation
between the Phoenix Bank and Hugh McCrum of San Francisco
 as assignee of D. A. Abrams as assignee of the Bank of Tempe,
 “ to establish and determine the priorities of rights under mort-
 gages between said litigants hereinbefore mentioned, which said
 cause of action and rights of the Phoenix National Bank, under
 its first mortgage in said litigation described, is also hereby sold,
 assigned, transferred and set over unto A. J. Daggs for the
 above nine thousand seven hundred and forty-one and             dol-
 lars ($9741.73'). It is further agreed that the aforesaid cause of
 action described shall be continued in the name of the Phoenix
 National Bank until the said case is determined and settled; but
 it is further agreed that from this date, November 1,1894, A. J.
 Baggs shall pay the costs that shall hereafter accrue in the
 said case.”
     This contract standing alone establishes nothing definite, and
 appreciating this the appellants attempt to explain it by a resort
 to what they allege to be the testimony in the case. It is said
  that “ they (W. A. and P. P. Daggs) could not pay their notes,
  three suits in court foreclosing three mortgages, each seeking
  priority, hanging to them like mill stones, grinding them to dust.
  Appellee had lost its reputed first mortgage in the district court
  and appealed. It then sold this note and litigation ; the con-
  tract shows, and agreed to stand up and carry the suit on in its
  name. The case was tried in the Supreme Court of Arizona,
  an held adversely to the appellee in appellants’ suit against the
  Makers of the five thousand dollar note. The appellee then fell
    °wn and refused to let its namc: be used any farther to carry on
558                      OCTOBER TERM, 1899.

                                    Syllabus.

the suit, refused to sign the bond, and would have nothing more
to do with the suit. . . . Appellant then demanded pay-
ment of the five thousand dollar note, and was refused. Appel-
lant spent over $500 in money and $500 in services prosecuting
the makers of the $5000 note; followed it to the Supreme
Court of Arizona, and would have gone further, but appellee
refused to let its name be used and he was compelled to stop.
Appellant then demanded credit for the $5000 note.”
   Those facts, however, are not a part of the counter-claim and
it is hardly necessary to say cannot be considered in passing on
a motion for judgment based on a confession of the allegations
of the counter-claim.
   Nor can it be said that such facts should have been found by
the lower court, because, as we have seen, under the statement
of the case as considered by that court, the questions for deci-
sion was the sufficiency of the averments of the counter-claim
as a defence.
   We repeat, therefore, that we are confined to the propositions
we have stated above and discussed, and as there was no pre-
judicial error in the ruling of the Supreme Court of the Terri-
tory on them, its judgment is
                                                        Affirmed.
