Supreme Court, US 


: wOovV 9 1995 
Fe @Ur%K 
No. 94-1966 Eeee.. 
IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


DWIGHT J. LOVING, PETITIONER, 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPONDENT. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 


JOINT APPENDIX 


Drew S. Days, Ill John H. Blume* 
Solicitor General Teresa L. Norris 
Department of Justice P.O. Box 11311 
Washington, D.C. 20530 Columbia, SC 29211 
(202) 514-2217 (803) 765-0650 

Roy H. Hewitt 


2827 Bowes Lane 
Woodbridge, VA 22193 


Major Fran W. Walterhouse 
Captain Walter S. Weedman 
United States Army 
Defense Appellate Division 
5611 Columbia Pike 
Falls Church, VA 22041 


*Counsel of Record 


Petition for Certiorari Filed June 2, 1995 
Certiorari Granted September 27, 1995 s¢ 


JOINT APPENDIX 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

United States v. Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, 

28 M.J. 1074 (N.M.C.M.R. 1989) ............. 
United States v. Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, 

££ @ fF ~  eRoee eee eee 88 
Rule for Courts-Martial 1004 (Prior to 1990 

ES 4G abe ehh beh ae kk dra tebe kas 132 
Article 18, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 

ee SS CP a ivy Cede Ladals doe dwaccewes 139 
Article 36, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 

10 U.S.C. § 836 (Prior to 1990 Amendment)... 140 
Article 56, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 

Se ey ce dubebtrdstoadsGetescaddent 14] 
Article 106a, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 

I an BO iradk bib kee bade bbeceidus ile: 142 
Article 118, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 

OP Ses SN o Koko bh neice sch 65cd badwsecnn 145 
SN GE I a cies occcvans tus au. 146 


(1) 


CHRONOLOGY OF RELEVANT EVENTS 


October 11, 1983: 


January 24, 1984: 


July 29, 1985: 


December | 1-12, 
1988: 


March 28, 1989: 


April 3, 1989: 


Opinion of the United States Court 
of Military Appeals in United 
States v. Matthews, 16 MJ. 354 
(C.M.A. 1983), holding that 
U.C.M.J. article 118 did not satisfy 
this Court’s decisions in Furman y. 
Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972) and 
Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 
(1976), because of the omission of 
specific aggravating factors. 


President Reagan’s Executive Order 
12460 amends Paragraph 75 of the 
1969 Manual for Courts-Martial by 
adding aggravating factors for capi- 
tal cases which became Rule for 
Courts-Martial 1004(c) in the 1984 
Manual for Courts-Martial. 


Congress enacts U.C.M.J. article 
106a creating capital espionage of- 
fense and setting forth aggravating 
factors for that offense only. 


Offenses committed. 


Trial begins. 

Petitioner sentenced to death, dis- 
honorable discharge, and forfeiture 
of all pay and allowances. 


February 3, 1992: 


Aril 15, 1992: 


November 10, 1994: 


February 2, 1995: 


Convictions and death sentence 
affirmed by the United States Army 
Court of Military Review, United 
States v. Loving, 34 MJ. 956 
(A.C.M.R. 1992), reprinted in Ap- 
pendix to the Petition at 229a-256a. 


Timely petition for reconsideration 
denied in an opinion by the United 
States Army Court of Military 
Review, United States v. Loving, 34 
M.J. 1065, (A.C.M.R. 1992), re- 
printed in Appendix to the Petition 
of 257a-26Sa. 


Convictions and sentence affirmed 
by the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces, 
United States v. Loving, 41 MJ. 
213 (1994), reprinted in Appendix 
to the Petition at la-227a. 


Timely petition for reconsideration 
denied without opinion by United 
States Court of Appeals for the 
Armed Forces, United States vy. 
Loving, 42 MJ. 109 (1995), re- 
printed in Appendix to the Petition 
at 228a. 


U.S. NAVY-MARINE CORPS COURT OF 
MILITARY REVIEW. 


NMCMR 87-3856. 
28 MJ. 1074 


UNITED STATES 
v. 


RONNIE A. CURTIS, 5i1-74—-5202, LANCE 
CORPORAL (E-3), U.S. MARINE CORPS. 


Sentence Adjudged 6 Aug. 1987. 
Decided 30 June 1989. 


Accused, a lance corporal in the United States Marine 
Corps, was convicted by general court-martial convened at 
Camp LeJeune, North Carolina, Sebastian Gaeta, Jr., J., of 
homicide and sentenced to death and he appealed. The 
United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Military 
Review, Strickland, J., held that: (1) procedures of the 
Rules for Courts-Martial for imposition of death sentence 
were properly promulgated; (2) delegation of power to the 
President to promulgate the rule was not unconstitutional; 
(3) trial counsel presented racially neutral explanation for 
preemptory challenge directed to one member; (4) death 
penalty was appropriate; and (5) it is not a denial of the 
equal protection to provide death penalty for service 
members while not providing for civilians. 


Affirmed. 


Byrne, C.J., filed an opinion concurring in part and 
dissenting in part. 


2 


Albertson, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and 
dissenting in part. 


LCDR L. Saccoccio, JAGC, USN. Appellate Defense 
Counsel. 


LT. Scott A. Hagen, JAGC, USNR. Appellate Govern- 
ment Counsel. 


Capt. Thomas D. Miller, USMC. Appellate Government 
Counsel. 


Before the Court En Banc. 
STRICKLAND Judge: 


Appellant was tried at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, 
by a general court-martial composed of officer and enlisted 
members. Contrary to his pleas, he was found guilty of two 
premeditated murders, larceny, burglary, unlawful entry, 
indecent assault and damage to Government property in 
violation of Articles 118, 121, 129, 130, 134 and 108, 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 918, 921, 929, 930, 934, and 908. respectively. 
Additionally, in accordance with his plea, he was convicted 
of disobeying a general order in violation of Article 92, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 892. On August 6, 1987, Lance 
Corporal Curtis was sentenced to death. The convening 
authority approved the sentence as adjudged. 


We determined that this case presented issues of 
exceptional importance and, thus, pursuant to Rule 17, 
Courts of Military Review Rules of Practice and Proce- 
dure, decided to hear this case en banc. 


Appellant raises seven allegations of legal error on 
appeal. We have carefully considered each assignment of 


3 


error in this capital case and will discuss each seriatim. 
Having reviewed the record pursuant to Article 66(c), 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866, we conclude that the assignments 
of error have no merit and that no prejudical error was 
committed which affects the findings or sentence. 


I 
Statement of Facts 


Appellant, Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, reported to 
3d Battalion, 2d Marines, 2d Marine Division, Camp 
Lejeune, North Carolina, in January 1985 and was assigned 
duties as a supply administrative clerk. His officer-in- 
charge was First Lieutenant James F. Lotz, the battalion 
supply officer. With the exception of an overseas 
deployment, Curtis and Lieutenant Lotz worked together in 
the same office for the next two years. 


During this time period, Curtis visited Lieutenant Lotz’s 
quarters aboard Camp Lejeune on several occasions; once 
for a supply section barbecue and on other occasions to 
pick up or deliver items related to supply work. As a 
result, Curtis learned the specific location of Lotz’s 
quarters and, in addition, met Lieutenant Lotz’s wife, Joan, 
who was a school teacher at the high school aboard the 
base. 


Also during this time frame, Curtis, who is black, 
formed the perception that Lieutenant Lotz was racially 
prejudiced. This was apparently the result of certain 
nicknames used by Lotz such as “‘Bebop Curtis’’ and 
“Curtis Blow’’; certain imitations of blacks dene by Lotz; 
and, what Curtis perceived to be a different attitude toward 
and treatment of black Marines in the office. Curtis’ 
perception of prejudice was flatly refuted by black friends 


4 


and acquaintances of Lotz, including a young black man 
who lived witl the Lotzs and was treated like a son. 
Nevertheless, it was this perception which apparently led 
Curtis to the events of April 13 and 14, 1987.! 


April 13, 1987, was a normal day in the supply section 
with Curtis going to work at 0730 hours as usual. 
Lieutenant Lotz was not in the office on this particular 
day, either in the morning or in the afternoon. Curtis got 
off work at 1630 hours and proceeded to his barracks room 
where he and his roommate listened te music for the next 
several hours. They then purchased » bottle of gin and 
continued to listen to music and drink mixed drinks for 
several more hours. During this time, Curtis consumed 
approximately one pint of gin. 


According to Curtis’ confessions and testimony, he then 
went for a walk and began thinking of the things that had 
been going on in the office and began thinking about 
Lieutenant Lotz picking on him. As he stood outside of the 
supply building where he worked, Curtis decided that he 
needed to kill his officer-in-charge. 


Curtis determined he would use a knife to carry out his 
plan and he broke into the supply building, picked the lock 
on the security cage and stole a Marine Corps K-Bar knife 
(a large knife with a seven inch blade). Prior to leaving he 
damaged the office computer by throwing it on the floor. 
Next, he went back to his barracks room and obtained a 


‘Whether this perception was the actual or only motive for these killings is 
subject to question. For example, on the night of the murders. Curtis 
complained to his roommate that Lotz had recently forbidden office personne! 
from playing games on the office computers, a practice that had previously 
been tolerated. He expressed his displeasure over this and it may explain the 
fact that while Curtis was stealing the knife from the supply building he threw 
his office computer to the floor. 


5 


pair of gloves so that he would not leave any fingerprints 
at the Lotz house. Curtis then stole a bicycle for 
transportation and, while riding the 1.5 mi'es to the Lotz 
home, devised a scheme that he knew would get him 
inside the house. 


Curtis arrived at the Lotz home sometime after midnight. 
He carried the knife concealed in the waistband of his 
pants. He left the bicycle in the backyard and went to the 
front door and knocked. Within minutes, Lieutenant Lotz 
appeared at the door. Curtis acted anxious and told Lotz 
that another Marine member of the supply section had been 
in an automobile accident and needed help. Lotz immedi- 
ately asked Curtis inside and prepared to cat the military 
police. As Lieutenant Lotz picked up the phone to assist 
one of his Marines whom he believed to be injured, Curtis 
withdrew the K-Bar from his waistband and stabbed the 
Lieutenant in the chest. Lieutenant Lotz tried to place a 
chair between himself and Curtis and called to his wife. 
Curtis then stabbed Lotz a second time in the back. 


Within moments Joan Lotz emerged from the bedroom 
with a blanket wrapped around her. She first went to her 
dying husband and then confronted Curtis, kicking him in 
the shin with her bare foot and asking what they had ever 
done to him. Curtis then began to attack Mrs. Lotz. As she 
pleaded with him to stop, he stabbed her seven times in the 
head, neck and back. Then, as she lay on the floor dying, 
Curtis ripped and cut off her panties and fondled her 
vaginal area. 


Curtis then searched the house to determine if any other 
persons were present with the intent that he would kill 
anyone he found. He rummaged through the house taking 
car keys and money for gas. He wiped clean the knife he 
had used in the killings and left the house, taking one of 


6 


the Lotzs’ cars. This car, however, had a standard trans- 
mission and Curtis had difficulty driving it so he returned 
to the crime scene. He thereupon reentered the Lotz home, 
found some additional money, checked both bodies and left 
a second time taking their other car. 


He drove around aimlessly for some period of time and 
ultimately decided to leave town. As he was traveling 
down the highway, Curtis momentarily fell asleep at the 
wheel and ended up crashing in the ditch. The state police 
arrived and, in the course of the accident investigation, 
Curtis admitted killing the Lotzs. He subsequently made 
several other confessions to these crimes. 


II 
Military Judge’s Instructions 


Appellant's first assignment of error is that the military 
judge improperly instructed the members as to the voting 
procedures they had to utilize to adjudge the death penalty. 
The military judge instructed the members that two votes 
were required in order to adjudge the death penalty. He 
instructed that, first, they must unanimously find at least 
one of the aggravating factors existed beyond a reasonable 
doubt and, second, they must unanimously find the death 
penalty to be the appropriate sentence. Appellant argues 
that, in addition, the members should have been instructed 
to vote and unanimously find that any extenuating or 
mitigating circumstances were substantially outweighed by 
any aggravating factors. This error is without merit 
because we find that the military judge properly instructed 
the members in accordance with the requirements of Rule 


7 


for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1004, Manual for Courts- 
Martial (MCM), United States, 1984. 


This assigned error arises as a result of the wording in 
R.C.M. 1004(b)(4), MCM, 1984, which states: 


Necessary findings. Death may not be adjudged unless— 


(A) The members find that at least one of the aggravat- 
ing factors under subsection (c) existed; 


(B) Notice of such factor was provided in accordance 
with paragraph (1) of this subsection and all members 
concur in the finding with respect to such factor; and 


(C) All members concur that any extenuating or 
mitigating circumstances are substantially outweighed by 
any aggravating circumstances admissible under R.C.M. 
1001(b)(4), including the factors under subsection (c) of 
this rule. (Emphasis added.) 


Appellant asserts that in order for *‘all members [to] 
concur’’ as required by subsection (C), there must first be 
a vote in which all members unanimously find that the 
extenuating or mitigating circumstances are substantially 
outweighed by the aggravating circumstances. At trial, this 
same argument was made and the military judge, in 
denying appellant's request for this additional vote, 


2The appellant does not challenge R.C.M. 1004, MCM, 1984, as a 
Constitutionally impermissible capital sentencing scheme. In our review of this 
case, we are satisfied that R.C.M. 1004, MCM, 1984, comports with the 
mandates of the Supreme Court that the members be required to make “‘an 
individualized determination on the basis of the character of the [accused] and 
the circumstances of the crime’’ and that the members “adequately 
differentiated this case in an objective, evenhanded, and substantively rational 
way" before imposing the death penalty. Zant v. Stephens, 462 US. 862, 103 
S.Ct. 2733, 77 L.Ed.2d 235 (1983). 


8 


indicated that ‘‘he [was] obligated to follow the procedures 
as set forth by the President.’ The military judge’s ruling 
that this additional vote was not required is supported by 
the plain language of R.C.M. 1004(b)(7): 


Voting. In closed session, before voting on a 
sentence, the members shall vote by secret 
written ballot separately on each aggravating 
factor under subsection (c) of this rule on 
which they have been instructed. Death may 
not be adjudged unless all members concur 
in a finding of the existence of at least one 
such aggravating factor. After voting on all 
the aggravating factors on which they have 
been instructed, the members shall vote on a 
sentence in accordance with R.C.M. 1006. 


This subsection requires that only two votes be taken by 
the members and not the three requested by appellant. The 
last sentence of this subsection clearly speaks of the 
aggravating factor determination vote being followed by 
the sentence determination vote with no discussion or 
provision for an intermediate vote. 


The absence of a requirement for a vote as to the 
balancing test does not relieve the members of their 
obligation to perform this test, it merely does not require 
that they memorialize the specific result. Appellant argues 
that without such memorialization there is no way to 
determine if all the members concurred that any extenuat- 
ing or mitigating circumstances were substantially out- 
weighed by any aggravating factors. We do not agree. 


R.C.M. 1004(b)(6) requires that the military judge 
instruct the members as to the ‘‘requirements and 
procedures’’ they must use to adjudge a death sentence, 


9 


including instructions regarding the balancing test. We 
believe the military judge’s instructions were in com- 
pliance with this provision. In his instructions, the military 
judge outlined a three-step procedure to be followed before 
a death sentence could be adjudged. These involved a 
determination of whether an aggravating factor existed, 
application of the balancing test and a consideration of 
whether death was appropriate. With respect to step two 
the judge instructed, in pertinent part: 


... [yJou may not adjudge a sentence of 
death unless you find that any and all 
extenuating or mitigating circumstances are 
substantially outweighed by any aggravating 
factors as you have found existed in the first 
step of this procedure. (Emphasis added.) 


The military judge thereafter instructed with respect to 
step three: “‘A sentence of death may be adjudged only 
upon the unanimous vote of all the members.”’ 


In following the judge’s instructions (given orally, with 
written copies provided to the members), the members 
could only have voted for death after first finding that the 
extenuating or mitigating circumstances were substantially 
outweighed by any aggravating circumstances. Thus, it is 
implicit in the recorded, unanimous vote for the death 
penalty that each member properly applied the balancing 
test. No further memorialization is necessary. Therefore, 
we hold that the military judge properly instructed the 
members as to the number of votes which are required by 
R.C.M. 1004, MCM, 1984. 


Included in this assignment of error is the allegation that 
the military judge overemphasized the requirement that the 


10 


members were required to unanimously concur in finding 
an aggravating factor, but underemphasized the require- 
ment that the members could not adjudge a death sentence 
unless they all first concurred in the finding that any 
extenuating or mitigating circumstances were substantially 
outweighed by any aggravating circumstances. Appellant 
argues that because the military judge instructed on the 
first requirement seven different times but only mentioned 
the second requirement once, the members did not fully 
and fairly evaluate the evidence but instead adjudged the 
death penalty in a meaningless manner. We disagree. 


Merely mentioning one requirement more than another 
during instruction does not alone constitute error. There 
must also be some indication that this resulted in the 
members improperly performing their duties. There is no 
such indication in this case. To the contrary, all indications 
are that the members properly deliberated according to the 
judge’s instructions. Not only did the military judge in this 
case orally instruct the members, he also provided them 
written copies of the instructions. If the members had any 
questions or were confused as to the instructions given by 
the military judge they could have referred to their copies 
for clarification. Furthermore, if the members were still 
confused or did not understand the instructions even after 
referring to their copies, then they could have requested 
further clarification from the military judge in open court. 
However, because the members did not request further 
clarification in open court and because they could easily 
refer to their copies of the instructions, we are convinced 
that the members were neither misled nor misinformed as 
to their duties in adjudging an appropriate sentence. 
Accordingly, appellant was provided a fair and full 
evaluation of all the evidence pursuant to R.C.M. 1004, 
MCM, 1984, which guaranteed meaningful deliberations by 
the members prior to the imposition of the death sentence. 


1] 
| iil 
Presidential Promulgation of R.C.M. 1004 


The procedures followed in this capital case in 
ultimately adjudging the death penalty were those set forth 
in R.C.M. 1004, MCM, 1984. R.C.M. 1004 was promul- 
gated by the President as a part of MCM, 1984 and 
became effective | August 1984.° Appellant contends that 
the sentencing procedures are invalid because the President 
exceeded the power delegated to him by Congress under 
Article 36, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 836, in that the rule is 
substantive in nature and not procedural. 


Judge Albertson, in her dissent, agrees with this 
proposition, but goes even further in finding fault with the 
death penalty provisions of MCM, 1984. It is her position 
that Article 118, UCMJ, has been invalidated as uncon- 
stitutional as a result of the United States Supreme Court 
decision in Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 92 S.Ct. 
2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972). Alternatively, she argues that 
the President impermissibly encroached on the legislative 
powers of Congress in promulgating R.C.M. 1004 or, if the 
delegation could be construed as permissible, Congress 
failed to provide sufficient specific guidelines to prevent 
the President from acting arbitrarily. 


We disagree with these arguments and find that Article 
118, UCMJ, has not been rendered unconstitutional and 
that the Presidential promulgation of R.C.M. 1004 was 
legally valid. 


A. 


We turn first to an analysis of the post Furman status of 


‘It was subsequently amended by Executive Order No. 012550 of 19 February 
1986 (MCM, 1984, change no. 2). 


12 


Article 118, UCMJ. In Furman and its progeny, the 
Supreme Court struck down various state death penalty 
Statutes as violating the Eighth Amendment because 
sentencing authorities were permitted to exercise uncon- 
trolled discretion in determining whether to impose the 
death sentence. As Judge Albertson points out, the 
dissenters in Furman speculated as to the effect the 
decision might have on other existing state and federal 
Statutes, including the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 
This speculation, however, was simply dicta and in no way 
directly affected any other statute, including the capital 
sentencing provisions of Article 118, UCMJ. The decision 
that did affect these provisions was handed down by the 
United States Court of Military Appeals in United States vy. 
Matthews, 16 M.J. 354 (C.M.A. 1983). As a result. we 
must turn to Matthews to determine the status of Article 
118, UCM. 


In Matthews, the Court of Military Appeals held that the 
death sentencing procedures employed by courts-martial in 
capital cases were defective because of the failure to 
require the court members to make specific findings as to 
individualized aggravating circumstances which could be 
factually and legally reviewed on appeal. /d. at 380. This 
holding did not invalidate Article 118, UCMJ, as being 
unconstitutional. Instead, it merely found that the proce- 
dures utilized in imposing the death sentence were 
constitutionally inadequate. The Court recognized Con- 
gress’ intent that the death penalty be a sentencing option 
only for certain offenses, including premeditated murder, 
id. at 380, and the Court noted the effect their ruling 
would have: 


Our ruling in this case ... creates a void 
which must be filled promptly in order to 
effectuate the congressional intent that court- 


13 


martial members have the option of impos- 
ing a death sentence for certain crimes. 


id. at 381. 


However, the Court further specifically recognized the 
continuing vitality of Article 118 by setting forth two 
alternative means to remedy the deficiencies of the 
sentencing procedures, neither of which required that 
Congress reaffirm its intent that the death penalty be 
authorized for premeditated murder. /d. at 380, 381. 
Congressional intent that the death penalty exist as a 
permissible sentence for premeditated murder was in no 
way thwarted nor invalidated by Matthews. We find ne 
holding of any court which has invalidated Article 118 as 


unconstitutional. 


The effect of Matthews was to prohibit the imposition of 
the death penalty until the procedural defect found by the 
Court was remedied. The Court noted that the action to 
remedy this defect could either be taken by Congress or 
the President. /d. at 380. Corrective action was taken by 
the President when R.C.M. 1004 was promulgated as a part 
of MCM, 1984. The issue is whether this promulgation 


was legally valid. 


‘ongress has delegated several of its powers with 
Pn to the UCMJ to the President. Article 56, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 856 delegates the power to set maximum punishments 
for certain courts-martial offenses and Article 36 delegates 
the power to prescribe rules. Article 36, UCMJ, provides, 


in pertinent part: 


(a) Pretrial, trial, and post-trial proce- 
dures, including modes of proof, for cases 


14 


arising upder this chapter triable in courts- 
martial. ..may be prescribed by the Presi- 
dent by regulations which shall. . .apply the 
principles of law and the rules of evidence 
generally recognized in the trial of criminal 
cases in the United States district courts, but 
which may not be contrary to or inconsistent 


with this chapter. 


(b) All rules and regulations made under 
this article shall be uniform insofar as prac- 
ticable and shall be reported to Congress. 


To determine whether the promulgation of R.C.M. 1004 
properly falls within this provisior we first look to the 
Court of Military Appeals discussion in Matthews. When 
indicating that corrective action could be taken by the 
President in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief under 
Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution, and pursuant to 
the power delegated to him by Congress, the Couft stated: 


Pursuant to Article 36 of the Uniform 
Code, the President promulgates rules to 
govern pretrial, trial, and post-trial proce- 

_ dures of courts-martial. Unlike other Federal 
criminal statutes, the punitive articles of the 
Uniform Code for the most part authorize 
punishment ‘‘as a court-martial may direct’; 
no maximum or minimum sentence is 
specified. However, as contemplated by 
Article 56 of the Uniform Code, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 856, the President prescribes maximum 
punishments for the various offenses. . . . 


The great breadth of the delegation of 
power to the President by Congress with 


15 


respect to court-martial procedures and sen- 
tences grants him the authority to remedy 
the present defect in the court-martial 
sentencing procedure for capital cases... . 


Id. at 380, 381. 


It is certainly clear from this language that the Court 
believed it was well within the President's power, as 
delegated to him by Congress, to promulgate these 
procedures.* 


The Court's analysis that the sentencing defects were 
procedural in nature, and thus within the President's power 
to correct, is consistent with the Supreme Court's holding 
in Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U.S. 282, 97 S.Ct. 2290, 53 
L.Ed.2d 344 (1977). In Dobbert, the death penalty statute 
in effect at the time the defendant committed murder was 
struck down as violative of the holding in Furman. Prior to 
the defendant's trial, however, a new death statute was 
enacted. The question was whether the changes in the new 
statute were procedural in nature, thus allowing it to be 
retroactively applied against the defendant, or substantive, 
thereby prohibiting retroactive application based on the 
constitutional prohibition against ex post facto laws. See 
U.S. CONST. art. I, § 10. 


The original statute provided that a person convicted of 
a capital offense would be punished by death unless the 
jury recommended mercy. The revised statute established, 
inter alia, a bifurcated sentencing proceeding, a specific 


*The Court of Military Appeals belief that the President has the power to 
promulgate these procedures is also consistent with the Court's holding in 
United States v. Flucas, 49 C_M.R. 449 (C._M.A. 1975), where the Presidential 
promulgation of a Manual provision was found to be valid which added the 
element of knowledge in assault cases where this element was provided as an 
aggravating factor increasing the maximum permissible punishment. 


16 


enumeration of aggravating circumstances, an opportunity 
to present relevant evidence of mitigating and aggravating 
circumstances, a test to balance mitigating circumstances 
against aggravating circumstances and procedures to 
review any death sentence imposed. In concluding that 
these changes were procedural and that there was no ex 
post facto violation, the Court stated: 


..» [t}he change in the statute was clearly 
procedural. The new statute simply altered 
the methods employed in determining 
whether the death penalty was to be im- 
posed; there was no change in the quantum 
of punishment attached to the crime. 


Dobbert, 432 U.S. at. 293, 294, 97 S.Ct. at 2298, 53 
L.Ed.2d at 356. 


The Court further supported the conclusion that the 
change was procedural by quoting from Hopt v. Utah, 110 
U.S. 574, 4 S.Ct. 202, 28 L.Ed. 262 (1884), as follows: 


The crime for which the present defendant 
was indicted, the punishment prescribed 
therefor, and the quantity or the degree of 
proof necessary to establish his guilt, all 
remained unaffected by the subsequent stat- 
ute. 


Dobbert, 432 U.S. at 294, 97 S.Ct. at 2298, 2299, 53 
L.Ed.2d at 357. 


R.C.M. 1004 established capital sentencing provisions 
which are similar to the statutory changes in Dobbert. 
R.C.M. 1004 sets forth aggravating factors, one or more of 
which must be found before death may be considered: 


17 


provides a notice requirement concerning these factors; 
provides broad latitude to present evidence in extenuation 
and mitigation; establishes voting procedures; and provides 
for necessary findings, including a balancing test, as a 
prerequisite to adjudging a death sentence. As in Dobbert, 
R.C.M. 1004 simply altered the methods employed in 
determining whether the death penalty was to be imposed. 
Thus, we reach the same conclusion as the Court in 
Dobbert as to the nature of these provisions. We find that 
the changes in the capital sentencing scheme brought about 
by the provisions of R.C.M. 1004 are clearly procedural. 


.. 


The next question is whether such a promulgation is 
contrary to the intent of Congress. We analyze this from 
two perspectives. First, Article 36(b) requires that the 
President report to Congress when rules and regulations are 
made. In accordance with this provision, copies of the 
Executive Orders promulgating R.C.M. 1004 as a part of 
MCM, 1984, and the subsequent modification to R.C.M. 
1004 were transmitted to Congress. 130 Cong.Rec. H-7611 
(daily ed. July 23, 1984) (BC-3679); id. S-9217 (daily ed. 
July 25, 1984) (EC-3579); and 132 Cong.Rec. H-1022 
(daily ed. March 11, 1986) (EC-2959); id. S-2355 (daily 
ed. March 10, 1986) (EC-2667). Thereafter, no Congres- 
sional objection to R.C.M. 1004 was voiced and, 
consequently, tacit approval of these procedures can be 
inferred. Second, and more important, is the Congressional 
intent reflected in the passage of Public Law 99-145, Title 
V. § 534(a), Nov. 8, 1985, 99 Stat. 634, which amended 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice by establishing 
espionage as a capital offense under Article 106a, UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 906a. This article creates certain aggravating 
factors which the members must unanimously find beyond 
a reasonable doubt in order to adjudge a sentence of death. 


In addition, it provides specific recognition of the 
President's power to delineate aggravating factors for a 


capital offense, as follows: 
(4) Any other factor that may be prescribed 
by the President by regulations under section 
836. of this title (Article 36). 


Article 106a(c)(4), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 906a. 


Furthermore, in considering the legislative intent associ- 


ated with this act we note the following: 


The conferees did, however, adopt a statu- 
tory formulation of capital sentencing stand- 
ards for espionage cases and intend that 
those standards be implemented in a manner 
consistent with the provisions of Rule for 
Courts-Martial 1004 of the Manual for 
Courts-Martial, 1984. The conferees do not 
intend that the enactment of statutory capital 
sentencing standards for the new Article 
106a be construed as affecting the validity of 
the regulatory capital sentencing standards 
that already exist for the other capital 
punitive articles. 


Department of Defense Authorization Act of 1986, Pub.L. 


No. 99-145, 1985 U.S.Code Cong. & Admi 
pp. 472, 579. : ge rete 


This legislative intent evidences a clear ratification of 
the Presidential action in promulgating R.C.M. 1004. This 
combined with the statutory provision allowing the Presi. 
dent to establish aggravating factors and the tacit approval 
of R.C.M. 1004, convinces us that Congress does not 


19 


believe that the President has encroached on its legislative 
prerogative in this matter. 


D. 


The only remaining question is whether, in spite of the 
beliefs of the Court of Military Appeals, the President, and 
Congress, promulgation of this rule is nevertheless consti- 
tutionally flawed because the Congressional delegation of 
power to the President under Article 36, UCMJ, is 
violative of the principle of separation of powers.° The 
Supreme Court has long recognized that Congress gener- 
ally cannot delegate its legislative powers to another 
branch of Government. Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649, 692, 
12 S.Ct. 495, 504, 36 L.Ed. 294, 310 (1892). Nevertheless, 
they have recognized that this prohibition does not prevent 
Congress from acquiring the assistance of other branches. 
J.W. Hampton, Jr. & Company v. United States, 276 U.S. 
394, 406, 48 S.Ct. 348, 351, 72 L.Ed. 624, 629 (1928). In 
Hampton, the Court indicated: 


In determining what it may do in seeking 
assistance from another branch, the extent 
and character of that assistance must be 
fixed according to common sense and the 
inherent necessities of the governmental 
coordination. .. . Congress has found it .. . 
necessary to use officers of the executive 
branch within defined limits, to secure the 
exact effect intended by its acts of legisla- 
tion, by vesting discretion ... to make 
public regulations interpreting a statute and 
directing the details of its execution, even to 
the extent of providing for penalizing a 
breach of such regulations. 


5U.S. CONST. art. I, § | provides that legislative powers shall be vested in 
the Congress of the United States. 


20 


Id. (Citations omitted). 


As a result, many Congressional delegations of power 
have been upheld. See, e.g., Mistretta v. United States, —— 
U.S. —_, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989) 
(upholding delegation to the United States Sentencing 
Commission of the power to promulgate binding sentenc- 
ing guidelines for federal offenses); /ichter v. United 
States, 334 U.S. 742, 785-786, 68 S.Ct. 1294, 1316-1317, 
92 L.Ed. 1694, 1725-1726 (1948) (upholding delegation to 
Secretary of War and other administrative officials of the 
authority to determine excessive profits); FPC v. Hope 
Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591, 600, 64 S.Ct. 281, 287, 88 
L.Ed. 333, 344 (1944) (upholding delegation of authority 
to Federal Power Commission to determine just and 
reasonable rates). 


The Supreme Court has upheld Congressional delegation 
of authority where it ‘‘is sufficiently specific and detailed 
to meet constitutional requirements’’, Mistretta, _ U.S. 
at __, 109 S.Ct. at 655, and where ‘‘Congress clearly 
delineates the general policy, the public agency which is to 
apply it, and the boundaries of this delegated authority.’ 
American Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U.S. 90, 105, 67 
S.Ct. 133, 142, 91 L.Ed. 103, 116 (1946). In her dissent, 
Judge Albertson argues that Article 36, UCMSJ, fails to 
meet these requirements, particularly as to establishing 
specific standards to prevent the President from acting 
arbitrarily. We do not agree. 


Article 36, UCMJ, delineates the general policy to pre- 
scribe pretrial, trial, and post-trial procedures for cases 
tried by courts-martial. It states that the authority is 
delegated to the President, and, most importantly, it does 
establish specific boundaries to limit the President's action 
under this provision. The President, in prescribing these 


21 


procedures, is bound to apply the principles of law 
recognized in criminal trials in the United States district 
courts. Consequently, he does not have unfettered discre- 
tion to do as he pleases. Rather, he may not act arbitrarily 
and he must follow the law. He is subject to an additional 
check in that he must report all rules and regulations made 
under this article to the Congress. 


The President's action in promulgating R.C.M. 1004 
falls squarely within the specific and detailed boundaries of 
his authority. R.C.M. 1004 complies not only with the 
legal principles of the United States district courts, but also 
with those of the United States Supreme Court. See 
Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231, 108 S.Ct. 546, 98 
L.Ed.2d 568 (1988); Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 103 
S.Ct. 2733, 77 L.Ed.2d 235 (1983); Gregg v. Georgia, 428 
U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976); Proffitt v. 
Florida, 428 U.S. 242, 96 S.Ct. 2960, 49 L.Ed.2d 913 
(1976). We find no defect, constitutional or otherwise, in 
the promulgation of this rule. 


IV 
Equal Protection 


Appellant alleges that he has been denied his right to the 
equal protection of the law and to be free from cruel and 
unusual punishment because as a member of the armed 
forces he has been sentenced to death when _ this 
punishment is not available for murder tried in federal 
civilian courts. The appellant's assertion that his rights 
under the Fifth and Eighth Amendments have been violated 
by Congress’ decision to make the death penalty available 
for violations of Article 118, UCMJ, and the President's 
promulgation of the prgcedures in R.C.M. 1004, MCM, 


22 


1984, for the imposition of the death penalty, is without 
merit.® 


The Court of Military Appeals has held that not every 
distinction or varied treatment of military personnel made 
by the Government violates equal protection guarantees of 
the Constitution. United States v. Means, 10 M.J. 162, 165 
(C.M.A. 1981). It is only when the distinction or treatment 
becomes unjustifiable discrimination that a service mem- 
ber’s due process rights to the equal protection of the laws 
are implicated. United States v. Rodriguez-Amy, 19 M.J. 
177, 178 (C.M.A. 1958); United States v. Larner, | M.J. 
371, 375 (C.M.A. 1976). In order to determine when a 
distinction or treatment is justifiable it is necessary to first 
examine whether the Government has utilized constitu- 
tionally suspect classifications such as race, religion, or 
national origin, or whether the Government is encroaching 
on fundamental constitutional rights. If neither suspect 
classifications nor fundamental constitutional rights are 
involved, then the Government's varied treatment of 
service members need only have a reasonable or rational 
basis. Means, 10 M.J. at 165. 


Appellant has alleged that his fundamental right to life is 
encroached by the Government's decision to make the 
death penalty a permissible sentence for service members 
and, therefore, a higher standard of scrutiny should be 
utilized than the rational basis test for determining whether 
he has been denied equal protection of the law. This 


©The Eighth Amendment is violated when the death penalty is carned out in 
barbaric or inhumane method or if it is excessive in relation to the crime 
committed. See Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 97 S.Ct. 2861, 53 L.Ed.2d 
982 (1977); Gray v. Lucas, 677 F.2d 1086 (Sth Cir. 1982). Since the appellant 
has not factually developed the method in which naval personnel are to be 
executed and since the question of whether the death penalty 1s proportionate 
to appellant's crime is fully discussed in section VII, we will analyze this 
allegation of error pursuant to the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment. 


23 


particular issue is of first impression in military law and 
we will look to federal case law for precedent. The Fifth 
Circuit Court of Appeals has twice examined this exact 
issue. In Gray v. Lucas, 677 F.2d 1086 (Sth Cir. 1982), 
cert. denied, 461 U.S. 910, 103 S.Ct. 1886, 76 L.Ed.2d 815 
(1983), the Court held that the presence of a death penalty 
in a criminal statute does not encroach on a fundamental 
right so as to trigger a heightened level of scrutiny. The 
Fifth Circuit based its decision on the Supreme Court's 
reasoning in Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S 153, 96 S.Ct. 
2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976). 


In Gregg, the Supreme Court reasoned that because of 
the complex issues involved in determining the moral 
values of society and the social utility of the death penalty, 
it is particularly within the province of the legislature to 
establish the degree of punishment for certain classes of 
crimes. Therefore, the Court reasoned that the decision to 
authorize the death penalty for certain classes of crimes 
Should not be upset by the courts unless it is ‘‘clearly 
wrong.’ See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 186-188, 96 S.Ct. at 2931, 
49 L.Ed.2d at 882. Accordingly, it was held in Gray vy. 
Lucas that equal protection challenges to a death penalty 
scheme should be analyzed under a rational basis test, and 
not the heightened level of scrutiny which appellant urges. 
This holding was later reaffirmed in Williams v. Lynaugh, 
814 F.2d 205 (Sth Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 935, 
108 S.Ct. 311, 98 L.Ed.2d 270 (1987). 


The legal reasoning in Gray v. Lucas and Williams vy. 
Lynaugh is sound and we will, therefore, analyze 
appellant’s equal protection challenge to R.C.M. 1004, 
MCM, 1984, according to the rational or reasonable basis 
test. But cf. Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535, 62 S.Ct. 
1110, 86 L.Ed. 1655 (1942) (the punishment of steriliza- 
tion was held to encroach upon the fundamental right of 
procreation). 


24 


Congress had a rational basis for deciding to authorize 
the death penalty for a violation of Article 118 and to 
delegate to the President the task of promulgating the 
procedures to impose this punishment on service members. 
Service members, because of their mission to wage war, 
may need the more stringent deterrent of capital punish- 
ment to ensure discipline. It is the necessity to secure from 
service members ‘‘prompt obedience to lawful orders and 
the maintenance of the orderliness and_ self-discipline 
necessary to the effective operation and control of an 
armed force in combat’’ that precipitated the establishment 
of the UCMJ as a disciplinary system. United States v. Van 
Steenwyk, 21 M.J. 795, 801 (NMCMR 1985). It is because 
‘‘the military is by necessity, a specialized society separate 
from civilian society’’ that civilian definitions of *‘criminal 
law’ cannot be applied to establish the parameters 
necessary to maintain military discipline. Parker v. Levy, 
417 US. 733, 743, 94 S.Ct. 2547, 2555, 41 L.Ed.2d 439, 
450 (1974). Therefore, it is reasonable for Congress to 
ensure military discipline by providing a heightened 
punishment for a breach of military criminal law than 
would be authorized for similar breaches of federal civilian 
criminal law. 


It is also reasonable for Congress to address the 
potential fears that the civilian community may have 
towards maintaining a professional and permanent fighting 
force by authorizing death for certain heinous crimes, such 
as murder. Clearly, a rational basis exists for the federal 
Government to distinguish civilians convicted of- murder 
from federally trained and government sponsored military 
members convicted of murder and to legislate a different 
form of punishment for these two classes of criminals. 
Thus, we find the appellant's equal protection challenge to 
the punishment of death for a violation of Article 118 and 
to the procedures as set forth in R.C.M. 1004 to be without 

merit. ' 


25 
\ 


Challenge For Cause 


After lengthy voir dire, one of the prospective members, 
Captain Emerson, was challenged for cause by the 
Government. The Government based its challenge on the 
case of Witherspoon v. Illinois, 391 U.S. 510, 88 S.Ct. 
1770, 20 L.Ed.2d 776 (1968), arguing that because of his 
religious upbringing and beliefs, Captain Emerson could 
never, under any circumstance, vote to impose the death 


penalty. The military judge granted the Government's 
challenge for cause, stating: 


I believe that he would not have any 
difficulty in voting for a finding of guilty 
which would automatically result in a 
penalty of death. But in this case I think it is 
clear to the military judge that he does have 
an inelastic attitude as described for—to 
voting in U.S. v. Rojas, {15 MJ. 902 
(NMMR 1983)] and although he used the 
words that he would consider, I don’t think 
that that consideration would be a meaning- 
ful one anyway, and that, notwithstanding 
his sincerity, he would be compelled to vote 
for the alternate punishment. 


Appellant asserts that the military judge erred in 


granting this challenge for cause. He contends that the 
military judge’s reliance on Witherspoon and United States 
v. Rojas, 15 M.J. 902 (NMCMR 1983), was misplaced and 
that a new standard exists which would not have excluded 
Captain Emerson. Appellant is correct to the extent that the 
standard applicable to this challenge is the one set forth in 
Adams vy. Texas, 448 U.S. 38, 100 S.Ct. 2521, 65 L.Ed.2d 


26 


581 (1980). However, we find that the military judge 
considered Adams in making his ruling and that Captain 
Emerson’s views concerning capital punishment permitted 
his challenge under this standard. Thus, appellant's 
contention is without merit. 


In Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 412, 105 S.Ct. 844, 83 
L.Ed.2d 841 (1985), the United States Supreme Court 
reaffirmed that Adams v. Texas established the proper 
standard fo; determining when prospective jurors may be 
excluded for cause because of their views on capital 
punishment.? Adams permits a juror to be challenged for 
cause when his views about capital punishment would 
prevent or substantially impair the performance of his 
duties as a juror in accordance with his instructions and his 
oath. Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 423, 105 S.Ct. at 851, 83 
L.Ed.2d at 851. This standard abolishes the Witherspoon 
reference to ‘‘automatically’’ voting against the death 
penalty, thereby dispensing with the requirement that a 
juror could only be excluded if he would never vote for 
death. In addition, it eliminates the extremely high burden 
of proving that a juror’s bias is ‘‘unambiguous’ or 
‘‘unmistakably clear’’. /d. 469 U.S. at 423, 424, 105 S.Ct. 
at 851, 852, 83 L.Ed.2d at 851, 852. 


In applying this standard in Wainwright, the Supreme 
Court upheld the trial judge’s excusal for cause of a juror 
who stated that her beliefs concerning the death penalty 
would interfere with her sitting as a juror. In so finding, 
the court gave great deference to the trial judge’s findings 
as long as the findings were fairly supported by the record 
regardless of whether a reviewing court might disagree 
with these findings. The Court noted: 


7In reaffirming this standard, the Court noted that the genesis for excusing 
jurors in capital cases was to prevent the state’s legitimate interest im 
administering constitutional capital sentencing schemes from being frustrated 
Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 423, 105 S.Ct. at 851, 83 L.Ed.2d at 851 


27 


... determinations of juror bias cannot be 
reduced to question-and-answer sessions 
which obtain results in the manner of 
catechism. What common sense should have 
realized experience has proved: many venire- 
men simply cannot be asked enough ques- 
tions to reach the point where their bias has 
been made ‘‘unmistakably clear’’; these 
veniremen may not know how they will 
react when faced with imposing the death 
sentence, or may be unable to articulate, or 
may wish to hide their true feelings. Despite 
this lack of clarity in the printed record, 
however, there will be situations where the 
trial judge is left with the definite impression 
that a prospective juror would be unable to 
faithfully and impartially apply the law... . 
[T}his is why deference must be paid to the 
trial judge who sees and hears the juror. 


469 U.S. at 434, 105 S.Ct. at 857, 83 L.Ed.2d at 858, 
citing Marshall v. Lonberger, 459 U.S. 422, 103 S.Ct. 843, 
74 L.Ed.2d 646 (1983). 


The Supreme Court similarly applied the Adams standard 
in Lockhart v. McCree, 476 U.S. 162, 106 S.Ct. 1758, 90 
| Ed.2d 137 (1986), and upheld the removal of eight jurors 
for cause prior to the guilt phase of a bifurcated trial. In 
that case, the trial judge removed for cause eight of the 
jurors who stated that they could not under any 
circumstance vote for the imposition of the death penalty. 


In this case, Captain Emerson was thoroughly questioned 
by both counsel and the military judge. He indicated that 
he had definite reservations concerning the death penalty. 
These reservations were founded on his religious teachings 


28 


and belief that only God could take a life. Captain 
Emerson appeared to be quite ambivalent during the initial 
portion of the voir dire as to how his beliefs might affect 
his ability to sit as a member and adjudge a sentence.* 
Subsequently, however, his feelings became much more 
focused, particularly efter he realized that he had another 
option available dusimg sentencing other than death: 


DC: Well, I'm a little confused because it 
seems to me that you're saying two things at 
the same time. Are you saying that it’s your 
religious belief that it's an extremely diffi- 
cult thing to do, to vote for a death penalty? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. 


DC: And at the same time you're saying 
that, yes, because of my obligation as a 
military officer, | could consider it and | 
could do it? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): | could consider 
it, but once again | stated that if there is 
another option that | would probably sway 
towards the other option. 


R. 167, 168. 


TC: So you, under no circumstances, be- 
cause of your religious beliefs could vote for 
a penalty of death regardless of the facts and 
circumstances of the case? 


29 


TC: You could consider it, but you could not 
vote for it? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. 
TC: Because of your religious beliefs? 
MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. 


TC: And that’s the truth from the bottom of 
your heart, is it not? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. 
TC: Captain Emerson? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): When he asked 
me do I consider it, I said **I'd consider it."’ 
But once again, I will always go with the 
other option. 


. 169. 


MJ: Now considering the prefatory remarks 
of Major Boyett, we got to the point in 
which you were called upon to cast your 
vote either for the death penalty or for the 
other alternative punishment. Do I correctly 
understand that you would in all events cast 
your vote for the alternative punishment? 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. 


MEM(CAPT EMERSON): Yes, sir. R. 173. 


‘It ts clear from the record that Captain Emerson's religious beliefs would not . . : ' 
have interfered with his ability to determine guilt or innocence during the The foregoing testimony clearly illustrates that Captain 
aed onattin aa Emerson's beliefs would affect his ability to adjudicate a 


30 


sentence in that he would always choose an alternative 
other than death even though he would ‘‘consider’’ death. 
We agree with the military judge that this “‘consideration”’ 
would not be a meaningful one. 


We must now examine Captain Emerson's responses in 
light of the Adams test to determine whether his exclusion 
for cause was proper. We initially note that, contrary to 
appellant's assertion, the military judge did not rely solely 
on Witherspoon and Rojas in ruling on this challenge. In 
fact, following a recess toward the end of voir dire, he 
compared Captain Emerson's responses specifically with 
the Adams and Lockhart cases. 


We give deference to the military judge's determination 
of Captain Emerson's views based on his personal 
observation of Captain Emerson and conclude that it is 
fairly supported by the record. We find that if Captain 
Emerson had been allowed to serve as a member in this 
case he would have effectively frustrated the Government's 
legitimate interest in administering its constitutionally valid 
death penalty scheme by always voting for an option other 
than death regardless of the circumstances. We find that 
Captain Emerson's views would have prevented or 
substantially impaired the performance of his duties as a 
juror in accordance with his instructions and his oath. The 
excusal of Captain Emerson for cause was proper. 


Vi 


Denial of Right to a Panel of Fair and 
Impartial Members 


Appellant made a motion for appropriate relief at trial 
asserting that his Sixth Amendment right to an impartial 
jury had been violated in that the members selected by the 


31 


convening authority did not represent a cross section of the 
community. This same issue is raised on appeal and, in 
addition, appellant contends that even if the Sixth 
Amendment is inapplicable to courts-martial, he neverthe- 
less was denied his due process right to be tried by 
members with fair and open minds whose impartiality 
could not be reasonably questioned. We find no merit to 
either contention. 


In support of his motion, appellant called a clinical 
psychologist to testify. The witness was qualified as an 
expert in behavioral psychology. As to foundational 
matters, the psychologist testified that he was aware of the 
fact that appellant was alleged to have murdered a Marine 
officer and his wife, that he had reviewed the convening 
orders and modifications, and was aware of the composi- 
tion of the prospective membership of the court. The 
psychologist testified that he was concerned that the officer 
members would not be totally impartial and objective 
because of their higher likelihood of identifying with the 
victim, who was also an officer. He proposed that the 
situation could be remedied by selecting the prospective 
members at random. No inquiry was made of the 
psychologist as to the ability of an officer chosen at 
random to be impartial and objective. Subsequently, the 
members were extensively questioned in voir dire and, as 
appellate defense counsel concedes in his brief, the officer 
members who ultimately decided the case gave no specific 
responses during voir dire which indicated any inability to 
be impartial. It is also significant to note that the assistant 
defense counsel acknowledged to the military judge that 
there was no indication that the convening authority had 
failed to comply with Article 25, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 825.” 


*This is uncontested on appeal. 


32 


Congress has specifically prescribed in Article 25, 
UCMSJ, the qualifications for service as a member of a 
courts-martial. It provides in pertinent part: 


[T]he convening authority shall detail as 
members thereof such members as, in his 
opinion, are best qualified for the duty by 
reason of age, education, training, ex- 
perience, length of service, and judicial 
temperament. 


The Court of Military Appeals has noted on several 
occasions that the Sixth Amendment right to a jury 
composed of a _ representative cross section of the 
population does not apply to courts-martial and, in fact, 
Article 25 contemplates otherwise. See United States v. 
Santiago-Davila, 26 MJ. 380 (C.M.A. 1988); United 
States v. McClain, 22 MJ. 124 (C.M.A. 1986). 


We consider unpersuasive the appellant's argument that 
the testimony of his expert, standing alone, was sufficient 
to dismiss the members. 


The record contains nothing at all to support appellant's 
conclusion. The expert testified in advance of voir dire and 
expressed a ‘“‘concern’’ that the officer members might 
identify with the victim and therefore be partial. This 
‘‘concern’’ was wholly unsubstantiated by specific re- 
sponses of prospective officer members during voir dire. 
While the expert had testified in numerous trials, he 
admitted that this was the first time he had expressed an 
opinion on this particular issue. Finally, his remedy to 
resolve the situation—to randomly select members from 
the command—leaves open the distinct possibility that the 
officers chosen in this manner might have the same 
inclination to identify with the victim. His remedy in no 


33 


way seeks to exclude officers entirely from the panel! 
which would logically resolve his concern, but merely 
offers an alternative method for selecting prospective 
members than is set forth in Article 25. The proposed 
remedy is inconsistent with the psychologist’s own opinion 
and detracts from its validity. We find nothing to support 
the allegation that the officer members might not be 
impartial. To the contrary, the record is replete with 
assurances by the members that they would follow the law 
and give appellant a fair trial. The military judge correctly 
denied this motion for appropriate relief. 


Vil 
Peremptory Challenge 


At the conclusion of voir dire, Government counsel 
peremptorily challenged Staff Sergeant Edwards, a black, 
who is of the same racial group as appellant. Defense 
counsel objected on the basis that the peremptory challenge 
was used in a discriminatory manner, but the objection was 
ultimately overruled by the military judge. Appellant 
contends that the military judge erred in this ruling, 
thereby denying his right to equal protection of the law. 


The Supreme Court has held that a defendant has the 
right to be tried by a jury from which no ‘‘cognizable 
racial group has been excluded’’ and, thus, ‘‘the Equal 
Protection Clause forbids the prosecutor to challenge 
potential jurors solely on account of their race or on the 
assumption that black jurors as a group will be unable 
impartially to consider the State’s case against a black 


‘While an accused is not entitled to a panel composed of entirely enlisted 
personnel, Article 25 does not preclude such a result. It merely requires that ar 
least one-third of the members be enlisted when the accused has made a 
request for enlisted members. 


34 


defendant.’ Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 at 89, 106 
S.Ct. 1712 at 1719, 90 L.Ed.2d 69 at 83 (1986). This mght 
to equal protection is part of due process under the Fifth 
Amendment and applies to trials by Courts-Martial. United 
States v. Santiago-Davila, 26 M.J. 380 (C.M.A. 1988). See 
also United States v. Shelby, 26 M.J. 921 (NMCMR 1988). 


Batson provides that once the defendant makes a prima 
facie showing of purposeful discrimination in the Govern- 
ment’s use of the peremptory challenge, “‘the burden shifts 
to the State to come forward with a neutral explanation for 
challenging black jurors.’ Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 
S.Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88. A prima facie case Is 
established when the defendant shows that he is a member 
of a cognizable racial group; that the prosecutor exercised 
peremptory challenges to remove members of defendant's 
racial group; and, that these facts and any other relevant 
circumstances raise an inference that the use of these 
challenges was to purposely exclude jurors because of race. 
This inference is based on the totality of the circumstances 
and such things as a ‘‘pattern’’ of strikes of members of a 
racial group or the prosecutor's questions and statements 
during voir dire, may be considered. Batson, 476 U.S. at 
96, 97, 106 S.Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88. 


It is insufficient to rebut the prima facie case by a mere 
assertion of the prosecutor that he was properly performing 
his duties and had no discriminatory motive for his 
challenge. It is not, however, necessary for the neutral 
explanation to rise to the level that would justify a 
challenge for cause. Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 S.Ct. at 
1722, 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88. In Batson, the case was 
remanded because the prosecutor used his peremptory 
challenges to remove all four black persons on the venire 
which resulted in the defendant, also black, being tried by 
an all white jury. 


35 


In Santiago-Davila, the accused was of Hispanic descent 
and the court members selected by the convening authority 
consisted of ten officer and enlisted members, two of 
whom had Hispanic surnames. Following voir dire, the 
Government peremptorily challenged one of the Hispanics 
and the military judge allowed the challenge to stand in 
spite of the objection. by defense counsel. The military 
judge offered trial counsel an opportunity to state a reason 
for the challenge but trial counsel declined to do so and 
the military judge did not require that a reason be given. In 
remanding Santiago-Davila, the Court of Military Appeals 
found that a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination 
had been established which required that a_ neutral 
explanation be given. The Court was not persuaded by the 
fact that one Hispanic remained on the panel, and it was of 
particular importance that they found an absence of 
anything in the voir dire or anywhere else in the record to 
clearly indicate anything other than race as a motive for 
the challenge. Santiago-Davila, 26 M.J. at 391. 


Turning to the case sub judice, the court selected by the 
convening authority consisted of nine officers and six 
enlisted members. Of these, six were black. One black 
officer was successfully challenged for cause by the 
defense because he knew Lieutenant Lotz and was Lotz’s 
superior in the chain of command. Another black officer, 
Captain Emerson, was also challenged for cause by the 
Government for the reasons discussed in a prior assign- 
ment of error. The Government further successfully 
challenged for cause a white officer without objection and 
the defense similarly challenged for cause two more white 
officers. Thus, at the time the Government exercised its 
peremptory challenge against Staff Sergeant Edwards, the 
panel consisted of four officers and six enlisted persons, 
four of whom were black. The final racial composition of 
the court was six whites and three blacks (one officer and 
two enlisted). 


36 


During voir dire, trial counsel initially experienced some 
difficulty in ascertaining that Staff Sergeant Edwards 
understood the concept of the government's burden to 
establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and required 
assistance by the military judge in defining terms. 
Thereafter, the voir dire appeared to proceed smoothly 
without revealing anything of particular significance until 
the following relevant exchange occurred: 


TC: I'll just ask one general question, Staff 
Sergeant. How do you feel about, again, 
being—sitting here as a member in_ this 
case? Your own words. 


MEM(SSGT EDWARDS): I feel, . sir, 
basically that it would be to me a learning 
experience. And coming in with an open 
mind, being able to give everything, weigh- 
ing out everything, and listening to all the 
facts before I finally say whether a person is 
innocent or guilty, it would be a good 
experience for me and something that | 
would like to go through, sir. 


TC: You'd also agree that not—it’s not only 
would be a learning experience, it would be 
a very, very serious responsibility? 


MEM(SSGT EDWARDS): Yes, sir. 


TC: Possibly one of the more serious 
responsibilities in your whole life? 


MEM(SSGT EDWARDS): Yes, sir. 


This concluded the voir dire of Staff Sergeant Edwards 
and he was subsequently peremptorily challenged by the 


37 


Government. Defense counsel made a timely objection and 
requested that the government state the reason for the 
challenge. At the time, because Santiago-Davila had not 
yet been decided, the military judge and counsel recessed 
and considered the ruling in Batson. Thereafter, the 
military judge and trial counsel believed it would be best 
for trial counsel to state the reason for his challenge. There 
was no discussion or finding as to whether a prima facie 
case of purposeful discrimination had been established. 
The defense counsel expressed his concern as follows: 


DC: Now, it strikes the defense that the 
government has known for some three and a 
half months that this case involved a defense 
theory which potentially would involve 
racial prejudice. As I remember the answers 
of Staff Sergeant Edwards, he met all legal 
criteria to be a member. No one had any 
objection to him for cause or anything like 
that. And it strikes the defense as rather 
Strange at this particular point in time that 
the government is using its one peremptory 
challenge to take a black man off this jury. 
Of course, there’s nothing that I can point to 
which proves that it’s racially motivated in 
any particular form, fashion, or manner 
because I can’t look in the minds of the 
prosecution. But it essentially gives a bad 
flavor to the whole thing and it’s the 
position of the defense that we should not 
only be worried about actual fact, but im- 
pression and how it looks as well because 
the court is, after all, essentially, an instru- 
ment which is supposed to arrive at fairness. 


The military judge discussed the challenges of the other 
blacks from the panel. 


38 


MJ: Well, of course, there were—I think at 
least two black members that were excused 
by challenges for cause, but neither one of 
those had any racial foundation; is that 
correct? 


DC: Yes, sir. 


After further discussion concerning specific rationale for 
these challenges, trial counsel stated his reason for 
challenging Staff Sergeant Edwards. 


TC: My articulation, sir, is, first of all, in 
my opinion Staff Sergeant Edwards’ re- 
sponses to the voir dire, while satisfactory, 
didn’t indicate to me to be the kind of 
member that the government would want on 
this case and one thing particularly that he 
said, if | remember correctly, he said that he 
would consider this as a learning experience 
which, in the Government's opinion, that 
was not the—while not challengeable for 
cause, that is why the government chose to 
exercise its peremptory challenge on him. 


Appellant contends that this is not the neutral basis for 
challenge required by Batson. The Government asserts that 
trial counsel’s explanation indicated that the purpose for 
the challenge was race-neutral assuming arguendo that a 
prima facie case of discrimination had been shown. 


In deciding this issue we will initially analyze whether 
there was a prima facie showing of purposeful discrimina- 
tion in connection with the peremptory challenge of Staff 


39 


Sergeant Edwards. First, appellant is a member of a 
cognizable racial group and, second, the Government's 
peremptory challenge sought to remove a member of that 
group. The only remaining question is whether the totality 
of the circumstances raise an inference that the challenge 
was used to exclude this member solely because of race. 


Examining the pattern of challenges exercised by trial 
counsel, we note that challenges for cause were exercised 
against one white and one black officer. The black officer 
was challenged because of his beliefs regarding capital 
punishment. In fact, defense counsel agreed with the 
military judge that this challenge had no racial foundation. 
Appellate defense counsel further concedes that he can 
point to nothing which proves the challenge was racially 
motivated. Our review of the record likewise reveals 
nothing said by trial counsel during voir dire that would 
infer the challenge was racially motivated. Our determina- 
tion of this question is hampered by the fact that the 
military judge made no findings with respect to this prima 
facie showing either because he simply neglected this step 
in applying the Batson principles or because he believed 
there was an automatic inference of purposeful exclusion 
merely because of the defense theory involving racial 
prejudice or for some other reason. Without speculating 
further, we will exercise caution and follow the Court of 
Military Appeals in their belief that the trial judge is able 
to decide if all of the circumstances surrounding the 
challenge create a prima facie case. Santiago-Davila, 26 
M.j. at 392. 


Finally, we must analyze whether trial counsel's expla- 
nation was neutral. Trial counsel stated that Staff Sergeant 
Edwards was not the kind of member the Government 
wanted on the case because he stated he would use it as a 


40 


learning exprience.'' In response to this explanation the 
military judge indicated that this was the only thing he had 
written down with respect to Staff Sergeant Edwards. He 
noted that it was probably an unfortunate choice of words 
but it nevertheless caught his attention. The military judge, 
in denying the defense’s objection and thus sustaining the 
peremptory challenge, found that, while he might not agree 
with the Government's stated reason, it was understandable 
and had sufficient foundation to satisfy Batson. We agree 
with the military judge. 


Trial counsel's questioning during the entire voir dire 
reflected the fact that he wanted the court to consist of 
members who were aware of the serious responsibility of 
deciding a capital case and who were capable of carrying 
out that responsibility. We believe that trial counsel sensed 
something less than these qualities in Staff Sergeant 
Edwards and felt that a case with the serious consequences 
of this one should not be used as a “‘learning experience’ ’. 
We find this explanation to be totally devoid of any racial 
motivation and to be completely neutral. 


Vill 


Appropriateness of the 
Sentence to Death 


Finally, we consider the appropriateness of appellant's 
sentence to death. Appellant contends that he should not be 
put to death because his murder of the Lotzs was simply a 
reaction to the way he had been treated by Lieutenant 


'! There may have been other factors of concern to trial counsel such as the 
difficulty he encountered in explaining to Staff Sergeant Edwards the cor -ept 
of the Government's burden to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. We wil! 
not speculate, however, as to what ‘‘other’’ factors may have influenced trial 
counsel to exercise this challenge and we have confined our analysis solely to 
the reason stated in the record. 


4] 


Lotz. He also contends that no proper penal interest would 
be served by such a sentence. He argues that these factors 
militate against imposition of the death penalty in this 
case. Chief Judge Byrne in his dissent, cites the ‘‘racial 
stereotyping of appellant by Lieutenant Lotz’’,'? as well as 
the lack of recent precedent for executions in the Naval 
Service, as reasons for opposing the death penalty in this 
case. We do not agree with this reasoning. 


We begin our analysis of this issue by carefully 
considering Lieutenant Lotz’s relationship with ‘iis subordi- 
nates and the atmosphere that existed in the supply office. 
Lieutenant Lotz referred to his subordinates by nicknames, 
either nicknames he coined himself or those invented by 
others. A Marine of Peruvian descent was called ‘‘a fuzzy 
headed foreigner’’; others had names such as 
“*tomahawk’’, ‘‘red’’, and ‘‘Jonesy’’. Lotz’s use of 
nicknames was not confined to persons in his office and he 
called a black Marine officer friend, *‘Action Jackson’’. 
Several nicknames were used with respect to appellant— 
“Bebop Curtis’’ and ‘Curtis Blow’’ (apparently in 
reference to a black ‘“‘rap’’ singer). In addition to the use 
of nicknames, Lotz allowed music to be played in the work 
spaces, and this was often ‘‘rap’’ music. While listening to 
this music, Lotz, on occasion, imitated what he thought 
were black mannerisms. The atmosphere was described by 
some as joking and casual. 


Following a supply inspection, Lotz was criticized by 
the inspector for calling his subordinates nicknames and 
was told that this practice was unprofessional. Thereafter, 


'2In support of this reason, Chief Judge Byrne states that racial prejudice in 
sentencing was an underlying rationale for striking down the death penalty in 
Furman. Such rationale is inapposite to this case since in Furman the racial 
prejudice under consideration was that of the jury against the defendant rather 
than any prejudice by the victim against the accused as alleged in this case 


— 


42 


Lotz called the office personnel together and inquired as to 
whether the use of nicknames was offensive to anyone. No 
one present, including Curtis, voiced an objection to this 
practice and the use of nicknames continued. 


Appellant testified that he was nevertheless bothered by 
these nicknames and by Lotz snapping his fingers at him, 
calling his mother by her first name and criticizing him for 
a bad attitude. Appellant acknowledged on cross-examina- 
tion that his proficiency and conduct marks had improved 
under Lotz and that Lotz was training him for a job of 
increased responsibility within the office. Co-workers 
characterized the occasional criticism of Curtis as justified 
because Curtis was a slow worker and was sometimes lazy. 
Appellant asserts that Lotz’s actions, as a whole, were 
offensive to him and that he perceived Lotz to be racially 
prejudiced.'* 


It is apparent that Lieutenant Lotz was insensitive to the 
feelings of minorities and to the potential effect of his 
conduct in this regard. Additionally, it is apparent that 
Lieutenant Lotz made the mistake which some junior, 


'*We are unable to determine whether or not Lieutenant Lotz was, in fact, 
racially preyudiced. We note, however, that substantial evidence was admitted 
that Lotz was neither racially prejudiced nor acted in a discriminatory manner. 
For example, two black sergeants and a black staff sergeant who worked in 
the supply office testified that they did not believe that Lotz was racially 
prejudiced. They did not preceive “‘racial tension’’ in the office nor did they 
believe that the use of nicknames and imitations by Lotz were done in a 
racially derogatory fashion. The Company First Sergeant, also a black Marine, 
testifred that during his twenty-five years of active duty he had seen racial 
prejudice, however, after knowing Lieutenant Lotz for two years, it was his 
opimon that Lotz was not prejudiced against black Marines. First Lieutenant 
Jackson, a black officer. knew Lotz well for almost eight months and testified 
that there was no question in his mind that Lotz was not prejudiced. Finally, a 
young black civilian testified that he lived with Lieutenant and Mrs. Lotz for 
about three months while he assisted Mrs. Lotz in coaching a basketball team 
at the school where she taught. He was treated as a member of the family in 
almost a “‘parental relationship’ ’. 


43 


relatively inexperienced officers make of creating an overly 
familiar, informal atmosphere with his subordinates in an 
attempt to be accepted. This is not a proper or professional 
relationship between officers and enlisted personnel. The 
question, however, is whether Curtis should now be 
exempt from the death penalty because of the flawed 
leadership style of Lieutenant Lotz? 


This question can be phrased in another manner: whether 
one who is dissatisfied with what he perceives to be the 
improper actions of his superior should escape the most 
severe punishment for murdering that superior? We believe 
that it is contrary to the interests of society to mandate a 
lesser punishment for such a crime and still expect that 
such crimes will be deterred in the future. This is particu- 
larly true in a military environment where the very corner- 
stone of our system of discipline is the superior-subordi- 
nate relationship. To allow, or even suggest, that one 
should be less severely punished because of a “‘perception 
of maltreatment’’ by a superior would tear at the very fiber 
of our military system of discipline. We reject the notion 
that the death penalty is inappropriate under the circum- 
stances of this case based on Curtis’ perception of his 
relationship with Lieutenant Lotz. 


Even if we were to believe that appellant's perception of 
mistreatment by Lotz somehow militated against the death 
penalty for killing Lieutenant Lotz, it is inexplicable why 
this in any way lessens his culpability for the brutal 
slaying of Mrs. Lotz. Curtis savagely stabbed Joan Lotz 
seven times as she begged for him to stop and then 
indecently assaulted her as she lay dying. Curtis admitted 
that Joan Lotz never did anything to hurt him. 


We next address the argument that the death sentence is 
inappropriate simply because it has not been imposed in 


44 


the Naval Service in recent history. This fact alone is not 
dispositive of the issue. As previously discussed in Section 
III, Congressional intent that death be a sentencing option 
for premeditated murder remains viable today. In addition, 
while no death sentences have been carried out in the 
recent past, the military community has recently expressed 
its intent that death is the appropriate sentence for 
premeditated murder under certain circumstances by 
adjudging death at the courts-martial level. See United 
States v. Turner, No. 85-4044 (NMCMR 8 August 1986), 
rev'd, 25 M.J. 324 (C.M.A. 1987), aff'd, No. 85-4044R 
(NMCMR 31 October 1988) (convening authority com- 
muted death sentence to life imprisonment); United States 
v. Rojas, 15 MJ. 902 (NMCMR 1983) rev'd in part, 17 
M.J. 154 (NMCMR 1981) (death sentence reversed for 
constitutional procedural infirmity, not for inappropriate- 
ness); United States v. Hutchinson, 15 MJ. 1056 
(NMCMR 1983), rev'd in part, 18 M.J. 281 (C.M.A. 1984) 
(summary disposition) (death sentence reversed for consti- 
tutional procedural infirmity, not for inappropriateness). 
We find these expressions of intent to be persuasive and 
discount any bar to approving the death sentence based on 
when the last time such a sentence was carried out. 


Lastly, we address the contention that death serves no 
penal interest. The death penalty serves two social pur- 
poses: deterrence and retribution. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 
U.S. 153, 183, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 2929-2930, 49 L.Ed.2d 859, 
880. Appellant argues that deterrence can be accomplished 
with a life sentence and that retribution is irrational and 
has no place in the military justice system. We reject this 
argument. . 


As we previously noted, deterring serious criminal 
misconduct is of particular importance in the military 
because our ability to fulfill our mission is directly related 


45 


to the discipline of our forces. In order for deterrence to be 
effective, we believe the full range of punishments for a 
particular offense ought to be available and that the 
punishment should be taiiored to the individual and the 
circumstances of the offense. 


Contrary to appellant’s assertion, retribution has a place 
in our system of justice. In Gregg, Justice Stewart, in 
discussing retribution noted: 


[Cjapital punishment is an expression of 
society's moral outrage at particularly offen- 
sive conduct. This function may be unap- 
pealing to many, but it is essential in an 
ordered society that asks its citizens to rely 
on legal processes rather than self-help to 
vindicate their wrongs. 


Id. 428 U.S. at 183, 96 S.Ct. at 2930, 49 L.Ed.2d at 880. 


Justice Stewart further noted in Gregg a speech on 
capital punishment given by Lord Justice Denning, Master 
of the Rolls of the Court of Appeal in England, in which it 
was stated: 


The truth is that some crimes are so outra- 
geous that society insists on adequate pun- 
ishment, because the wrongdoer deserves it, 
irrespective of whether it is a deterrent or 
not. 


Royal Commission on Capital Punishment, minutes of 
Evidence, Dec. 1, 1949, p. 207 (1950). 


In this case, we view the crimes committed by Curtis to 
be heinous and outrageous. The slaying of Lieutenant Lotz, 


46 


Curtis’ officer-in-charge, and Mrs. Lotz in their quarters 
aboard a military base and the manner in which these 
killings were accomplished convinces us that the death 
sentence is clearly proper. We do not arrive at this 
conclusion lightly and have carefully considered all of the 
circumstances surrounding the offenses and all evidence of 
extenuation and mitigation. Taking all of these factors into 
consideration, we find the sentence to death to be 
appropriate in this case. 


IX 
Decision 


We have carefully examined the record of trial, the 
clemency request, the assignments of error and the 
Government's reply thereto and have concluded that the 
findings and sentence are correct in law and fact and that 
no error materially prejudicial to the substantial rights of 
the appellant was committed. We are convinced of 
appellant’s guilt of all of the charges and specifications 
beyond a reasonable doubt and specifically find the 
sentence to be appropriate. Article 66(c), Uniform Code of 
Military Justice. 


Accordingly, the findings and sentence, as approved on 
review below, are affirmed. 


Senior Judges COUGHLIN and RILEY, and Judges 
McLERAN, MIELCZARSKI, JONES and RUBENS 
concur. 


BYRNE, Chief Judge (concurring/dissenting): 


I believe life impr’sonment, not death, is the appropriate 
penalty in this case. 


The racial stereotyping, by one of the two murder 
victims, precipitated appellant's violent acts. See, e.g., R. 
591, 602-605. 


47 


This fact is vital because a matrix of contexts circum- 
scribes when the death penalty is appropriate in the Naval 
Service. A Marine has not been executed since 1817.! 
There are strong religious and moral factors weighing 
against imposition of this ultimate sanction. Concern with 
racial prejudice in sentencing underlies the Supreme 
Court's rationale in Furman vy. Georgia.? The Supreme 
Court has fenced in the death penalty with unique con- 
straints limiting its imposition—in contrast to oiher lawful, 
imposable punishments.* Consequently, before any system 


‘Solis, LCOL Gary D., Marines and Military Law In Vietnam: Trial by Fire 
(Working Draft) History and Museums Division, Headquarters, U.S. Marine 
Corps. 

2 See e.g., Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 251-53, 363-367, 92 S.Ct. 2726, 
2732-33, 2763, 2789-91, 33. L.Ed.2d 346, 355-57, 390, 420-22. 


‘In Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976), 
Justice Stewart stated: 

While Furman did not hold that the infliction of the death 
penalty per se violates the Constitution's ban on crue! and 
unusual punishments, it did recognize that the penalty of 
death is different in kind from any other punishment 
imposed under our system of criminal justice. Because of 
the uniqueness of the death penalty, Furman held that it 
could not be imposed under sentencing procedures that 
created a substantial risk that it would be inflicted in an 
arbitrary and capricious manner. Mr. Justice White 
concluded that “‘the death penalty is exacted with great 
infrequency even for the most atrocious crimes and .. 

there is no meaningful basis for distinguishing the few 
cases in which it is imposed from the many cases in which 
Oit is not.’’ 408 US, at 313, 33 L.Bd.2d 346, 92 S.Ct. 2726 
(concurring). Indeed the death sentences examined by the 
Court in Furman were ‘‘cruel and unusual in the same way 
that being struck by lightning is cruel and unusual. For of 
all the people convicted of [capital crimes}, many just as 
reprehensible as these, the petitioners [in Furman were} 
among a capriciously selected random handful upon whom 
the sentence of death has in fact been imposed... . [The 
Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments cannot tolerate the 
infliction of a sentence of death under legal systems that 
permit this unique penalty to be so wantonly and so 


48 


of criminal justice in this land executes the death penalty, 
its rationale for doing so must be capable of withstanding 
withering scrutiny.4 The crimes committed by the accused 
must “‘cry out’’ for death. The racial overtones in this case 
have silenced that cry, in my opinion. 


I would affirm only so much of the sentence as provides 
for confinement for life, total forfeitures, a dishonorable 
discharge, and reduction to pay grade E-1. 


In all other respects, | concur with Judge Strickland’s 
opinion. ) 

ALBERTSON, Judge (concurring in part/dissenting in 
part): 


I concur with the majority on their resolution of all issues 
except those discussed in section's three and eight of the 


freakishly imposed."’ Id. [408 U.S.] at 309-310, 33 L.Ed.2d 
346, 92 S.Ct 2726. (Stewart, J., concurring). 
428 U.S. at 188, 96 S.Ct. at 2932, 49 L.Ed.2d at 883. 
Later, Justice Stewart concluded: 

In summary, the concerns expressed in Furman that the 
penalty of death not be imposed in an arbitrary or 
capricious manner can be met by a carefully drafted statute 
that ensures that the sentencing authority is given adequate 
information and guidance. As a veneral proposition these 
concerns are best met by a system that provides for a 
bifurcated proceeding at which the sentencing authority is 
apprised of the information relevant to the imposition of 
sentence and provided with standards to guide its use of the 
information. 

428 U.S. at 195, 96 S.Ct. at 2935, 49 L.Ed.2d at 887. 
*Professor of Law George E. Dix commented in a Georgetown Law Journal 
article regarding appellate review of death sentences: 
Such a review implicitly includes an evaluation of whether 
reasonable persons would regard the death sentence as 
disproportionate to the offender's culpability, given the 
nature of the crime committed, the circumstances of its 
: commission, and possible influences upon the defendent. 
PIX, George E., ‘‘Appellate Review of the Decision To Impose Death,”’ 68 
Geo.LJ. 93 107 


49 


majority opinion. I dissent from their resolution of the 
assignment of error relating to the Presidential authority to 
promulgate Rule for Court-Martial (R.C.M.) 1004, Manual 
for Courts-Martial (MCM), 1984, because I have concluded 
that, until Congress acts in an affirmative manner, the 
Article 118, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), pro- 
vision authorizing the imposition of the death penalty is 
constitutionally invalid as a result of the Supreme Court's 
decision in Furman vy. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 92 S.Ct. 
2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972). Even if I am incorrect in that 
conclusion, I further conclude that the delegation of author- 
ity by the Congress to the President to promulgate R.C.M. 
1004(c) was absolutely impermissible and as presently set 
forth in Article 36, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 836, does not include sufficient 
standards to guide the President, in accordance with the 
principles set forth in Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 
U.S. 388, 55 S.Ct. 241, 79 L.Ed. 446 (1935), to promulgate 


RCM. 1004(c). 


R.C.M. 1004 enunciates the only procedures and aggra- 
vating factors within the military justice system (except for 
Article 106a, UCMJ) for determining the appropriateness of 
the imposition of the death penalty. R.C.M. 1004 was prom- 
ulgated in light of the suggestion of the United States Court 
of Military Appeals decision in United States v. Matthews, 
16 M.J. 354 (C.M.A. 1983) which in turn was based upon 
the United States Supreme Court decision in Furman vy. 
Georgia. Thus, I do not contest the finding of my Brothers 
in the majority that the procedures set forth in R.C.M. 
1004(a), (b), (d), and (e) meet the requirements the Supreme 
Court mandated before imposition of the death penalty 
could be considered constitutional. I believe, however, that 
the only Governmental authority that can identify, at least as 
they relate to aggravating factors, (i.e., R.C.M. 1004(c)) and 
effectuate the standards for imposition of the death penalty 


50 


in accordance with the Supreme Court’s mandate within the 
military justice system, as it is presently established, is the 
United States Congress. While Congress might be able to 
delegate the Furman mandate, it can only do so after meet- 
ing certain criteria, United States v. Mistretta, _. U.S. —__., 
109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989) citing American 
Power and Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U.S. 90, 67 S.Ct. 133, 91 
L.Ed. 103 (1946),' which, at this point in time, it has not 
met. Accordingly, I find that the imposition of the death 
penalty upon a military accused convicted within the mili- 
tary justice system is unconstitutional under the principles 
announced in Furman v. Georgia, (hereinafter Furman) and 
United States v. Mistretta. | shall explain in more detail 
below. With regard to the eighth assignment of error, the 
appropriateness of the imposition of the death penalty in ap- 
pellant’s case, I dissent only because I cannot reach a con- 
sideration of that issue since [ am not convinced that the 
death penalty is a valid punishment or that the guidelines set 
forth in R.C.M. 1004(c) are authorized and appropriate 
guidelines. 


I. 
Furman v. Georgia 


Furman declared that existing state capital punishment 
statutes violated the Eighth Amendment because they 


'As quoted in the recent Supreme Court decision of Mistretta v. United States, 
SS . '09 S.Ct. 647, 652-54, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989); **The 
Constitution has never been regarded as denying to the Congress the necessary 
resources of flexibility and practicality, which will enable it to perform its 
functions." Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388, 421, 55 S.C’. 241, 
248, 79 L.Ed. 446 (1935). Accordingly, this Court has deersed it 
‘constitutionally sufficient’ if Congress clearly delineates the genersi policy, 
the public agency which is to apply it, and the boundaries of this delegated 
authority.’ American Power and Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U.S. 90, 105, 67 S.Ct. 
133, 142, 91 L.Ed. 103 (1946). 


51 


permitted exercise of uncontrolled discretion by sentencing 
authorities in determining whether to impose capital 
punishment in any specific case. United States v. Matthews, 
16 M.J. at 369. Subsequently in Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 
153, 96 S.Ct. at 2920, 49 L.Ed.2d at 859 (1976) (hereinafter 
Gregg), the Supreme Court examined the new (post-Fur- 
man) Georgia statute which retained the death penalty for 
six categories of crime. In addition to the six categories of 
crime for which the legislature retained the death penalty, 
the Georgia legislature also adopted new trial procedures 
and capital sentencing guidelines that it mandated be 
followed before imposition of the death penalty upon one 
convicted of a capital offense was authorized. For example, 
the Georgia statute established a bifurcated trial, including a 
separate sentencing stage wherein evidence in aggravation, 
extenuation, and mitigation of the crime was presented. 
Additionally, the judge was required to instruct the jury as 
to any of 10 statutory aggravating circumstances that were 
supported by the evidence and that it, the jury, must find, 
and specify, at least one of the ten aggravating circum- 
stances beyond a reasonable doubt before they could 
adjudge the death penalty. Finally, the new statute required 
expedited and automatic direct review by the state supreme 
court. 


The Supreme Court upheld the new Georgia statute as 
passing constitutional muster because the jury’s attention 
had been focused ‘‘on the particularized nature of the 
crime and the particularized characteristics of the individ- 
ual defendant.’ Gregg, 428 U.S. at 206, 96 S.Ct. at 2940, 
49 L.Ed.2d at 893. In particular the Court was impressed 
with the channeling of the jury’s discretion such that the 
jury could not impose the death sentence in a wanton and 
freakish manner. The Supreme Court arrived at the same 
conclusion with regard to Florida’s reenacted statute. 
Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242, 96 S.Ct. 2960, 49 


52 


L.Ed.2d 913, reh’g den. 429 U.S. 875, 97 S.Ct. 197, 50 
L.Ed.2d 158 (1976). 


Impact Of Furman On Article 
118, UCMJ 


What, then, is the status of Article 118, UCMJ? In 1950 
Congress enacted Article 118, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, 10 U.S.C. § 118. That article defines the offense of 
murder within the military community. Within that statute 
Congress identified four specific types of murder of which 
two, premeditated murder [Article 118(1)] and murder 
committed during the commission of certain felonies 
{Article 118(4)], were designated capital offenses. The 
other two types of murder, death as a result of an act done 
with the intent to kill or inflict great bodily harm [Article 
118(2)] and death resulting from an act inherently 
dangerous to others [Article 118(3)], were designated as 
offenses punishable ‘‘as a court-martial may direct.’’? See 
R.C.M. 1003(b). Offenses punishable *‘as a court-martial 
may direct’’ have generally been understood to carry any 
punishment exclusive of death, see, e.g., para. 127(c), 
(Article 118) MCM, 1969; para. 43(e), Part IV, MCM, 
1984, and exclusive of those punishments deemed cruel 
and unusual under Article 55, UCMJ. Article 118 has not 


2The legislative history to Articie 56, UCMJ, wherein the Congress gave the 
President broad authority to set the maximum punishment for offenses which a 
court-martial may direct and which a court-martial could not thereafter exceed 
when directing punishment, clearly reveals that Congress never intended the 
President to deal in any way with the death penalty. In fact, the hearings 
relating to Article 56, in particular, reveal concern that the wording of the 
provisions be carefully articulated so that assurance could be had that the 
President could never make an offense a capital offense that the Congress 
itself had not declared capital. Index and Legislative History of the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice, HH at 1187. 


53 


been amended since the enactment of the UCMJ. Thus, 
Article 118 is a pre-Furman statute.’ 


The next step is to determine what impact the Supreme 
Court’s decisions in Furman and Gregg have on pre-Fur- 
man statutes, such as Article 118, in which the death 
penalty is authorized but fails to set forth Furman-Gregg 
type guidelines.4 In other words, what is the status of 
Article 118 in view of Furman? 


I believe the concurring and dissenting opinions in 
Furman clarify its impact on Article 118’s status.> First, let 
us look at the concurring opinions that provide the 


‘By analogy then, Article 118—and any other death penalty offenses within 
the UCMJ, with the exception of Article 106a—should be in the same status 
as those state statutes which Furman v. Georgia delared unconstitutional. 
Since Furman, at least 35 of those states having Furman-invalidated statutes, 
have, through the positive action of their legislatures, taken action to reinstate 
the death penalty for some offenses and provide the guidelines required by 
Furman. E.g., Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 
(1976), Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242, 96 S.Ct. 2960, 49 L.Ed.2d 913, reh'g 
den. 429 U.S. 875, 97 S.Ct. 197, 50 L.Ed.2d 158 (1976). 


*We do recognize, as the Court of Military Appeals did in Matthews, that 
many of the procedures within the military justice system, such as a bifurcated 
trial and the opportunity to present aggravating, extenuating and mitigating 
evidence on sentencing, probably meet some of the Supreme Court's concerns. 
The court-martial process did not, however, address the concept of finding and 
weighing aggravating and mitigating factors by some identified standard such 
that unfettered, and possibly discriminatory, discretion was not controlled. 
*We must look at the various concurring and dissenting opinions to attempt to 
elicit the intended impact of Furman because no unified majority opinion 
explaining the result was arrived at by the Court. Accordingly, what other way 
can we determine the exact intent of the Court other than to glean from the 
concurring and dissenting opinions what the Court as individuals believed was 
the impact of the decision. See Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. at 169, n. 15, 96 
S.Ct. at 2909 n. 15, 49 L.Ed.2d at 859, n. 15 (1976); Marks v. United States, 
430 U.S. 188, 97 S.Ct. 990, 51 L.Ed.2d 260 (1977), Annotation, *‘Supreme 
Court's Views on Constitutionality of Death Penalty and Procedures Under 
Which It Is Imposed."’ 51 L.Ed. 886; Annotation, ‘*Binding Effect Upon State 
Courts of Opinion of United States Supreme Court Supported by Less Than 
Majority of All Its Members."’ 65 ALR3d 504. 


54 


narrowest grounds for the majority's opinion. Justice 
Stewart concurred in reversing Furman’s sentence to death 
because he believed that ‘‘the Eighth and Fourteenth 
Amendments cannot tolerate the infliction of a sentence of 
death under legal systems that permit this unique penalty 
to be so wantonly and so freakishly imposed.’* Furman, 
408 U.S. at 310, 92 S.Ct. at 2763, 33 L.Ed.2d at 390. 
Justice White, also concurring, stated: 


... [A]s the statutes before us are now 
administered, the penalty is so infrequently 
imposed that the threat of execution is too 
attenuated to be of substantial service to 
criminal justice. 


In this respect, | add only that past and 
present legislative judgment with respect to 
the death penalty loses much of its force 
when viewed in light of the recurring 
practice of delegating sentencing authority to 
the jury and the fact that a jury, in its own 
discretion and without violating its trust or 
any statutory policy, may refuse to impose 
the death penalty no matter what the 
circumstances of the crime. Legislative 
“‘policy’’ is thus necessarily defined not by 
what is legislatively authorized but by what 
juries and judges do in exercising the 
discretion so regularly conferred upon them. 
In my judgment what was done in these 
cases violated the Eighth Amendment. 


408 U.S. at 313-314, 92 S.Ct. at 2764, 33 L.Ed.2d at 
392-393. 


Now let us turn to the dissenters. Chief Justice Burger 
stated in his dissent: 


55 


The actual scope of the Court's ruling, 
which I take to be embodied in_ these 
concurring opiniens, is not entirely clear. 
This much, however, seems clear: if the 
legislatures are to continue to authorize 
capital punishment for some crimes, juries 
and judges can no longer be permitted to 
make the sentencing determination in the 
same manner they have in the past. 


408 U.S. at 397, 92 S.Ct. at 2807, 33 L.Ed.2d at 


The Chief Justice went on to say: 


While I would not undertake to make a 
definitive statement as to the parameters of 
the Court's ruling, it is clear that if state 
legislatures and the Congress wish to main- 
tain the availability of capital punishment, 
significant statutory changes will have to be 
made. ... (Emphasis added.) |L]egislative 
bodies may seek to bring their laws into 
compliance with the Court's ruling by 
providing standards for juries and judges to 
follow in determining the sentence in capital 
cases or by more narrowly defining the 
crimes for which the penalty is to be 
imposed. 


Since there is no majority of the Court on 
the ultimate issue presented in these cases, 
the future of capital punishment in this 
country has been left in an uncertain limbo. 


440. 


408 U.S. at 400, 92 S.Ct. at 2809, 33 L.Ed.2d at 442. 
Finally, the Chief Justice stated: 


56 


Rather than providing a final and unam- 
biguous answer on the basic constitutional 
question, the collective impact of the major- 
ity's ruling is to demand an undetermined 
measure of change from the various state 
legislatures and the Congress. (Emphasis 
added). While I cannot endorse the process 
of decision making that has yielded today's 
result and the restraints that result imposes 
on legislative action, | am not altogether 
displeased that legislative bodies have been 
given the opportunity, and indeed unavoid- 
able responsibility, to make a thorough re- 
evaluation of the entire subject of capital 
punishment. If today’s opinions demonstrate 
nothing else, they starkly show that this is an 


57 


in existence, but denies to Congress and to 
the legislatures of the 50 States the power to 
adopt new policies contrary to the policy 
selected by the Court... . 


[T}he impact of the majority's ruling is all 
the greater because the decision encroaches 
upon an area squarely within the historic 
prerogative of the legislative branch—both 
state and federal—to protect the citizenry 
through the designation of penalties for 
prohibitable conduct. It is the very sort of 
judgment that the legislative branch is 
competent to make and for which the 


judiciary is ill-equipped. 


effectively than courts. Justice Blackmun, dissenting, found: 


408 U.S. at 403, 92 S.Ct. at 2811, 33 L.Ed.2d at 444. Also 
dissenting was Justice Powell who wrote: 


Not only are the capital punishment laws 
of 39 States and the District of Columbia 


Because of the pervasiveness of the 
constitutional ruling sought by petitioners, 
and accepted in varying degrees by five 
members of the Court, today's departure 
from established precedent invalidates a 
Staggering number of state and federal laws. 
(Emphasis added.) The capital punishment 
laws of no less than 39 States (footnote 
omitted) and the District of Columbia are 
nullified. In addition, numerous provisions of 
the Criminal Code of the United States and 
of the Uniform Code of Military Justice also 
are voided. (Emphasis added.) The Court's 
judgment not only wipes out laws presently 


struck down, but also all thuse provisions of 
the federal statutory structure that permit the 
death penalty apparently are voided. No 
longer is capital punishment possible for 
[various federal crimes listed in Title 18 
U.S. Code]. Also in jeopardy, perhaps, are 
the death penalty provisions in various 
Articles of the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice. 10 USC §§ 885, 890, 894, 899, 901, 
904, 906, 913, 9/8, and 920. (Emphasis 
added.) All these seem now to be discarded 
without a passing reference to the reasons, or 
the circumstances, that prompted their enact- 
ment, some very recent, and their retention 
in the face of efforts to repeal them. 


58 
408 U.S. at 412, 92 S.Ct. at 2815, 33 L.Bd.2d at 449. 


From these dissents, it would appear that at least four 
justices of the Supreme Court believed that Furman 
declared all state and federal statutes, including the UCMJ, 
null and void if they authorized the imposition of the death 
penalty but did not meet the standards identified by 
Furman.© The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals was 
compelled to reach the same conclusion in United States y. 
Harper, 729 F.2d 1216 (9th Cir. 1984). In fact, it based its 
conclusion on the position not only of petitioner, but also 
of the Government, whose brief on this issue in the district 
court stated that Title 18 U.S.C. § 794’s death penalty 
provision is: 


. unenforceable and void because it sets 
forth no legislated guidelines to control the 
fact-finder’s discretion. (Emphasis added.) 
The Department of Justice has long been of 
the view that Furman rendered section 794’s 
death penalty provision unconstitutional. See 
Imposition of Capital Punishment: Hearings 
on S. 1, S. 1400, and S. 1401 Before the 
Subcomm. on Criminal Laws and Procedures 
of the Comm. of the Judiciary, 93d Cong., 
Ist Sess. 43 (1973) (statement of Robert G. 
Dixon, Jr., Assistant Attorney General, Of- 
fice of Legal Counsel, Department of Jus- 
tice); To Establish Constitutional Procedures 


“Even though three of the justices who participated in Furman are no longer 
members of the Court, six of the Furman Court do remain and might continue 
fo represent a majority should the constitutionality of Article 118's death 
penalty be presented. In playing the numbers game then, we know that of 
those six remaining justices, two justices would declare the death penalty 
unconstitutional per se; one justice would not declare the death penalty 
unconstitutinal per se but would declare discretionary statutes unconstitutional. 
and four justices believe the Furman decision declares the death penalty 
Statutes im existence at the time of the opinion null and void. 


59 


for the Imposition of Capital Punishment: 
Hearings on S. 1382 Before the Subcomm. 
on Criminal Laws and Procedures of the 
Comm. on the Judiciary, 95th Cong., Ist 
Sess. 22 (1977) (statement of Mary Lawton, 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of 
Legal Counsel, Department of Justice); 
Capital Punishment: Hearings on S. 114 
Before the Comm. of the Judiciary, 97th 
Cong., Ist Sess. 22 (1981) (statement of D. 
Lowell Jensen, Assistant Attorney General, 
Criminal Division, Department of Justice). 
Moreover, the Senate has recently passed a 
bill, supported by the Justice Department, 
that would authorize the imposition of the 
death penalty for certain crimes, including 
espionage. S. 1765, 98th Cong., 2d Sess., 
130 Cong.Rec.S. 1491-93. 


In light of the above, we believe it clear 
that the death penalty provision of the 
espionage statutes is unconstitutional. It 
cannot be saved by judicial formulation of 
the missing, but essential, statutory 
guidelines. 


729 F.2d at 1225-6. See McKenzie v. Risley, 801 F.2d 1519 
(9th Cir. 1986), cert. denied __. U.S. ___, 109 S.Ct. 250, 
102 L.Ed.2d 239 (1988). 


Additionally, the decisions of the federal circuit courts, 
e.g., United States v. Watson, 496 F.2d 1125, 1129 (4th 
Cir. 1973) and United States v. McNally, 485 F.2d 398 (8th 
Cir. 1973) (en banc), reflect the two differing rationales 
state and federal courts have utilized for analyzing the 
continuing constitutional validity of statutes related to the 


60 


imposition of the death penalty in light of Furman.’ 
Watson sides with the classification rationale while 
McNally reflects the penalty rationale.* 


* Annotation, “Effect of the Abolition of Capital Punishment on Procedural 
Rules Governing Crimes Punishable by Death—Post-Furman Decisions.’ 71 
A.L.R.3d 454, 457-460. 


*The Watson court was concerned with the impact of Furman on a federal 
statute that gave the defendant a procedural right to two attorneys if he faced 
the possibility of the imposition of the death penalty. Since it was unable to 
determine that the sole reason Congress gave the accused the procedural right 
im question was because of the possibility of the imposition of the death 
penalty, a possibility that no longer existed, it refused to hold the procedural 
right inapplicable to a defendant convicted under the statute which Congress 
had done nothing about since Furman. Thus, Watson looked at the death 
penalty provision as a not only a penalty provision that may or may not S< 
capable of imposition but as a means for classifying an offense as one of the 
most severe types of offenses. 

We have no doubt that Furman raises pointed legislative 

questions of whether section 3005 should not be repealed or 

whether the various provisions of Tithe 18 which purport to 

authorize the imposition of the death penalty should be 

amended in an effort to harmonize them or to validate them 

under Furman. ... But we conceive these to be legislative 

questions and not judicial ones, especially when a holding 

by us that Furman has effected a repeal of section 3005, of 

necessity, would probably create serious doubt as to 

whether the various other provisions of Title 18 and the 

Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, to which we have 

referred, have also been repealed. The question of whether 

these statutes and the rule should now be repealed merits 

the prompt consideration of Congress and the Rules 

Committee, but we regard our role as one of proceeding 

with caution unless and until it unmistakably and clearly 

appears that Furman has had this effect. This, we fail to 

find. 
Watson, 496 F.2d at 1129-1129. The Court then held that the defendant had 
the statutory right to have two attorneys because he was facing conviction for 
a crime that authorized the death penalty even though the imposition of the 
death penalty under federal law as it existed at that time was ineffectual. 

McNally, on the other hand, determined that when the death penalty has 

been determined by a court or the prosecution not to be appropriate because of 
Furman, *‘the case lost its capital nature’’ and the defendent was not entitled 
to the advantage of any procedure which was otherwise required in the 


61 


These judicial decisions shed some light on how we 
might interpret the status of Article 118 as a whole, or the 
status of its provision authorizing imposition of the death 
penalty in particular. The courts that follow the classifica- 
tion ratvonale hold that the statutes identifying offenses as 
‘capital offenses’’ established a category of offenses that 
because of their gravity remained classified as ‘‘capital 
offenses.’’ That being so, all statutes that interrelated to a 
‘capital offense’’ statute remained operative if a capital 
offense was involved. The courts using the penalty 
rationale declare that since capital punishment provisions 
were no longer constitutional unless they met current 
schemes offered by the judiciary, the ‘‘capital offense’’ no 
longer existed. Thus, any legislation that was triggered by 
the possibility of imposition of the death penalty was not 
operative until that penalty was again constitutionally 
imposable. Hence, while the death penalty may be 
authorized by the legislature, its imposition is constitu- 
tionally prohibited; the authorization provision is invalid. 


I can accept the penalty rationale more readily than I can 
the classification rationale because of the concept of 
severability. It is well-established that a statute may be 
constitutional in part and unconstitutional in another, and, 
as long as the unconstitutional provision is severable from 
the rest of the statute, the constitutional provision will 
stand with its unconstitutional aspect rejected. United 
States v. Jackson, 390 U.S. 570, 88 S.Ct. 1209, 20 L.Ed.2d 
138 (1968); Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 
62 S.Ct. 766, 86 L.Ed. 1031 (1942). But regardless of 
which rationale one accepts, I believe little argument 
remains with the fact that Furman, at the very least, 


prosecution of a capital offense. McNally, 485 F.2d at 407. Thus, McNally 
looked at the death penalty provision as solely a penalty provision 


62 


declared all provisions of statutes authorizing imposition? 
of capital punishment existing at the time of the decision 
ineffectual. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. at 153, 96 S.Ct. at 
2920; Watson, 496 F.2d 1125; In re Ex Parte Bynum, 294 
Ala. 78, 312 So.2d 52 (1975). 


All of this precedent tells me that the federal and state 
courts have exercised caution when called upon to interpret 
the impact of Furman on a statutory authorization for 
imposition of the death penalty. Where legislatures have 
not specifically and affirmatively indicated their intent 
since Furman to authorize imposition of the death penalty 
by reenacting, reinstating, modifying, or, in some other 
permissible way, validating the authorization provision in 
question, these courts have also exercised caution when 
they have had to determine the applicability of statutes that 
grant or deny a defendant a procedural right that is 
dependent upon him facing the possibility of the imposi- 
tion of the death penalty. In light of this exercise of 
caution, I believe this Court should also exercise caution in 
interpreting legislative inaction or implicit ratification of 
the U.S. Congress when deiermining whether Article 118's 
authorization for the imposition of death remains valid 
since the decision in Furman. Although appellate courts act 
on the presumption of constitutionality of statutory 
provisions, because the case law since Furman has not 
made it unmistakably clear to me that Article 118’s death 
penalty authorization provision is constitutional, I cannot 
find that it is constitutional. See United States v. Watson, 
496 F.2d 1125, 1129 (4th Cir. 1973). If it is not a 
constitutionally valid provision because Congress has not 


*The key word here is ‘‘imposition’’. Furman, at the very least, declared 
imposition of the death penalty outside its guidelines unconstitutional. The 
death penalty was still authorized but its imposition, the abiiity to effectuate it, 
was possible only after the development of specific and controlled 
discretionary guidelines and procedures and the application of those guidelines 
and procedure by the authorized fact-finder. 


63 


affirmatively demonstrated its reinstatement of that penalty 
provision, let alone given the guidelines required by 
Furman-Gregg, then the imposition of the death penalty 
within the military justice system is unconstitutional. 


Presidential Effectuation of An Invalid 
Statutory Provision 


Let us presume, however, that Article 118’s provision 
authorizing the death penalty is not void but merely 
ineffectual. How can it be effectuated? In this particular 
case, can the President pursuant to Article 36, UCMJ, 
effectuate, i.e., make constitutionally permissible, Article 
118’s authorization for imposition of the death penalty, by 
promulgating R.C.M. 1004? 


In United States v. Matthews, 16 M.J. at 354, the Court 
of Military Appeals held that the sentencing standards then 
existing under the UCMJ were defective because they 
failed *‘to require that the court members make specific 
findings as to individualized aggravating circumstances— 
findings which can, in turn, be reviewed factually and 
legally.”’ /d., at 380. In dicta the Court then indicated how 
the defective sentencing standards could be corrected: 


Congress can take action to remedy this 
defect that now exists in the sentencing 
procedure employed by courts-martial in 
capital cases. However, corrective action 
also can be taken by the President in the 
exercise of his responsibilities as 
commander-in-chief under Article II, Section 
2, and of powers expressly delegated to him 
by Congress. See Article 36, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 836. 


64 


The Court further expounded on its theory that the 
President could take the corrective action needed: 


The congressional delegation of powers to 
the President has traditionally been quite 
broad in the field of military justice. 
Pursuant to Article 36 of the Uniform Code, 
the President promulgates rules to govern 
pretrial, trial, and post-trial procedures of 
courts-martial. Unlike other Federal criminal 
statutes, the punitive articles of the Uniform 
Code for the most part authorize punishment 
“as a court-martial may direct’’; no max- 
imum or minimum sentence is specified. 
(Footnote omitted.) However, as contem- 
plated by Article 56, of the Uniform Code, 
10 U.S.C. § 856, the President prescribes 
maximum punishments for the various of- 
fenses. (Citation omitted.) The great breadth 
of the delegation of power to the President 
by Congress with respect to court-martial 
procedures and sentences grants him the 
authority to remedy the present defect in the 
court-martial sentencing procedure for capi- 
tal cases. Cf. Youngstown Sheet and Tube 
Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 
96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952). Indeed, a proposed 
revision'? of the Manual for Courts-Martial, 
which [is] ... R.C.M. 1004 ... prescribes 
special procedures for sentencing in capital 
Cases. 


Matthews, 16 M.J. at 380-381. (Footnote added). 


‘The proposed revision of the Manual for Courts-Martial mentioned by the 
Court of Military Appeals in Matthews referred to what ultimately became 
Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1004, Manual for Courts-Martial (MCM) 
1984. 


65 


The President heeded the Matthews dicta and promul- 
gated R.C.M. 1004. Despite our supervisory court's dicta 
in Matthews, and its apparent anticipatory sanction of the 
President's action, I believe there is a separation of powers 
issue that the Court of Military Appeals may not have 
considered at the time. Additionally, I believe significant 
case law addressing the separation of powers issue has 
been decided since Matthews, see Mistretta v. United 
States, _.. U.S. —_, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 
(1989); INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 77 
L.Ed.2d 317 (1983); Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714, 106 
S.Ct. 3181, 92 L.Ed.2d 583 (1986); United States v. 
Harper, 729 F.2d 1216 (9th Cir. 1984), that impacts upon 
the continued validity of the dicta such that it may re- 
examine Matthews. See United States v. Carter, 25 M.J. 
471, 473 (C.M.A. 1988). 


Elementary civics teaches us that: 


the executive department, like the 
judicial, must yield in most matters to the 
creative power of the legislature (footnote 
omitted); the legislature makes laws and the 
executive enforces them when made, and 
each department is, in the main, supreme 
within its own field of action (footnote 
omitted). The executive cannot discharge the 
functions of the legislature in any manner by 
so acting in his official capacity that his 
conduct is tantamount to a repeal (. . . Henry 
v. State, 10 Okla.Crim. 369, 136 P. 982), 
enactment (Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. 
v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 
L.Ed. 1153 ...;), variance, or enlargement 
(Whitcomb Hotel, Inc. v. California Employ- 
ment Com., 24 Cal.2d 753, 151 P.2d 233, 


66 


155 A.L.R. 405; Boone v. Kingsbury, 206 
Cal. 148, 273 P. 797, cert. den. and app 
dismd 280 U.S. 517, 50 S.Ct. 66, 74 L.Ed. 
587, and cert. den. and app dismd 280 U.S. 
517, 50 S.Ct. 66, 74 L.Ed. 588). Thus, the 
President of the United States has no 
authority, even under the clause requiring 
him to see that the laws are faithfully 
executed, to suspend of his own motion the 
operation of acts of Congress (Kendal vy. 
United States, 37 U.S. 524, 9 L.Ed. 1181). 


16 Am.Jur.2d sec. 305 at 821-822. 


Just as the President cannot legislate, neither can the 
courts by judicial construction. See United States vy. 
Jackson, 390 U.S. 570, 88 S.Ct. 1209, 20 L.Ed.2d 138 
(1968). As the majority notes in its equal protection 
discussion: ‘‘In Gregg the Supreme Court reasoned that 
because of the complex issues involved in determining the 
moral values of society and the social utility of the death 
penalty, it is particularly within the province of the 
legislature to establish the degree of punishment for certain 
classes of crime.’ This, for me includes, factors that 
differentiate capital murder from non-capital murder. 


Whether an unconstitutional provision of a death penalty 
Statute can be subsequently effectuated with corrective 
action has been answered affirmatively by Gregg v. 
Georgia, 428 U.S. at 206, 96 S.Ct. at 2940, and Proffitt v. 
Florida, 428 U.S. at 242, 96 S.Ct. at 2960, when the 
Supreme Court approved new statutes enacted by the state 
legislatures subsequent to Furman. The new legislation 
reaffirmed the legislative policy of the appropriateness of 
the imposition of the death penalty as to certain categories 
of crime and channeled the decision-making for imposition 


67 


of the death penalty by establishing certain specified 
aggravating factors and several procedural safeguards. 
Positive action to establish or reaffirm policy and to 
establish standards for channelling decision-making in an 
attempt to make law as to crime and punishment in 
compliance with the Constitution is beyond question the 
sole province of the legislature. United States v. 
Wiltberger, 18 U.S. 76, 5 Wheat. 76 (1820). As with many 
of Chief Justice Marshall’s opinions, the principle he 
enunciated about the power to legislate being within the 
sole province of the legislature has remained good law 
through the years. Whalen v. United States, 445 U.S. 684, 
100 S.Ct. 1432, 63 L.Ed.2d 715 (1980); Bell v. United 
States, 349 U.S. 81, 75 S.Ct. 620, 99 L.Ed. 905 (1954); 
United States v. Evans, 333 U.S. 483, 68 S.Ct. 634, 92 
L.Ed. 823 (1948); Howell v. Mississippi, 300 So.2d 774 
(1974). 


My Brothers give four reasons for their belief that the 
President can validate the ineffectual provisions of Article 
118. First, they rely on the Congressional enactment, 
unchanged since 1951, of Article 36, UCMJ, which they 
believe delegates to the President that authority: 


(a) Pretrial, trial, and post-trial procedures, 
including modes of proof, for cases arising 
under this chapter triable in courts-martial, 

may be prescribed by the President by 
regulations which shall, so far as he con- 
siders practicable, apply the principles of 
law and the rules of evidence generally 
recognized in the trial of criminal cases in 
the United States district courts, but which 
may sot be contrary to or inconsistent with 
this chapter. 


(b) All rules and regulations made under 


68 


this article shall be uniform insofar as practi- 
cable and shall be reported to Congress.'! 


Second, they rely on what they consider the expression of 
congressional intent with regard to the President's authority 
to set punishments, including the death penalty, as 
explicitly set forth in Article 56, UCMJ: *‘The punishment 
which a court-martial may direct for an offense may not 
exceed such limits as the President may prescribe for that 
offense."’'? The third reason is what they believe is 
recognition of the authority of the President to do so by 
the Court of Military Appeals in their decision in 
Matthews, 16 M.J. at 354; the President's implementation 
of that advice; and the Congressional ratification, albeit 
sub silentio, of the provision in question.'? Finally, the 
majority believes that the President has been properly 
delegated broad authority to effectuate Article 118's death 
penalty provision because the President's authority as 
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces is based upon a 
long-standing special relationship with the Congress, an 
historical relationship so unique from any other, that he 
alone has the expertise to determine what is necessary to 
maintain morale and discipline within the military. This 
special relationship, they conclude, enables the President to 
meet the Furman mandate better than any other 
mechanism. 


''Some of my Brother judges believe that the President has merely “applied 
the principles . . . recognized in the trial of criminal cases in the United States 
district courts, . . ."’ and that those principles are the guidelines established by 
the Supreme Court in Furman and Gregg. My counter-argument is that the 
courts, including the United States Supreme Court, have recognized that they 
cannot legislate. United States v. Harper, 729 F.2d 1216 (9th Cir. 1984): see, 
e.g., Furman, 408 U.S. at 398, 92 S.Ct. at 2808 (Burger, CJ., dissenting). 
'2The Table of Maximum Punishments, paragraph 127(c), Manual for Courts- 
Martial, 1951, and 1969, show the President referring to Article 118 for a 
definition of the maximum punishment permitted for murder rather than him 
Stating it in his own terms as the meximum senence permissible. 
'*Provisions of the Manual for Courts-Martial made pursuant to Article 36, 
UCMJ, must be reported to Congress. Article 36(b), UCMJ. 


69 


I do not accept those reasons because of two long 
standing principles: (1) Congress cannot delegate its 
legislative power to the President (the nondelegation 
principle); Marshall Field and Co. v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649, 
12 S.Ct. 495, 36 L.Ed. 294 (1892);'4 and (2) penal rules 
must be strictly construed.'5 


In United States v. United Verde Copper Co., 196 U.S. 
207, 25 S.Ct. 222, 49 L.Ed. 449 (1905), the Supreme Court 
applied the nondelegation principle to the executive 
branch. In United Verde the Secretary of the Interior had 
established regulations under the supposed authority of 
Congress to implement an act of Congress. In doing so, he 
tried to give ‘‘an authoritative and final construction of the 
statute’’ and in doing that the Court said: 


'*Two important facts to remember in this regard are the constitutional 
provisions speaking about the legislative and executive branch responsibilities 
toward the armed forces. Article I, section 8, clause 14 states that *‘The 
Congress shall have the Power ... To make Rules for the Government and 
Regulation of the land and naval Forces.’’ Article Il, section 2 states; **The 
President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United 
States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual 
Service of the United States. . 

'S**The rule that penal laws are to be construed strictly is perhaps not much 
less old than construction itself. It is founded on the tenderness of the law for 
the rights of individuals; and on the plain principle that the power of 
punishment is vested in the legislative, not in the judicial department. It is the 
legislature, not the court, which is to define a crime, and ordain its 
punishment.’’ United States v. Wiltberger, 18 U.S. 76, 5 Wheat. (U.S.) 76, 95, 
5 L.Ed. 37, 42 (1820); Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. at 452-453, 92 S.Ct. at 
2835-36 (Powell, J., dissenting). Additionally, **{t}he Supreme Court is most 
likely to reject broad delegations of congressional power, typically on statutory 
grounds, when action of the government agency claiming delegated power 
touches constitutionally sensitive areas of substantive liberty."’ Tribe, 
AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW, (2d Edition, 1988) at p. 365. What 
more constitutionally sensitive area of substantive liberty can there be than an 
individual's life? See California v. Ramos, 463 U.S. 992, 103 S.Ct. 3446, 77 
L.Ed.2d 1171 (1983) and cases cited in n. 9, e.g. Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 
U.S. 104, 117-8, 102 S.Ct. 869, 877-8, 71 L.Bd.2d | (1982). 


70 


If rule 7 is valid, the Secretary of the 
Interior has power to abridge or enlarge the 
Statute at will. If he can define one term, he 
can another. If he can abridge, he can en- 
large. Such power is not regulation: it is 
legislation. The power of legislation was 
certainly not intended to be conferred upon 
the Secretary. 


196 U.S. at 212, 25 S.Ct. at 225.'6 


In Reid v. Covert, 354 U.S. 1, 38-39, 77 S.Ct. 1222, 
1241-42, | L.Ed.2d 1148, 1172 (1957), the President's 
authority to act in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief 
with regard to the administration of military justice 
specifically was addressed: 


It must be emphasized that every person who 
comes within the jurisdiction of courts- 


'*in United States v. Grimaud, 220 U.S. 506, 31 S.Ct. 480, 55 L.Ed. 563 
(1911), the Supreme Court upheld the action of the Secretary of Agriculture's 
use of his legislatively delegated powers in making criminal the violation of 
rules and regulations made and promulgated by him under the authority of a 
statute covering forest reservations. The Court reiterated that only Congress 
can legislate and quoting its previous opinion in Marshall Field and Co. y 
Clark, 143 U.S. 649, 12 S.Ct. 495, 36 L.Ed 294 (1892) stated: 

The legislature cannot delegate its power to make a law, 

but it can make a law to delegate a power to determine 

some fact or state of things upon which the law makes or 

intends to make its own action depend. To deny this would 

_ be to stop the wheels of government. There are many things 

upon which wise and useful legislation must depend which 

cannot be known to the lawmaking power, and must 

therefore be a subject of inquiry and determination outside 

the halls of legislation. 
Grimaud, 220 U.S. at 519, 31 S.Ct. at 484, 55 L.Ed. at 569. The Court then 
explained that while the act of Congress in question did not expressly declare 
the particular activity in question unlawful, the statutes involved did have 
encompassing terms and expressly stated that failure to comply with the rules 
and regulations of the Secretary would subject the offender to the penalty 
imposed by Congress. 


71 


martial is subject to military law—law that 
is substantially different from the law which 
governs civilian society. Military law is, in 
many respects, harsh law which is frequently 
cast in very sweeping and vague terms. It 
emphasizes the iron hand of discipline more 
than it does the even scales of justice. 
Moreover, it has not yet been definitely 
established to what extent the President, as 
Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, or 
his delegates, can promulgate, supplement or 
change substantive military law as well as 
the procedures of military courts in time of 
peace, or in time of war.... If the 
President can provide rules of substantive 
law as well as procedure, then he and his 
military subordinates exercise legislative, 
executive and judicial powers with respect to 
those subject to military trials. Such blend- 
ing of functions in one branch of Govern- 
ment is the objectionable thing which the 
draftsmen of the Constitution endeavored to 
prevent by providing for the separation of 
governmental powers. 


In summary, “‘it still remains true that 
military tribunals have not been and proba- 
bly never can be constituted in such way 
that they can have the same kind of 
qualifications that the Constitution has 
deemed essential to fair trials of civilians in 
federal courts.’ In part this is attributable to 
the inherent differences in values and 
attitudes that separate the military establish- 
ment from civilian society. In the military, 
by necessity, emphasis must be placed on 


72 


the security and order of the group rather 
than on the value and integrity of the 
individual. (Footnotes omitted). The Presi- 
dent's authority as head of the executive 
branch and as Commander-in-Chief is, there- 
fore, not unfettered authority. 


See also Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO yy. 
American Petroleum Institute, 448 U.S. 607, 671, 100 S.Ct. 
2844, 2878, 65 L.Ed.2d 1010, 1052 (1980): Textile 
Manufacturers Institute, Inc. v. Donovan, 452 U.S. 490, 
543, 101 S.Ct. 2478, 2507, 69 L.Ed.2d 185, 222 (1981). 


Using these principles to analyze the authority of the 
President by virtue of Article 36 to promulgate R.C.M. 
1004, we must address two issues. First, anticipating that 
the Supreme Court's recognition that there are ‘‘inherent 
differences in values and attitudes [which] exist that 
separate the military establishment from the civilian 
society’ might be considered a means by which the 
President could be ‘‘inferred’’ to understand ‘‘the intent’’ 
of Congress and thus allow him, under the rubric of his 
special relationship with Congress, to effectuate Furman- 
Gregg criteria for the imposition of the death penalty, let 
us examine Article 118 to see if there are inherent 
differences that would separate the former from the latter. 
In other words, do inherent differences in values and 
attitudes exist that separate the military from the civilian 
community such that imposition of the death penalty in the 
former and not the latter is constitutionally permissible? | 
have no doubt that they do. But, I do doubt, that the 
differences, at least during peacetime, are so inherent that 
Congress need not itself establish Furman-Gregg criteria.'7 


'7On the other hand, if we could identify a difference in values and attitudes. 
then, maybe, Presidential action in establishing the aggravating factors in 
RCM. 1004(c) would be justified 


73 


I am not at all certain that murder, at least the two types 
of murder that concern us in appellant's case,'* or even the 
particular circumstances surrounding the commission of 
that offense by this particular appellant as alleged, 
including the aggravating factors plead and found in the 
charge and specifications, identify any values or attitudes 
so different as to separate the military establishment from 
the civilian society. In fact, I believe the Court of Military 
Appeals has already addressed this issue. 


In United States v. Matthews, 16 M.J. at 354, the Court 
recognized that circumstances might exist which would 
permit rules governing capital punishment to be different 
from those applicable to civilians. But, in Matthews’ 
situation, the murder and rape of a civilian dependent, 
offenses which the court was unable to relate to military 
exigencies, the Court found: 


{[Njo reason why Matthews should be 
executed for his [crimes] if the sentencing 
procedures used by the court-martial failed 
to meet the standards established by the 
Supreme Court for sentencing in capital 
cases in civilian courts. There is no military 
necessity for such a distinction; and we do 
not believe that applying lower standards in 
this case would conform to the intent of 
Article 55 or of the Eighth Amendment. 


Matthews, 16 M.J. at 369.'9 The only difference between 


'*Premeditated murder (Article 118(1)) and murder during the commission of 
a felony (Article 118(4)). 

Recognizing that the Court of Military Appeals made this statement in 
applying the principle to the issue of cruel and unusual punishment rather than 
a delegation of power issue, it would seem to me that the same type of 
justification would have to be used under an equal protection argument if 


74 


Matthews and appellant is that the President has since 
promulgated R.C.M. 1004. Otherwise, the offense of 
murder is the same.*° Thus, I do not believe that sufficient 
differentiating values and attitudes have been adequately 
identified, let alone identified as inherent, to permit the 
death penalty to be effectuated by the President rather than 
by the Congress. 


IV. 
Is There A Proper Delegation? 


Even if, based on the facts of this particular case, those 
differentiating values and attitudes are identified ade- 
quately and are inherent to the military, the process by 
which that identification is validated must be by a proper 
delegation.*! There is nothing in the congressional 


proper authority did establish procedures for imposition of the death penalty 
for service members that differed from that of their civilian counterparts. I do 
not address, therefore, the issue of whether military status alone is sufficient to 
overcome any equal protection arguments to permit the imposition of the death 
penalty on service members and not civilians for offenses committed under the 
same nine similar circumstances. 


*°One could argue that the primary victim in appellant's case is his officer-in- 
charge and his dependent civilian wife while Matthews murdered a civilian 
dependent of an Army officer. The status of appellant's victim as officer-in- 
charge could have been one of the aggravating factors under the President's 
scheme but was not plead. Thus, the victim's officer status, which might have 
created that military significance, was not used by the Government at trial and 
cannot now be used as a means to differentiate appellant's case from 
Matthews’ situation on the basis of a special need of the military. 

*!' As we have previously noted, the military justice system is dependent upon 
both the legislative and executive branch for its creation and effectuation. See 
Footnote 14. Therefore, since Congress was endowed with the authority *‘to 
make rules and regulations for the governing’ of the armed services, the 
Congress legislates and the President, as head of the executive branch and as 
commander in chief of the armed forces, enforces that legislation. Where 
Congress has failed to express an intent to require certain action, ¢.g., require 
the taking of an oath to demonstrate bona fides at the time of submission of an 
application to an executive agency, the executive could not then prescribe that 
violation of the requirement would result in criminal penalty. Williamson v. 
United States, 207 U.S. 425, 28 S.Ct. 163, 52 L.Ed. 278 (1907). 


75 


delegation in Article 36, UCMJ, that can be pointed to that 
would demonstrate that the identification of the differen- 
tiating values and attitudes was proper. See United States 
v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258, 88 S.Ct. 419, 19 L.Ed.2d 508 
(1967); O'Neal v. United States, 140 F.2d 908 (6th Cir. 
1944). 


It may well be true that the standards set forth in R.C.M. 
1004 meet the guidelines set forth in Gregg v. Georgia, 
428 U.S. at 153, 96 S.Ct. at 2909, e.g., aggravating factors 
and procedural safeguards are present; and, it would appear 
that the concerns of the Court of Military Appeals have 
been eliminated. But, the President's arbitrary promulga- 
tion of such rules without guidance from the legislature 
that results in the effectuation of an otherwise unconstitu- 
tional statutory provision is not a proper application of the 
delegation process. See The Aurora v. United States, \\ 
U.S. 382, 7 Cranch 382, 3 L.Ed. 378 (1813). In the 
numerous cases cited by the Supreme Court since Aurora, 
those that upheld a statutory delegation on grounds that the 
acts complained of were not a result of improper 
delegation, were based on statutes that had provided 
specific guidelines upon which the President was to base 
his action and which prevented the executive from taking 
what the courts considered arbitrary action; and, most 
importantly, the President or a member of the executive 
branch took his action in accordance with those statutory 
guidelines. See, e.g., Union Bridge Co. v. United States, 
204 U.S. 364, 27 S.Ct. 367, Si L.Ed. 523 (1907); Marshall 
Field and Co. v. Clark, 143 U.S. at 649, 12 S.Ct. at 495; 
United States v. Gordon, 580 F.2d 827 (Sth Cir. 1978); 
United States v. Pastor, 557 F.2d 930 (2d Cir. 1977). See 
also Annotation, **Validity of Statute or Ordinance Vesting 
Discretion in Public Officials without Prescribing a Rule of 
Action,” 92 A.L.R. 400; Annotation, ‘‘Validity of 
Delegation to Drug Enforcement Administration of Au- 
thority to Schedule or Reschedule Drugs Subject to 


76 


Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq.),’’ 47 
A.L.R.Fed. 869. 


In Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388, 55 S.Ct. 
241, 79 L.Ed. 446 (1935), the Supreme Conrt established a 
three-stepped analysis to determine whether the President's 
authority, exercised in light of a congressional delegation, 
was too broad: 


. . . we look to the statute to see whether the 
Congress has declared a policy with respect 
to that subject, whether the Congress has set 
up a standard for the President’s action, 
whether the Congress has required any 
finding by the President in the exercise of 
the authority to enact the prohibition. 


293 U.S. at 415, 55 S.Ct. at 246, 79 L.Ed. at 456. The 
Supreme Court recently breathed new life into Panama in 
the realm of criminal punishments. Mistretta v. United 
States, _.. U.S. —__, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 
(1989). Using Panama's three-stepped analysis as recently 
applied by Mistrerta, | find Articles 36, 56, and 118 itself 
so deficient that reliance on an Article 36 delegation as a 
proper congressional delegation to the President for 
effectuating guidelines that would authorize the imposition 
of the death penalty within the military justice system is 
misplaced and improper. This is particularly so when such 
a delegation relates to the imposition of the supreme and 
ultimate penalty.?? 


First, | do not believe that Congress has set a policy 
with regard to the imposition of the death penalty for 
\ 

22 And, it is only to the imposition of the death penalty that my dissent applies. 
I offer no comment on the validity of the delegation with regards to other 
matters that may arise within the military justice system at a later time. 


“77 


Article 118 since Furman. In fact, the only offenses for 
which the Congress has been able to obtain a consensus for 
imposition of the death penalty in appropriate circum- 
stances have been in connection with air piracy [49 U.S. 
C.A. §§ 1472(i)(1)(B), 1472(n)(1)(B)] and espionage by 
military personnel [Article 106a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 906a]. See Gubiensio-Ortiz v. Kanahele, 857 F.2d 1245 
(9th Cir. 1988); see also Thompson v. Oklahoma, —_— U.S. 
—., 108 S.Ct. 2687, 101 L.Ed.2d 702 (1988) (O’Connor, 
J., concurring in judgment). My failure to presume that 
Congress has set a general death penalty policy is also 
based on recognition of the public controversy surrounding 
capital punishment, at least as to some offenses, and the 
reluctance of the federal courts and the United States 
Sentencing Commission to presume the will of Congress in 
light of possible adverse congressional reaction. See 
Gubiensio-Ortiz, 857 F.2d at 1256. 


Second, I do not believe that we can presume, as the 
majority would have us, that because of a presidential 
reporting requirement, the Congress has given tacit 
approval or has ratified the presidential promulgation of 
R.C.M. 1004. The Supreme Court has clearly stated that 
when “‘‘substantial restraints are being placed on constitu- 
tional procedures’’ and they are ‘‘in conflict with our long- 
accepted notions of fair procedures, such action must be 
based upon explicit, not implicit, authority. Such decisions 
cannot be assumed by acquiescence or non-action.”’ 
Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 507, 79 S.Ct. 1400, 
1419, 3 L.Ed.2d 1377, 1396-97 (1959). The Greene Court 
further enunciated the significance of explicit action on the 


part of Congress: 


They must be made explicitly not only to 
assure that individuals are not deprived of 
cherished rights under procedures not actu- 
ally authorized (citation omitted), but also 


78 


because explicit action, especially in areas of 
doubtful constitutionality, requires careful 
and purposeful consideration by those re- 
sponsible for enacting and implementing our 
laws. Without explicit action by lawmakers, 
decisions of great constitutional import and 
effect would be relegated by default to 
administrators who, under our system of 
government, are not endowed with the 
authority to decide them. 


Id. at 507, 79 S.Ct. at 1419, 3 L.Ed.2d at 1397. 


In Greene v. McElroy, the petitioner's work oppor- 
tunities were being severely limited by the Department of 
Defense without affording him a hearing that comported 
with ‘‘our traditional ideas of fair procedures.’’ In 
appellant's case, he is being subjected to the imposition of 
the death penalty without being afforded the constitutional 
assurance that imposition of such an extreme penalty is a 
current policy adopted by the branch of government 
established to determine such policy. 


Thus, I conclude that Congress has not set a policy with 
regard to imposition of capital punishment in the military 
justice system since Furman. | further conclude, upon 
examination of Article 36, that no standards were set by 
the Congress with regard to what factors the President 
should apply in determining when the imposition of the 
death penalty would be authorized. As to the third step in a 
Panama analysis, | could conclude that the Presidential 
finding requirement has been met, since only the President 
can order the punishment of death executed. R.C.M. 1207; 
see Article 71(a), UCMJ. Therefore, having failed to meet 
two of the three steps required by Panama, | find that the 
President's authorization of imposition of capital punish- 
ment pursuant to findings made in accordance with R.C.M. 


79 


1004 is based upon an unconstitutional delegation of 
authority. 


V. 


Limitation Of Article 36, UCMJ 


Throwing caution to the winds, however, let's do some 
further analysis by assuming that Congress did establish a 
death penalty policy, at least with respect to Article 118, 
and did intend to delegate to the President under Article 
36, UCMSJ, the ability to correct provisions of the UCMJ 
held ineffectual until the Furman mandate was complied 
with. The congressional delegation must still be examined 
because it must be capable of proper application by the 
President. In order to ensure that proper application, the 
delegation must establish certain standards for the Presi- 
dent to follow when he acts pursuant to the delegation.?° 


I find that the standards enunciated by Congress are 
either non-existent or very restrictive. When one examines 
the judicial opinions addressing delegation after Panama, 
and in particular when one examines the delegation by 
Congress to the Sentencing Commission, as described at 
great length in Mistretta, one finds the standards 
enunciated by the Congress must be specific and 
detailed.?4 


25For example, compare Article 36, UCMJ (quoted infra) with the Federal 
Sentencing Commission Act wherein the Congress set forth categories for 
determining offenses, categories for determining categories of defendants, four 
purposes, three goals, and a specific tool, etc. See Gubiensio-Ortiz v. 
Kanahele, 857 F.2d at 1245, see Annotation, ‘Validity of Delegation to 
Drug Enforcement Administration’ of Authority to Schedule or Reschedule 
Drugs Subject to Controlled Substances Act (21 USC §§ 801 et seq)” 47 
ALR Fed 869. 

**Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, as amended 18 U.S.C. § 3551 ef seq. 
(1982 ed., Supp. IV), and 28 U.S.C. §§ 991-998 (1982 ed.. Supp.. IV). 


80 


Looking at Article 36, however, I fail to find such 
specific and detailed standards. I do find that the matters 
which Congress delegated to the President are very general 
and involve matters of procedure, not matters involving 
substantive law.?5 Ellis v. Jacob, 26 MJ. 90 (C.M.A. 
1988); United States. v. Frederick, 3 MJ. 230 (€.M.A. 
1977). This fact provides another ground for my conclu- 
sion that R.C.M. 1004 is an improper basis upon which to 
authorize imposition of the death penalty. 


The aggravating factors set forth in R.C.M. 1004(c) are 
matters of substantive law and not procedure. Two 
Supreme Court opinions serve as the judicial authority for 
this conclusionary statement. Bullington v. Missouri, 451 
U.S. 430, 101 S.Ct. 1852, 68 L.Ed.2d 270 (1981) and 
California v. Ramos, 463 U.S. 992, 103 S.Ct. 3446, 77 
L.Ed.2d 1171 (1983). 


In Bullington the Supreme Court referred to the Missouri 
Statute that enacted death penalty legislation after the 
Furman decision as containing “‘substantive standards to 
guide the discretion of the sentencer’’ and affording 
“procedural safeguards to the convicted defendant.’’ 451 
U.S. at 433, 101 S.Ct. at 1853, 68 L.Ed.2d at 275.2° The 


**While we believe rules of evidence involve substantive law, the 
congressional delegation is a little more specific im that it directs the President 
to adopt rules that apply to trials in federal district courts—which we 
recognize as the Federal Rules of Evidence, rules enacted by the Congress, 
and upon which the Military Rules of Evidence were based, with some 
modification, due to the needs of the military law practice. Appendix 22. 
Analysis, MCM, 1984. 

2°! disagree with the Government's contention and the majority's interpreta- 
tion thai the Supreme Court considered the aggravating factors procedural 
matters in Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U.S. 282, 97 S.Ct. 2290, 53 L.Bd.2d 344 
(1977). The Dobbert Supreme Court was addressing the factual situation 
involving a change in the role of the judge and jury in the imposition of the 
death penalty. | agree that the change in the roles made by the Florida 


statute that the Bullington court examined had two separate 
provisions. One addressed purely procedural issues, such as 
the requirement for a bifurcated trial, the jury's require- 
ment to hear additional evidence in extenuation, mitigation, 
and aggravation. Additionally, this provision provided the 
judge with guidelines as to what he was to instruct the jury 
and his role in the proceedings after jury had made its 
decision. The second provision of the statute dealt with the 
legislature’s specification of 10 aggravating and 7 mitigat- 
ing circumstances which the jury had to find in writing and 
be convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that ‘‘any 
aggravating circumstance or circumstances that it finds to 
exist are sufficient to warrant imposition of the death 
penalty.’’ Bullington, 451 U.S. at 434, 101 S.Ct. at 1853, 
68 L.Ed.2d at 276. After careful analysis of Bullington, | 
believe the Court's ‘‘procedure’’ label—as interpreted by 
appellate Government counsel in their argument before this 


legislature involved procedural matters; but, a determination that a change in 
role is procedural is far different from determining that the identification of 
certain factors are sufficiently aggravating as to make an individual eligible 
for the judge or jury to impose the death penalty is also a procedural matter. 
Additionally, the Florida statute had previously passed constitutional muster, 
both as to the aggravating factors to be considered and the procedural 
application of determining the presence of aggravating factors before 
imposition of the death penalty was authorized Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 
242, 96 S.Ct. 2960, 49 L.Ed.2d 913, reh'g den., 429 U.S. 875, 97 S.Ct. 197, 
50 L.Ed.2d 158 (1976). 

Additionally, the Florida statute, which not only changed the role of judge 
and jury, but also identified aggravating factors which had to be found before 
the death penalty could be imposed, was enacted by the legislature and not by 
someone in the executive acting under a delegation of authority. Thus, no 
separation of powers—improper delegation or usurpation of authority—issue 
was or could be raised by the defendant in Dobbert. The only issue of concern 
for the Court was whether the change in the Florida statute violated ex post 
facto principles. The statutory changes served to ameliorate the appellant's 
potential for imposition of the death penalty because it provided ©‘ significantly 
more safeguards to the defendant than did the old... . Hence, viewing the 
totality of the procedural changes wrought by the new statute, we conclude 
that the new statute did not work an onerous application of an ex post facto 
change in the law."’ 432 U.S. at 295-6, 97 S.Ct. at 2301, 53 L.Ed.2d at 358. 


82 


court—was meant to apply to the change in procedure 
caused by the new legislation, i.e., the new state statute 
gave the jury rather than the judge the responsibility for 
determining the presence of the statutorily created ag- 
gravating factors. The Court’s ‘‘procedure’’ label had 
nothing to do with the establishment of the aggravating 
factors themselves. I base this conclusion on the fact that 
the Court expounded on its determination that the 
provisions of the statute almost equated to a trial on the 
merits, particularly with the use of the beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard. *‘By enacting a capital sentencing proce- 
dure that resembles a trial on the issue of guilt or 
innocence, however, Missouri explicitly requires the jury to 
determine whether the prosecution has ‘proved its case.’ *’ 
451 U.S. at 444, 101 S.Ct. at 1858, 68 L.Ed.2d at 282. As 
a result the Court stated that ‘‘it is the State, not the 
defendant, that should bear ‘almost the entire risk of 
error.’ ’’ 451 U.S. at 446, 101 S.Ct. at 1859, 68 L.Bd.2d at 
283. It thus held that the State was not entitled, at 
defendant's second trial, to attempt to prove the aggravat- 
ing factors it had failed to prove at his first sentencing 
hearing since he had, in reality, been found not guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt of those aggravating factors. 
R.C.M. 1004 is almost identical to that Missouri statute, 
except for the specific aggravating and mitigating factors 
listed in the Missouri statute. Indeed, the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals, en banc, recently held that Arizona's 
Statute requiring the finding of aggravating factors beyond 
a reasonable doubt was unconstitutional because it placed 
with the trial judge the duty of finding the aggravating 
factor when it should have been the duty of the jury. The 
Court determined it should be the jury's decision because 
the aggravating factors were like elements of the offense. 
As such the defendant was entitled, in light of the Sixth 
Amendment, to a jury determination of the existence of 
those aggravating factors. Adamson v. Ricketts, 865 F.2d 
1011 (9th Cir. 1988). 


83 


In California v. Ramos, Justice O'Connor, writing for a 
majority Court explained the Court's present interpretation 
of Gregg: 


In Gregg itself, the joint opinion of Justices 
STEWART, POWELL and STEVENS con- 
cluded that the Georgia sentencing scheme 
met the concerns of Furman by providing a 
bifurcated proceeding, instruction on the 
factors to be considered, and meaningful 
appellate review of each death sentence, 
(citation omitted.) Satisfied that these pro- 
cedural (emphasis added) safeguards ‘‘suita- 
bly directed and limited”’ the jury’s discre- 
tion ‘‘so as to minimize the risk of wholly 
arbitrary and capricious action,” (citation 
omitted), the joint opinion did not undertake 
to dictate to the State the particular substan- 
tive (emphasis added) factors that should be 
deemed relevant to the capital sentencing 
decision. Indeed, the joint opinion observed: 
““It seems clear that the problem [of chan- 
neling jury discretion] will be alleviated if 
the jury is given guidance regarding the 
factors about the crime and the defendant 
that the State, representing organized society, 
deems particularly relevant to the sentencing 
decision."’ (Citation omitted.) (‘“The defer- 
ence we owe to the decisions of the state 
legislatures under our federal system .. . is 
enhancec where the specification of punish- 
ments is concerned, for ‘these are peculiarly 
questions of legislative policy’ *’). (Foot- 
note: Moreover, in approving the sentencing 
schemes of Georgia, Florida, and Texas, the 
joint opinions of Justices Stewart, POWELL, 


84 


and STEVENS did not substitute their views 
for those of the state legislatures as to the 
particular substantive (emphasis added) fac- 
tors chosen to narrow the class of defendants 
eligible for the death penalty. . . .) 


It would be erroneous to suggest, however, 
that the Court has imposed no substantive 
(emphasis added) imitations [sic] on the 
particular factors that a capital sentencing 
jury may consider in determining whether 
death is appropriate. 


463 U.S. at 1000, 103 S.Ct. at 3452-53, 77 L.Ed.2d at 
1180. 


The majority states that Article 36 ‘‘clearly delineates 
the general policy to prescribe pretrial, trial, and post-trial 
procedures for cases tried by courts-martial,"’ and *‘clearly 
states that the authority is delegated to the President,’’ and 
‘‘does establish specific boundaries to limit the President's 
action under this provision’’ because the President ‘‘is 
bound to apply the principles of law recognized in criminal 
trials in the United States district courts."" While I agree 
with that statement as far as it goes, the statement is 
flawed in that the United States district courts have no 
capital punishment principles to apply. Congress has not 
passed any federal legislation establishing Furman-type 
factors for federal capital offenses in general, but /ias for 
the specific crimes of aircraft piracy and espionage by 
military personnel; but in doing so, specified the 
aggravating factor(s) that had to be found before death 
could be imposed. 


Although the United States district courts must follow 
the Furman mandate when interpreting capital punishment 


85 


statutes, as must we, the district courts—despite the 
validity or invalidity of any substantive-procedural 
distinctions—-cannot establish the aggravating factors 
where none have been enacted by the Congress. See United 
States v. Harper, 729 F.2d 1216 (9th Cir. 1984). Likewise, 
if a federal district court cannot effectuate an unconstitu- 
tional death penalty provision, neither can the President, 
pursuant to Article 36, which requires him to follow, 
insofar as practicable, the principles of law recognized in 
trials of criminal cases in United States district courts. 
Article 36, UCMJ. 


Furthermore, Article 36's delegation is additionally 
limited by Article 56, UCMJ, for while giving authority to 
the President to prescribe maximum punishments, it does 
so in terms of non-capital offenses. That the President's 
authority to prescribe maximum punishments is limited to 
non-capital offenses is supported not only by the legislative 
history of Article 56 but in fact by the President's own 
past actions.2’ Since the inception of the UCMJ and the 
promulgation of the first Manual for Courts-Martial, the 
provisions relating to the maximum punishments author- 
ized for particular offenses—the Table of Maximum 


271 recognize that the Court of Military Appeals in United States v. Flucas, 23 
US.C_M.A. 274, 275, 49 CMR. 449, 450 (1975). held that the President 
acted with proper authority when, pursuant to Article 36, UCMIJ, he 
established the “‘element’’ of knowledge for the offense of assault, he 
provided “an aggravating factor increasing the maximum permissible 
punishment ‘when the victim has a particular status or 1s performing a special 
function.” Paragraph 207b, MCM 1969." | can, however. distinguish Flucas 
on one simple ground—the death penalty 1s so unique that it requires different 
treatment. As Justice Stewart stated in his concurring opmmon in Furman, 408 
US. a 306, 92 S.C. at 2760, 33 L.Edld a 388: 

The penalty of death differs from all other forms of 

criminal punishment. not in degree but in kind It 1s unique 

in its total irrevocability. It is unique im its rejection of 

rehabiluation of the convict as a basic purpose of criminal 

justice And it 1s umque. finally. in its absolute renunciation 

of all that is embodied in our concept of humanity. 


86 


Punishments in MCM 1951 and 1969—have never 
addressed the punishments authorized for those offenses 
described in the various articles that authorize the 
imposition of the death penalty, even where life imprison- 
ment is a mandatory lesser sentence. Therefore, since 
offenses carrying the death penalty are capital offenses, the 
President does not have the authority to prescribe anything 
which might effect the maximums with regard to Article 
118, most particularly the aggravating factors that deter- 
mine whether one convicted of a capital offense is eligible 
for consideration of imposition of the death penalty. If the 
President could prescribe the aggravating factors which 
make a person eligible for imposition of the death penalty, 
he would place a maximum on all other situations wherein 
a death occurs as the result of a criminal act for which 
Congress has authorized the death penalty. He would thus 
act contrary to congressional intent and his authority under 
Article 56. See Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 103 S.Ct. 
2733, 77 L.Ed.2d 235 (1983); United States v. United 
Verde, 196 U.S. at 207, 25 S.Ct. at 222; United States v. 
MeCormick, 12 U.S.C.M.A. 26, 30 C.M.R. 26 (1960). 
While it is true that such an action accrues to the benefit 
of some capital offenders, without the proper authority or 
specific guidance of Congress, the President not only 
usurps authority but places other capital offenders in 
jeopardy when Congress may not have intended such 
unequal classification.?* 


A further indication that Congress and not the President 
is the proper authority for prescribing the aggraveting 
factors, and a recognition by Congress of its respon- 
sibilities in this arena, is the 1986 enactment of Article 
106a, 10 U.S.C. § 906a. Not only did Congress establish 
espionage as a capital offense, it also set forth within the 


“| also make no judgment on cqual protection of the law questions such a 
that posed by appellant. | find i unnecessary to my resolution of this case. 


87 


statute itself, the aggravating factors that had to be found 
before imposition of the death penalty could be adjudged.?’ 
In that statute the Congress further delegated to the 
President the authority to prescribe other aggravating 
factors under Article 36. 


Vi. 


Summary 


In summary, I find that the Article 118 provision 
authorizing the imposition of the death penalty is 
unconstitutional and therefore invalid because of Furman 
and its progeny. | further find that the President's attempt 
in 1984 to effectuate that invalid authorization by 
promulgation of the aggravating factors set forth in R.C.M. 
1004(c) pursuant to the authority vested in him by Articles 
36 and 56, as they presently exist, was ineffectual because 
such delegation was constitutionally impermissible in the 
first place, or was an improper delegation by the Congress 
in the second. 

Accordingly, while | approve the findings, | would 
disapprove the death penalty as approved on review below 
as a matter of law and approve only so much of the 
sentence as provides for dishonorable discharge, life 
imprisonment, forfeitures of all pay and allowances and 
reduction to pay grade E-~|. 


If Congress had tacitly approved or ratified RCM. 1004, as offered by the 


majority, why was it necessary for the Congress to set forth specific 
aggravating factors for Article 106a, UCMJ. a post-Furman statute” 


“The propnety of that additional delegation is a maiter for future resolution. 
if necessary 


88 
U.S. COURT OF MILITARY APPEALS. 


No. 63,044. 
NMCMR 87-3856. 
32 M.J. 252 


UNITED STATES, APPELLEE, 
\ 


RONNIE A. CURTIS, LANCE CORPORAL, 
U.S. MARINE CORPS, APPELLANT. 


Argued Aug. 29, 1990. 
Decided April 18, 1991. 


Accused, a lance corporal in the United States Marine 
Corps, was convicted by general court-martial, Sebastian 
Gaeta, Jr., J., of premeditated murder of two victims, 
burglary of their home, and various other offenses, and 
was semenced to death. The United States Navy-Marine 
Corps Court of Military Review, 28 M.J. 1074, affirmed. 
On mandatory review the United States Court of Military 
Appeals, Everett, Senior Judge, held that: (1) capital case 
procedure promulgated by President through rule was not 
invalid as impermissible extension of presidential power 
and did not violate separation of powers, although 
President prescribed aggravating factors to be considered in 
making death penalty determination through the Manual 
for Courts-Martial; (2) rule promulgated by President to 
provide procedure for capital cases was not facially 
unconstitutional; and (3) before death sentence adjudged by 
court-martial can be approved, Court of Military Review 
must determine: whether one or more valid aggravating 


89 


factors have been unanimously found by court-martial and 
that finding is factually and legally correct; if any 
corrective action results in setting aside any such finding, 
but leaves intact at least one aggravating factor, whether 
that error affected imposition of sentence; whether death 
sentence adjudged is disproportionate to other death 
sentences that have been imposed; and whether under all 
facts and circumstances of case death sentence is 


appropriate. 


Sullivan, C.J., and Cox, J., filed concurring statements. 


For Appellant: Robert E. Morin and Lieutenant Com- 
mander John B. Holt, JAGC, USN (argued); Captain 
Arthur R. Philpott, JAGC, USN, Lieutenant Commander L. 
Saccoccio, JAGC, USNR-R, Lieutenant Commander Susan 
K. Milliken, JAGC, USN, Captain Dwight H. Sullivan, 
USMCR, Lieutenant Frederic D. Firestone, JAGC, USNR, 
Lieutenant Thomas E. Miro, JAGC, USNR (on briefs). 


For Appellee: Major Thomas D. Miller, USMC, and 
Lieutenant Commander Lawrence W. Muschamp, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Commander Thomas W. Osborne, JAGC, 
USN and Lieutenant Colonel Joseph S. Uberman, USMC 
(on briefs); Lieutenant Scott A. Hagen, JAGC, USNR. 


Amici Curiae on behalf of Appellant: Captain Richard 
W. Aldrich (argued)—For Appellate Defense Division, 
USAF. Ronald Meister (argued); Edward H. Shakin (on 
brief)—For American Civil Liberties Union Foundation. 
Captain Michael J. Berrigan (argued); Colonel Robert B. 
Kirby, Lieutenant Colonel Russell S. Estey, Captain 
Cynthia G. Wright (on brief)—For Defense Appellate 
Division, U.S. Army. Roger L. Stavis, Esq. (argued); 
Stephen J. Shapiro and Nicholas Kamillatos (on brief)— 
For the Association of the Bar of the City of New York 


90 


Committee on Military Affairs and Justice. Jeanelle 
Moseley (law student) (argued); Ronald F. Wright (on 
brief); Michelle Davis, Gaylynn Gee, Anne Shaw (law 
students)—For Wake Forest University School of Law 
Clinical Appellate Program. Steven H. Goldblatt (on brief); 
Kevin M. Hodges, Brian G. Holland, Juan Enrique Mejia 
(law students)—For Georgetown University Law Center 
Appellate Litigation program. 


Amici Curiae on behalf of Appellee: Captain David G. 
Nix (argued); Colonel Joe R. Lamport and Colonel Robert 
E. Giovagnoni (on brief); Major Paul H. Blackwell, Jr.— 
For Appellate Government Division, USAF. Captain 
Jonathan F. Potter (argued); Colonel Alfred F. Arquilla, 
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel J. Dell’Orto, Captain Randy V. 
Cargill, Captain Stephen R. Henley (on briefs); For 
Government Appellate Division, U.S. Army Paul J. Larkin, 
Jr. (argued); William P. Barr and Edward S.G. Dennis, Jr., 
Assistant Attorneys General; Andrew G. McBride, Associ- 
ate Deputy Attorney General (on briefs)—For U.S. 
Department of Justice. Paul D. Kamenar (argued); Daniel 
J. Popeo (on brief)—For Washington Legal Foundation. 


Opinion of the Court 
EVERETT, Senior Judge: 


Appellant was sentenced to death by a general court- 
martial convened at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. The 
issues now before us are whether the President was 
empowered to prescribe the procedure under which this 
sentence was adjudged and, if so, whether the rule he 
prescribed complied with constitutional requirements. 


On April 14, 1987, Curtis used a pretext to obtain entry 


9] 


to the home of his supervisor, First Lieutenant James Lotz. 
His purpose—-apparently the result of perceived racial slurs 
and the imbibing of gin—was to kill Lotz. He carried out 
his objective with a knife, and then he killed Lotz’ wife, 
Joan. 


After being apprehended, appellant was charged with the 
premeditated murder of both victims, the burglary of their 
home, and various other offenses.' The convening au- 
thority referred the charges to trial as a capital case; and 
pursuant to RCM 1004, Manual for Courts-Martial, United 
States, 1984, the Government notified? the defense of the 
‘aggravating factors’’ on which it would rely. 


After the general court-martial found Curtis guilty as 
charged, the Government offered evidence as to these 
‘aggravating factors’’: (1) that Lieutenant Lotz’ murder 
was aggravated by the murder of his wife; (2) that Mrs. 
Lotz’ murder was aggravated by the murder of Lieutenant 
Lotz; and (3) that Mrs. Lotz’ murder occurred during a 
burglary,’ to wit: breaking and entering into the Lotz home 


'These offenses included larceny of the knife he used to kill the Lotzes, 
iarceny of their automobiles; and indecent assault on Mrs. Lotz after he had 
stabbed her. These offenses were in violation of Articles 118, 129, 121, and 
134, Uniform Code of Military Justice. 10 USC §§ 918, 929, 921, and 934, 
respectively. 

2 At trial the defense questioned the validity of the notice because it only listed 
two ‘‘aggravating circumstances,’" namely: ‘‘a. The murder of Joan M. Lotz 
was committed while the accused was engaged in the commission of a 
burglary; and b. The accused .. . has been found guilty in the same case of 
another violation of Article 118.°' The defense objected to three factors being 
listed in the instructions and on the sentence worksheet when they were 
notified of only two. While the judge found the defense was not misled by the 
notice, it would be advisable for the notice to be precise as to what factors are 
being relied on for each specification which carries the death penalty. 


‘The Government relied on a ‘‘constructive breaking’’ by means of a pretext. 
See para. 5Sc(2), Manual for Courts Martial, [sic] United States, 1984. Curtis 
had come to the Lotz home at 2:00 a.m. and had pretended that another 
Marine had been in an accident. Lieutenant Lotz invited Curtis in while he 
phoned for assistance. While Lotz was phoning, appellant stabbed him. 


92 


at night with the intent to commit murder. The general 
court-martial adjudged the death sentence, which the 
convening authority approved. Thereafter, the Court of 
Military Review reviewed the case en banc and unan- 
imously—affiemed the findings of guilty. 28 MJ 1074 
(1989). However, Chief Judge Byrne dissented from 
affirmance of the death sentence, which he concluded was 
not appropriate in this case (id. at 1095-96); and Judge 
Albertson dissented from affirmance of the sentence 
because she believed that RCM 1004 was unconstitutionai. 
Id. at 1096-1113. 


The case reached this Court for mandatory review. See 
Art. 67(a)(1), Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 USC 
§ 867(a)(1) (1989). After considering the briefs submitted 
by the parties, as well as various motions, we concluded 
that two issues—which were discussed extensively in the 
Court of Military Review, raised in this Court, and are 
common to any capital case tried by a court-martial— 
should be separately considered and argued. These issues 
were: 


WHETHER THE CAPITAL PUNISHMENT PROCESS 
UNDER WHICH APPELLANT WAS SENTENCED TO 
DEATH IS INVALID BECAUSE IT IS AN IMPERMISS- 
IBLE EXTENSION OF PRESIDENTIAL POWER. 


WHETHER RULE FOR COURTS-MARTIAL 1004 IS 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL ON ITS FACE. 


Thereafter, we received supplemental briefs from the 
parties and from various amici curiae and then heard 


93 


extensive oral argument. Aided by the excellent briefs and 
argument, we now have concluded that the President acted 
within his powers in promulgating RCM 1004 and that this 
Rule otherwise satisfies constitutional requirements. 


Il 
A 


The Constitution, on its face, does not single out capital 
cases for special treatment. This point was made in Gideon 
v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 
(1963)—overruling Betts v. Brady, 316 U.S. 455, 62 S.Ct. 
1252, 86 L.Ed. 1595 (1942), which had drawn a distinction 
between capital and noncapital cases. Likewise, in Kinsella 
v. United States ex rel. Singleton, 361 U.S. 234, 80 S.Ct. 
297, 4 L.Ed.2d 268 (1960), the Supreme Court rejected the 
attempt by Justices Frankfurter and Harlan to draw a line 
between capital and noncapital cases with respect to 
military jurisdiction over civilian defendants abroad. 


The Supreme Court, however, has now made clear that 
the Eighth Amendment requires a different treatment of 
death-penalty cases. Thus, in Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 
238, 92 S.Ct. 2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972), a majority of 
the justices agreed that the arbitrary and capricious 
imposition of capital punishment—which, in their view, 
characterized most state procedures—violated the Eighth 
Amendment. Cf. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 
2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976). Likewise, in applying double 
jeopardy protections, a capital case is treated differently 
from other cases. Cf. Bullington v. Missouri, 451 U.S. 430, 
101 S.Ct. 1852, 68 L.Ed.2d 270 (1981). 


We observe, also, that in practice, the issues raised by 
capital cases occupy a significant amount of the time spent 


94 


by appellate courts. Thus, in its 1989 term, nine cases 
decided by the Supreme Court were capital.4 The collateral 
attacks and multiple reviews in capital cases have posed 
problems of judicial administration which have troubled 
Congress, the Supreme Court, the legal profession, and the 
public. 


In regulating military justice, Congress has exhibited a 
special concern for capital cases. Most of the punitive 
articles of the Uniform Code of Military Justice provide 
that a convicted person ‘“‘shall be punished as a court- 
martial may direct’’; and only for a few crimes—such as 
wartime desertion, mutiny, sedition, espionage, murder, 
and rape—is a court-martial empowered to impose ‘‘death 
or such other punishment as a court-martial may direct.” 
See, e.g., Arts. 85(c), 94(b), 106a(a)(1), 118, and 120(a), 
UCMJ, 10 USC §§ 885(c), 894(b) 906a(a)(1), 918, and 
920(a), respectively.5 Article 45(b) of the Uniform Code, 
10 USC § 845(b), prohibits a guilty plea in a capital case. 
Article 49(f), UCMJ, 10 USC § 849(f), limits use of 
depositions in capital cases. The third clause of Article 
134, UCM!, 10 USC § 934, incorporates the federal 
criminal code into military justice, but it only does so with 
respect to ‘‘crimes and offenses not capital.’’ 


B 
In United States v. Matthews, 16 MJ 354 (CMA 1983), 


4Blystone v. Pennsylvania, 494 U.S. 299, 110 S.Ct. 1078, 108 L.Ed.2d 255; 
Boyde v. California, 494 U.S. 370, 110 S.Ct. 1190, 108 L.Ed.2d 316; Butler v. 
McKellar, 494 U.S. 407, 110 S.Ct. 1212, 108 L.Ed.2d 347; McKoy v. North 
Carolina, 494 U.S. 433, 110 S.Ct. 1227, 108 L.Ed.2d 369; Saffle v. Parks, 494 
U.S. 484, 110 S.Ct. 1257, 108 L-Ed.2d 415; Clemons v. Mississippi, 494 U.S. 


738, 110 S.Ct. 1441, 108 L.Ed.2d 725; Whitmore v. Arkansas, | eae 
110 S.Ct. 1717, 109 L.Ed.2d 135; Walton v. Arizona, _... U.S. — —., 110 
S.Ct. 3047, 111 L.Ed.2d S511; Lewis v. Jeffers, US. _, 110 S.Ct. 
3092, 111 L.Ed.2d 606. 


‘For premeditated murder or felony murder, the punishment imposable under 
Article 118 is ‘death or imprisonment for life.” 


95 


this Court considered the constitutionality of the sentencing 
procedure then prescribed for capital cases by the Manual 
for Courts-Martial. In some respects, this procedure met 
the requirements which we held had been established by 
Furman v. Georgia, supra, and succeeding Supreme Court 
cases—requirements which we concluded were applicable 
to courts-martial. For example, trials by courts-martial are 
bifurcated—the sentencing proceedings being separate from 
the adjudication of guilt. The accused has unlimited 
opportunity to present mitigating and extenuating evidence, 
which the military judge must identify to the court 
members for their deliberations on sentence. Moreover, 
mandatory review of the facts, the law, and the 
appropriateness of sentence is provided in death cases—as 
well as in most other cases tried by general court-martial. 


The principal defect that Matthews identified in the 
military justice system was that neither the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice nor the Manual for Courts-Martial 
required the court-martial members to ‘‘specifically iden- 
tify the aggravating factors upon which they have relied in 
choosing to impose the death penalty.”’ 16 MJ at 379. 
Thus, upon appellate review, it was impossible to assure 
that a death penalty adjudged by a court-martial reflected 
‘‘an individualized determination on the basis of the 
character of the individual and the circumstances of the 
crime.”’ /bid, quoting Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 879, 
103 S.Ct. 2733, 2744, 77 L.Ed.2d 235 (1983). 


In Matthews, we ruled that either Congress or the 
President could ‘‘take [corrective] action to remedy’’ the 
‘defect that now exists in the sentencing procedure 
employed by courts-martial in capital cases.’" 16 MJ at 
380. The majority of this Court concluded that, if new 
sentencing procedures were authorized, they could be 


96 


applied retroactively for resentencing Matthews or other 
servicemembers as to whom death sentences had been 
adjudged. Cf. Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U.S. 282, 97 S.Ct. 
2290, 53 L.Ed.2d 344 (1977). Indeed, we ruled in 
Matthews that if the President or Congress prescribed 
constitutionally valid procedures for imposing the death 
penalty within 90 days after we issued our mandate, the 
new procedures could be used in resentencing the accused. 
16 MJ at 382. 


Within the 90-day period that had been allowed by this 
Court, President Reagan amended the Manual for Courts- 
Martial to provide a new procedure for capital cases. Exec. 
Order No. 12,460, 49 Fed.Reg. 3169 (1984). However, this 
amendment, by its own terms (§ 6), was prospective in 
application and was not intended to apply to Matthews or 
any other servicemember whose case had already been 
tried. 


The death penalty procedure authorized by the President 
in January 1984 became RCM 1004 in the Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States, 1984. When Congress 
amended the Uniform Code in 1985 by adding Article 
106a—Espionage, and authorized the death penalty for this 
crime, RCM 1004 was amended to specify some additional 
‘aggravating factors’’ for members of a court-martial to 
consider in deciding on a death penalty. § 1k(4), Exec. 
Order No. 12,550, 51 Fed.Reg. 6497, 6498 (1986). 


We are now asked by appellant to reconsider our 
conclusion in Matthews that the President may constitu- 
tionally define the circumstances under which a death 
penalty may be imposed by a court-martial. Furthermore, 
appellant maintains that, in its present form, RCM 1004 is 
unconstitutional on its face. 


RCM 1004, which is captioned ‘‘Capital cases,” 
currently provides: 


(a) In general. Death may be adjudged only 
when: 


(1) Death is expressly authorized under 
Part IV of this Manual for an offense of 
which the accused has been four guilty or 
is authorized under the law of war for an 
offense of which the accused has been found 
guilty under the law of war; and 


(2) The accused was convicted of such an 
offense by the concurrence of all the 
members of the court-martial present at the 
time the vote was taken; and 


(3) The requirements of subsections (b) 
and (c) of this rule have been met. 


(b) Procedure. In addition to the provisions 
in R.C.M. 1001, the following procedures 
shall apply in capital cases— 


(1) Notice. Before arraignment, trial coun- 
sel shall give the defense written notice of 
which aggravating factors under subsection 
(c) of this rule the prosecution intends to 
prove. Failure to provide timely notice under 
this subsection of any aggravating factors 
under subsection (c) of this rule shall not bar 


98 


later notice and proof of such additional 
aggravating factors unless the accused dem- 
onstrates specific prejudice from such failure 
and that a continuance or a recess is not an 
adequate remedy. 


(2) Evidence of aggravating factors. Trial 
counsel may present evidence in accordance 
with R.C.M. 1001(b\(4) tending to establish 
one or more of the aggravating factors in 
subsection (c) of this rule. 


(3) Evidence in extenuation and mitiga- 
tion. The accused shall be given broad 
latitude to present evidence in extenuation 
and mitigation. 


(4) Necessary findings. Death may not be 
adjudged unless— 


(A) The members find that at least one 
of the aggravating factors under subsection 
(c) existed; 


(B) Notice of such factor was provided 
in accordance with paragraph (1) of this 
subsection and all members concur in the 
finding with respect to such factor: and 


(C) All members concur that any ex- 
lenuating or mitigating circumstances are 
substantially outweighed by any aggravating 
circumstances admissible under R.C.M. 
1001(b)(4), including the factors under sub- 
section (c) of this rule. 


(5) Basis for findings. The - findings in 
subsection (b)(4) of this rule may be based 


99 


on evidence introduced before or after 
findings under R.C.M. 921, or both. 


(6) Instructions. In addition to the instruc- 
tions required under R.C.M. 1005, the 
military judge shall instruct the members of 
such aggravating factors under subsection (c) 
of this rule as may be in issue in the case, 
and on the requirements and procedures 
under subsections (b)(4), (5). (7), and (8) of 
this rule. The military judge shall instruct 
the members that they must consider all 
evidence in extenuation and mitigation be- 
fore they may adjudge death. <. 

(7) Voting. In closed session, before vot- 
ing on a sentence, the members shall vote by 
secret written ballot separately on each 
aggravating factor under subsection (c) of 
this rule on which they have been instructed. 
Death may not be adjudged unless all 
members concur in a finding of the existence 
of at least one such aggravating factor. After 
voting on all the aggravating factors on 
which they have been instructed, the mem- 
bers shall vote on a sentence in accordance 
with R.C.M. 1006. 


(8) Announcement. If death is adjudged, 
the president shall, in addition to complying 
with R.C.M. 1007, announce which ag- 
gravating factors under subsection (c) of this 
rule were found by the members. 


(c) Ageravating factors. Death may be ad- 
judged only if the members find, beyond a 


100 


reasonable doubt, one or more of the 
following aggravating factors: 


(1) That the offense was committed be- 
fore or in the presence of the enemy, except 
that this factor shall not apply in the case of 
a violation of Article 118 or 120; 


(2) That in committing the offense the 
accused— 


(A) Knowingly created a grave risk of 
substantial damage to the national security of 
the United States; or 


(B) Knowingly created a grave risk of 
substantial damage to a mission, system, or 
function of the United States, provided that 
this subparagraph shall apply only if sub- 
stantial damage to the national security of 
the United States would have resulted had 
the intended damage been effected; 


(3) That the offense caused substantial 
damage to the national security of the United 
States, whether or not the accused intended 
such damage, except that this factor shall not 
apply in case of a violation of Article 118 or 
120; 


(4) That the offense was committed in 
such a way or under circumstances that the 
lives of persons other than the victim, if any, 
were unlawfully and substantially endan- 
gered, except that this factor shall not apply 
to a violation of Articles 104, 106a, or 120; 


101 


(5) That the accused committed the of- 
fense with the intent to avoid hazardous 
duty; 


(6) That, only in the case of a violation of 
Article 118 or 120, the offense was com- 
mitted in time of war and in territory in 
which the United States or an ally of the 
United States was then an occupying power 
or in which the armed forces of the United 
States were then engaged in active 
hostilities; 


(7) That, only in the case of a violation of 
Article 118(1): 


(A) The accused was serving a sentence 
of confinement for 30 years or more or for 
life at the time of the murder; 


(B) The murder was committed while 
the accused was engaged in the commission 
or attempted commission of any robbery, 
rape, aggravated arson, sodomy, burglary, 
kidnapping, mutiny, sedition, or piracy of an 
aircraft or vessel, or was engaged in flight or 
attempted flight after the commission or 
attempted commission of any such offense; 


(C) The murder was committed for the 
purpose of receiving money or a thing of 
value; 


(D) The accused procured another by 
means of compulsion, coercion, or a promise 
of an advantage, a service, or a thing of 
value to commit the murder; 


102 


(E) The murder was committed with 
the intent to avoid or to prevent lawful 
apprehension or effect an escaps from 
custody or confinement; 


(F) The victim was the President of the 
United States, the President-elect, the Vice 
President, or, if there was no Vice President, 
the officer in the order of succession to the 
office of President of the United States, the 
Vice-President-elect, or any individual who 
is acting as President under the Constitution 
and laws of the United States, any Member 
of Congress (including a Delegate to, or 
Resident Commissioner in, the Congress) or 
Member-of-Congress elect, justice or judge 
of the United States, a chief of state or head 
of government (or the political equivalent) of 
a foreign nation, or a foreign official (as 
such term is defined in section 1116(b)- 
(3)(A) of title 18, United States Code), if the 
official was on official business at the time 
of the offense and was in the United States 
or in a place described in Mil.R.Evid. 
315(cV(2), 315(c\(3); 


(G) The accused then knew that the 
victim was any of the following persons in 
the execution of office: a commissioned, 
warrant, noncommissioned, or petty officer 
of the armed services of the United States; a 
member of any law enforcement or security 
activity or agency, military or civilian, 
including correctional custody personnel; or 
any firefighter; 


(H) The murder was committed with 
intent to obstruct justice; 


103 


(1) The murder was preceded by the 
intentional infliction of substantial physical 
harm or prolonged, substantial mental or 
physical pain and suffering to the victim, 


(J) The accused has been found guilty 
in the same case of another violation of 
Article 118; 


(8) That only in the case of a violation of 
Article 118(4), the accused was the actual 
perpetrator of the killing; 


(9) That, only in the case of a violation of 
Article 120: 


(A) The victim was under the age of 
12; or 


(B) The accused maimed or attempted 
to kill the victim; 


(10) That, only in the case of a violation 
of the law of war, death is authorized under 
the law of war for the offenses: 


(11) That, only in the case of a violation 
of Article 104 or 106a: 


(A) The accused has been convicted of 
another offense involving espionage or trea- 
son for which either a sentence of death or 
imprisonment for life was authorized by 
Statute, or 


(B) That in committing the offense, the 
accused knowingly created a grave risk of 


104 


death to a person other than the individual 
who was the victim. 


For purposes of this rule, ‘‘national se- 
curity’’ means the national defense and 
foreign relations of the United States and 
specifically includes: a military or defense 
advantage over any foreign nation or group 
of nations; a favorable foreign relations 
position; or a defense posture capable of 
successfully resisting hostile or destructive 
action from within or without. 


(d) Spying. If the accused has been found 
guilty of spying under Article 106, subsec- 
tions (a)(2), (b), and (c) of this rule and 
R.C.M. 1006 and 1007 shall not apply. 
Sentencing proceedings in accordance with 
R.C.M. 1001 shall be conducted, but the 
military judge shall announce that by opera- 
tion of law a sentence of death has been 
adjudged. 


(e) Other penalties. Except for a violation of 
Article 106, when death is an authorized 
punishment for an offense, all other punish- 
ments authorized under R.C.M. 1003 are 
also authorized for that offense, including 
confinement for life, and may be adjudged in 
lieu of the death penalty, subject to limita- 
tions specifically prescribed in this Manual. 
A sentence of death includes a dishonorable 
discharge or dismissal, as appropriate. Con- 
finement is a necessary incident of a 
sentence of death but not a part of it. 
(Discussion omitted.) 


105 
B 


If ‘‘aggravating factors’’ used in channeling the 
discretion of the sentencing authority in death cases were 
elements of the crime, we would have no choice but to 
hold that they must be set forth by Congress and cannot be 
prescribed by the President. Consistent with Article I of 
the Constitution, only Congress has the power to legislate; 
and definition of the elements of a crime clearly is 
legislation. However, the Supreme Court has made clear 
that ‘‘aggravating factors’’ are not ‘‘elements”’ of a crime. 
Cf. Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. —__, —~ 110 S.Ct. 3047, 
3054-55, 111 L.Ed.2d 511, 525 (1990). For this reason a 
defendant has no right to a jury trial as to the existence of 
aggravating factors, and the sentencer’s rejection of a 
particular circumstance is not an ‘‘acquittal’’ of that 
circumstance for double jeopardy purposes. Cf. Poland v. 
Arizona, 476 U.S. 147, 106 S.Ct. 1749, 90 L.Ed.2d 123 
(1986). 


Is it consistent, then, with the separation of powers 
required by the Constitution for the President to prescribe 
these ‘‘aggravating factors’’? The recent decision of the 
United States Supreme Court in Mistretta v. United States, 
488 U.S. 361, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989), 
provides us with guidance. 


There the Court considered the constitutionality of 
sentencing guidelines issued by the Sentencing Commis- 
sion, which is chaired by a Federal circuit judge and has 
other judges among its members. The defendant com- 
plained that the commission and its guidelines were 
unconstitutional because promulgation of guidelines was a 
legislative task which should have been performed by 
Congress and because ‘‘the separation of powers doctrine” 
was violated by allowing active members of the judiciary 


106 


to serve on the commission. However, the Supreme Court 
concluded, over Justice Scalia’s vigorous dissent, that 
establishment of the commission had not violated 
separation-of-powers requirements and that the guidelines 
had been constitutionally promulgated.° 


In Mistretta, the Court seemed willing to allow 
considerable flexibility and innovativeness in the allocation 
of power among governmental institutions. Apparently its 
chief concern was that one branch of Government not 
aggrandize itself at the expense of another. However, in 
Mistretta this fear was allayed because Congress had 
established the Sentencing Commission and had defined 
the task which it wished the Commission to perform. A 
year before the Court took a similar tack in upholding 
legislation which provided for an Independent Counsel. 
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 108 S.Ct. 2597, 101 
L.Ed.2d 569 (1988). 


Unlike an Independent Counsel or members of the 
Sentencing Commission, the President holds an office 
specifically authorized by the Constitution. Moreover, he 
has been invested by the Constitution with the ‘‘executive 
Power,’” Art. Il, § 1, and is the Commander-in-Chief of 
the Armed Forces. Art. IJ, § 2. In view of his inherent 
constitutional authority, a separation-of-powers objection 
has much less merit in the present context than if the 
‘aggravating factors’’ for capital cases tried by courts- 
martial had been formulated by a specially created 
commission. 


We are mindful, however, of the separation-of-powers 
analysis in Justice Jackson's often cited concurring opinion 


*In footnote 11 of its opinion in Mistretta, the Supreme Court discussed the 
Sentencing Commission's authority with respect to the death penalty. 488 U.S. 
361, 378, 109 S.Ct. 647, 657-58, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989). 


107 


in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 
72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952). There, in dealing with 
the seizure of steel mills during the Korean War, Justice 
Jackson suggested that the President's power is the greatest 
when he acts under a specific delegation from Congress; is 
less when he acts without delegation, but as to a subject 
concerning which Congress has not legislated; and is the 
least when he acts on the basis of his inherent 
constitutional authority and against the express or implied 
wishes of Congress. See 343 U.S. at 635-38, 72 S.Ct. at 
870-72. Presidential power to prescribe the ‘‘aggravating 
factors’’ in RCM 1004 is more sustainable if it has been 
expressly or implicitly conferred by Congress, or if 
Congress, at least, has displayed no desire to legislate in 
this field and a willingness to let the President take action. 


It is clear that Congress has been willing for the 
President to play the major role in determining what 
punishments may be imposed by courts-martial. Most of 
the punitive articles in the Uniform Code provide that a 
convicted accused ‘‘shall be punished as a court-martial 
may direct.’ Under Article 56, UCMJ, 10 USC § 856, 
“*({t}he punishment which a court-martial may direct for an 
offense may not exceed such limits as the President may 
prescribe for that offense.”’ Article 18, UCMJ, 10 USC 
§ 818, states that a general court-martial ‘“‘may, under such 
limitations as the President may prescribe, adjudge any 
punishment not forbidden by [the Code], including the 
penalty of death when specifically authorized by’ the 
Code. (Emphasis added.) When these Articles are taken 
together, they reveal that—instead of legislating maximum 
punishments as it has done in Title 18 of the United States 
Code for cases tried in the District Courts—Congress has 
decided that the President shall set the maximum 
punishments imposable in trials by courts-martial. 


Consistent with Articles 18 and 56 of the Code—and 
previously with comparable provisions of the Articles of 


108 


War—the President for several decades prescribed max- 
imum punishments in a Table of Maximum Punishments as 
part of the Manual for Courts-Martial. The current Manual 
sets the maximum punishments in subparagraph e for each 
paragraph in Part IV devoted to a particular offense.” In 
some instances, this Table and now the Manual text 
provide that a maximum punishment is increased because 
of aggravating circumstances. For example, driving while 
drunk carries a heavier penalty if it results in death. Para. 
35e(1), Part IV, 1984 Manual, supra. Desertion terminated 
by apprehension authorizes a higher maximum punishment 
than desertion terminated by surrender. Para. 9e(2). The 
maximum punishment for larceny depends on the value of 
the property stolen. Para. 46e(1). And so on. 


Thus, under a power delegated by Congress, the 
President has for many years been prescribing aggravating 
circumstances that would increase the punishment impos- 
able for various offenses tried by courts-martial. Presum- 
ably, Congress has been well aware of his exercise of this 
power because, under Article 36(b) of the Uniform Code. 
10 USC § 836(b), the rules and regulations prescribed by 
the President for courts-martial—including, of course, the 
maximum punishments—must be reported to Congress. 


Since 1951 death penalties have been authorized by 
several punitive articles of the Uniform Code, and 
previously they had been permitted by the Articles of War 
and the Articles for the Government of the Navy. 
Furthermore, Congress has never displayed any intent to 
rescind them. 


In 1983, when this Court decided Matthews, we held 
that either Congress or the President could prescribe 


’Appendix 12 of the Manual lists maximum punishments, but it is not 
authoritative. 


109 


‘aggravating factors’’ for death cases in courts-martial. 16 
MJ at 380-81. In view of our analysis in Matthews, it 
should have been apparent that, unless ‘hese aggravating 
factors were prescribed by one branch of government or 
the other, courts-martial would be precluded from adjudg- 
ing death penalties. 


When, after our Matthews decision the President 
prescribed a new sentencing procedure for death cases, his 
action was promulgated by the Executive Order No. 12460. 
supra, which gave notice to Congress and the public at 
large. We are unaware of any indication of legislative 
displeasure with the President's action or any legislative 
effort at that time to undo his action or to curtail the use of 
capital punishment in courts-martial. 


In 1985, Congress enacted legislation which we interpret 
to be an affirmation of presidential power to prescribe 
“aggravating factors’’ for capital cases. The Uniform Code 
was amended by the addition of Article 106a, which 
prohibited espionage and authorized punishment “by death 
or such other punishment as a court-martial may direct.”’ 
Art. 106a(a)(1). In connection with its death penalty, 
Article 106a provided: 


(b)(1) No person may be sentenced by 
court-martial to suffer death for an offense 
under this section (article) unless— 


(A) the members of the court-martial 
unanimously find at least one of the 
aggravating factors set out in subsection (c): 
and 


(B) the members unanimously deter- 
mine that any extenuating or mitigating 


110 


circumstances are substantially outweighed 
by any aggravating circumstances, including 
the aggravating factors set out in subsection 
(Cc). 


(2) Findings under this subsection may be 
based on— 


(A) evidence introduced on the issue of 
guilt or innocence; 


(B) evidence introduced during the sen- 
tencing proceeding; or 


(C) all such evidence. 


(3) The accused shall be given broad 
latitude to present matters in extenuation and 
mitigation. 


(c) A sentence of death may be adjudged 
by a court-martial for an offense under this 
section (article) only if the members unan- 
imously find, beyond a reasonable doubt, 
one or more of the following aggravating 
factors: 


(1) The accused has been convicted of 
another offense involving espionage or trea- 
son for which either a sentence of death or 
imprisonment for life was authorized by 
statute. 


(2) In the commission of the offense, the 
accused knowingly created a grave risk of 
substantial damage to the national security. 


(3) In the commission of the offense, the 
accused knowingly created a grave risk of 
death to another person. 


(4) Any other factor that may be pre- 
scribed by the President by regulations 
under section 836 of this title (article 36), 


Pub.L. No. 99-145, title V, § 534(a), 99 Stat. 634 (1985) 
(emphasis added). 


Two features of this legislation are noteworthy. First, the 
procedure prescribed by Article 106a conforms generally to 
the procedure which the President previously had _pre- 
scribed in RCM 1004. Secondly, the President is 
specifically authorized by Article 106a(c)(4) to prescribe 
other ‘‘aggravating factors’’ in addition to the three that 
are set forth in Article 106a(c)(1)-(3). This authority is 
linked in (c)(4) of that Article to the power granted him by 
Article 36(a) of the Uniform Code to prescribe *‘*{p)retrial, 
trial, and post-trial procedures, including modes of proof,”’ 
for trials by courts-martial.* 


In connection with the provision for death-penalty 
sentence proceedings in Article 106a, H.R. Conference 
Report No. 235, 99th Cong., Ist Sess., states: 


The conferees did, however, adopt a 
Statutory formulation of capital sentencing 
standards for espionage cases and intend that 
those standards be implemented in a manner 
consistent with the provision of Rule for 
Courts-Martial 1004 of the Manual for 
Courts-Martial, 1984. The conferees do not 


“Under Article 36(b), UCMJ, 10 USC § 836(b), the rules and regulations 
promulgated under Article 36(a) ‘shall be reported to Congress.’ 


112 


intend that the enactment of statutory capital 
sentencing standards for the new Article 
106a be construed as affecting the validity of 
the regulatory capital sentencing standards 
that already exist for the other capital 
punishment articles. 


DOD Authorization Act of 1986, Pub.L. No. 99-145, 
1985 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin. News, 571, 579 
(emphasis added). If failure of Congress to complain about 
the content of regulations can be construed to be 
ratification, cf. Power Reactor Development Co. v. 
International Union of Electrical, Radio & Machine 
Workers, AFL-CIO, 367 U.S. 396, 408-09, 81 S.Ct. 1529, 
1535-36, 6 L.Ed.2d 924 (1961), the provisions of Article 
106a—along with its legislative history—are even clearer 
evidence of ratification. 


As heretofore mentioned, the Supreme Court has made 
clear its concern that one branch of government not grab 
any power which the Constitution has conferred on another 
branch. Cf. Mistretta and Morrison, both supra; Bowsher 
v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714, 106 S.Ct. 3181, 92 L.Ed.2d 583 
(1986). By implication Article 106a affirms that Congress 
does not consider the President's prescribing *‘aggravating 
factors’’ to be in diminution of its own legislative power. 
Instead, Congress undoubtedly has concluded that, in view 
of the major roie that for decades it has delegated to the 
President in prescribing limitations on maximum punish- 
ment, it is better for the President to prescribe *‘aggravat- 
ing factors’’ by Executive Order than for Congress to 
attempt to do so by statute.’ 


"Since we conclude that Congress has—at least, implicithy—delegated this 
task to the President, we need not consider what inherent authority the 
President would have in this area. For example, absent any indication of 
congressional willingness for him to prescribe “aggravating factors,” could 
the President constitutionally do so? Also, what if Congress attempted to block 
exercise of this power by the President’ 


113 
Cc 


To the extent we rely on delegation from Congress as a 
source of presidential power, we are confronted by 
appellant's argument that Congress failed to prescribe 
standards for the exercise of the delegated power. Cf. 
A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 
495, 55 S.Ct. 837, 79 L.Ed. 1570 (1935); Panama Refining 
Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388, 55 S.Ct. 241, 79 L.Ed. 446 
(1935). Certainly Congress did not give the President 
guidance as explicit as that which the Sentencing Reform 
Act prescribed for the Sentencing Commission. Indeed, 
Justice Scalia, the sole dissenter in Mistretta, perceived no 
delegation problem in the creation of that Commission and 
was concerned chiefly with the claimed violation of 
separation-of-powers principles. 


However, in prescribing ‘“‘aggravating factors’ the 
President was not left totally without guidance from 
Congress. Article 106(a)(c)(4) refers to regulations pre- 
scribed by the President under Article 36—which, in turn, 
directs that the President “‘shall, so far as he considers 
practicable, apply the principles of law and the rules of 
evidence generally recognized in the trial of criminal cases 
in the United States district courts, but which may not be 
contrary to or inconsistent with’’ the Uniform Code. See 
Art. 36(a). Apparently Congress wished the President to 
look to the “‘principles of law’’ applied in federal criminal 
cases in determining what should be the ‘‘aggravating 
factors’’ for capital cases tried by court-martial. Further- 
more, as we examine the ‘aggravating factors’’ prescribed 
by the President in RCM 1004, we find that they reflect 
policy expressed by Congress in various statutes— 
including several punitive articles of the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice—and also conform generally with the 
Model Penal Code and with policies expressed in the 


114 


Statutes of many of the 36 states which authorize the death 
penalty.'° 


““Aggravating factor’’ (1) is commission of the offense 
“before or in the presence of the enemy.’’ Article 99 of 
the Code, 10 USC § 899, authorizes death for nine types of 
misbehavior ‘‘before or in the presence of the enemy,”’ 
and thereby it reflects a legislative judgment that such 
conduct is very harmful to the military mission. 


‘‘Aggravating factor’’ (2A) corresponds to an ‘‘ag- 
gravating factor’’ prescribed by Congress for espionage 
offenses, see Art. 106a(c)(2); and ‘*Aggravating factors’’ 
(2)(B) and (3) also correlate with the manifest congres- 
sional concern about espionage—a crime for which death 
is authorized by Article 106a(a)(1) of the Code. See also 
18 USC § 794. 


““Aggravating factor’’ (4) parallels an ‘‘aggravating 
factor’’ prescribed by Article 106a(c)(3) and reflects 
special concern if the crime for which the accused has 
been convicted created a grave risk of death to others. This 
“aggravating factor’’ has parallels in many state statutes 
authorizing the death penalty.!! 


‘“Aggravating factor’’ (5)—which involves commission 
of the offense *‘with the intent to avoid hazardous duty’’— 
reflects legislative disapproval of flight from hazardous 
duty. Thus, desertion with intent to avoid hazardous duty 
authorizes the death penalty in time of war, see Art. 


See Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U.S. 361, 109 S.Ct. 2969, 2975 n.2, 2976 n4. 
2978 0.5, 106 L.Ed.2d 306 (1989), for a collection of federal and state statutes 
concerning the death penalty. 

'' Commonwealth v. Smith, 518 Pa. 15, $40 A.2d 246, 260 (1988). Jones » 
State, 520 So.2d $43, SS1-S2 (Ala. 1988); Stouffer v. State, 738 P.2d 1349. 
1361 (OkLCr. 1987), Hogan v. State, 103 Nev. 21, 732 P.2d 422, 424 (1987). 
Way v. State, 496 So.2d 126, 128 (Pla. 1986). 


115 


85(a)(2) and (c); and running away from the enemy or 
cowardly conduct also permits a death penalty, see Art. 
99(1) or (5). 


‘‘Aggravating factor’’ (6)—which applies to murders 
and rapes in time of war—deals with conduct which 
violates the law of war; and thereby threatens international 
relations. The death penalty is not unusual for violations of 
the law of war; see, e.g., In re Yamashita, 327 U.S. |, 66 
S.Ct. 340, 90 L.Ed. 499 (1946)!2: Ex Parte Quirin, 317 
U.S. 1, 63 S.Ct. 2, 87 L.Bd.3 (1942): and perhaps the 
constitutional restrictions derived from Furman may not 
even apply to such violations. Cf Yamashita and Quirin. 


‘‘Aggravating factor’’ (7)—applies only to premeditated 
murder in violation of Article 118(1) and is the only 
“aggravating factor’’ involved in appellant's case. This 
“aggravating factor’’ has ten subparts. As explained in the 
Drafters’ Analysis of this rule, see Manual for Courts- 
Martial, United States, 1984, at A21-66 (Change 2), these 
“aggravating factors’’ were to a considerable extent 
derived from those contained in the state statutes enacted 
in response to Furman vy. Georgia, supra. 


Factor (7)(A) applies to an accused “serving a sentence 
of confinement for 30 years or more or for life at the time 
of the murder." This factor is intended to express 
disapproval of premeditated murder by an accused who has 
already been convicted of a very serious crime. Also. it 
may provide an additional deterrent for someone who 
might only be deterred by the death penalty. 


Article 106, UCMJ, 10 USC § 906, which is based on the law of war. 
applies not only to servicemembers but also to civilians. Whether its 
mandatory death penalty is constitutional 1s open to question. Cf Woodson v. 
North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 96 S.Ct. 2978, 49 L.Bd2d 944 (1976), and 
Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325, 96 S.Ct. 3001, 49 L.Bd.2d 974 (1976) 


116 


Factor (7)(B) is that the premeditated murder occurred 
“‘while the accused was engaged in the commission or 
attempted commission of any robbery, rape, aggravated 
arson, sodomy, burglary, kidnapping, mutiny, sedition, or 
piracy of an aircraft or vessel, or was engaged in flight or 
attempted flight after the commission or attempted 
commission of any such offense.’’ 


Congress has severely condemned all of these crimes. 
Under Article 118(4), murder committed in the course of 
“burglary, sodomy, rape, robbery, or aggravated arson”’ 
permits a death sentence and requires at least life 
imprisonment. Mutiny and sedition are themselves capital 
offenses under Article 94. Piracy long has been viewed as 
a universal offense against the law of nations and is 
specifically mentioned in Article I, § 8, cl. 10 of the 
Constitution. Congress has prescribed the death penalty for 
skyjacking under certain circumstances—49 USC App § 
1472(i)(1)(B) (aircraft piracy resulting in death authorizes 
the death penalty).'* Kidnapping also is severely con- 
demned by the Federal criminal code, 18 USC § 1201(a)— 
although the death penalty, which at one time Congress 
authorized for this crime, was subsequently held uncon- 
stitutional in United States v. Jackson, 390 U.S. 570, 88 
S.Ct. 1209, 20 L.Ed.2d 138 (1968). 


Factors (7(C), (7)(D}, and (7)(E)—which involve, 
respectively, murder ‘“‘for the purpose of receiving’’ 
something of value, ‘‘procur[ing] another ... to commit 
the murder,’ or committing the murder “‘to avoid or to 
prevent lawful apprehension or effect an escape’’—have 
counterparts in many state statutes. See, e.g., Ariz. Rev. 


'*Whether the authorized penalty of death if the death of another person 
occurs as a result of the air piracy is constitutionally sustainable may be 
questioned since the statute requires no specific findings of aggravation and 
specifies no aggravating factors. 


117 


Stat. Ann. 13~703(F)(5) (Supp. 1988) (which includes as a 
factor that the homicide was committed with the expecta- 
tion of receiving something of value); see also Walton vy. 
Arizona, _ U.S. __, 110 §.Ct. 3047, 3051, 111 L.Ed.2d 
S11 (1990). Of course, resistance of apprehension and 
escape are offenses under the Uniform Code. See Art. 95, 
10 USC § 895. 


‘‘Aggravating factor’ (7)(F)—concerns the official 
Status or duties of the victim, and it corresponds with 
recent legislation seeking to protect various public 
officials. See, e.g., 18 USC §§ 351 and 1751. 


Factor (7)(G) centers on the victim's execution of his 
military office or his duties, military or civilian, in law 
enforcement, security, or firefighting. At least to some 
extent, this ‘‘aggravating factor’’ recognizes a congres- 
sional intent to protect persons performing duties important 
to public safety. Cf 18 USC § 1114; Arts. 90 and 91, 
UCMJ, 10 USC §§ 890 and 891, respectively 


‘“Aggravating factor’ (7)(H) concerns ‘‘intent to 
obstruct justice.”’ Obstruction of justice is a recognized 
federal crime. 18 USC §§ 1501-15. In military practice 
obstruction or interference with the administration of 
justice is not limited to those acts enumerated in the 
federal criminal code—United States v. Jones, 20 MJ 38, 
40 (CMA 1985); United States v. Long, 2 USCMA 60, 6 
CMR 60 (1952); but under the facts here we need not 
decide which definition should be applied to the act 
alleged to have aggravated the offense. 


‘‘Aggravating factor’’ (7)(1) resembies an ‘‘aggravating 
factor’ in many state statutes for murders described as 
“heinous, atrocious, or cruel’’ or in similar terms. 
However, unlike the state statutes—which have sometimes 


118 


been successfully attacked as vague—see Maynard vy. 
Cartwright, 486 U.S. 356, 108 S.Ct. 1853, 100 L.Ed.2d 
372 (1988); Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S. 420, 100 S.Ct. 
1759, 64 L.Ed.2d 398 (1980); and have required limiting 
judicial construction, cf. Walton v. Arizona, supra—this 
“aggravating factor’’ is stated clearly in RCM 1004. 


‘“‘Aggravating factor’ (7)(J) is ‘‘another violation of 
Article 118°’—i.e., another murder—‘‘in the same case.”’ 
Since any violation of Article 118 has a maximum 
punishment either of death or of life imprisonment, this 
“aggravating factor’’ is predicated on conduct viewed 
quite seriously by Congress. Likewise, in many state 
Statutes, a second murder is an ‘‘aggravating factor.’’'4 


‘“‘Aggravating factor’ (8) applies only in the case of a 
violation of Article 118(4), and so relates only to felony 
murders. We have held that an accused may be convicted 
of murder under Article 118(4) even though he did not kill 
the victim and only aided and abetted commission of the 
felony on which the felony-murder conviction was based. 
United States v. Jefferson, 22 MJ 315 (CMA 1986). The 
Supreme Court has concluded that the Eighth Amendment 
is violated when a defendant is sentenced to death for a 
felony murder if he did not participate actively in the 
killing. Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782, 102 S.Ct. 3368, 
73 L.Ed.2d 1140 (1982); but cf. Tison v. Arizona, 481 U.S. 
137, 107 S.Ct. 1676, 95 L.Ed.2d 127 (1987) (upholding a 
death penalty for an accused who did not kill the victim, 
but whose conduct was related to the killing). 


‘*Aggravating factor’’ (9) applies only to a violation of 
Article 120—which authorizes a death penalty for rape. In 


'4See Townsend v. State, 533 N.E.2d 1215, 1229 (Ind. 1989): Wallace v. State. 
486 N.E.2d 445, 463 (Ind. 1985); Hightower v. State, 259 Ga. 770, 386 S.E.2d 
509, S11 (1989), State v. Sloan, 756 §.W.2d 503, 509, 511 (Mo. banc 1988). 


119 


Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 97 S.Ct. 2861, 53 L.Ed.2d 
982 (1977), the Supreme Court held that executing a 
defendant for rape of an adult female would violate the 
Eighth Amendment. We intimated in Matthews that this 
same principle would apply to trials by courts-martial, ‘‘at 
least, where there is no purpose unique to the military 
mission that would be served by allowing the death penalty 
for this offense.”’ 16 MJ at 380. 


This **factor’’ seeks to comply with Coker by permitting 
the death penalty only if ‘‘[t}he victim was under the age 
of 12”° or if **[t}he accused maimed or attempted to kill 
the victim." Congress has manifested its intent that young 
females be protected from sexual intercourse by creating 
the offense of carnal knowledge, whereunder a serv- 
icemember may be punished for consensual intercourse 
with a female under 16. Also, Congress has prohibited 
both maiming, see Art. 124, UCMJ, 10 USC § 924, and 
attempted murder, see Art. 80, UCMJ, 10 USC § 880, and 
Art. 118. 


‘*Aggravating factor’ (10) applies to conduct for which 
“death is authorized under the law of war.’’ The law of 
war—which is part of the ‘“‘Law of Nations’’ within the 
meaning of Article I, § 8, cl. 10 of the Constitution— 
provides a separate basis of military jurisdiction from that 
which exists under Article I, § 8, cl. 14, on which the 
Uniform Code is based. Jn re Yamashita and Ex Parte 
Quirin, both supra. Violations of the law of war may be 
tried by general court-martial, see Art. 18, or by a military 
commission or some other type of military tribunal. Cf 
Arts. 104 and 106, UCMJ, 10 USC § 904 and 906, 
respectively; Jn re Yamashita and Ex Parte Quirin, both 
supra; Madsden v. Kinsella, 343 U.S. 341, 72 S.Ct. 699, 
96 L.Ed. 988 (1952). If the line of decisions beginning 
with Furman v. Georgia, supra, applies to violations of the 


120 


law of war and if an aggravating factor must be established 
to permit imposition-of the death penalty for those 
violations, it seems appropriate that one ‘‘aggravating 
factor’ should be that the law of war recognizes the 
seriousness of the conduct involved by authorizing the 
punishment of death.'> 


‘*Aggravating factor’ (11) applies only to violations of 
Article 104—aiding the enemy—or of Article 106a— 
espionage. The first alternative is that ‘‘[t}he accused has 
been convicted of another offense involving espionage or 
treason for which either a sentence of death or imprison- 
ment for life was authorized by statute.’ Here again, 
aggravation is found in conduct which Congress has 
condemned by authorizing punishment of death or life 
imprisonment. 


The other alternative is based on the language of Article 
106a(c)(3), whereunder an aggravating factor for the 
offense of espionage is that ‘‘the accused knowingly 
created a grave risk of death to another person.”’!® 


From our examination of the ‘‘aggravating factors’ 
formulated by the President in RCM 1004, it seems clear 
that, to a considerable extent the President acted in reliance 
on legislative policy expressed in the Uniform Code of 


'S Article 18, UCMJ, 10 USC § 818, authorizes either general courts-martial or 
other military tribunals to administer the law of war. 


'©Indeed, the language used in the Rule, which adverts to “grave risk of death 
to a person other than the individual who was the victim,”’ seems to suggest 
that. in order for this aggravating factor to apply, the accused not only must 
have been convicted of aiding the enemy or espionage, but also must have 
killed one person ‘‘who was the victim’’ and placed in great danger someone 
else. We doubt that this additional restriction was intended. Nevertheless, 
since, in describing this “‘aggravating factor,’ the President did not use the 
language, “‘the victim, if any’’—as he did for “‘aggravating factor’’ (4)— 
“aggravating factor’ (11)(B) must contemplate a ‘‘victim’™’ apart from the 
person placed at risk. 


121 


Military Justice and in other federal statutes. This is 
especially true with respect to ‘‘aggravating factor’’ (7) 
and its various subparts—which were utilized in adjudging 
the death penalty in the present case. To the extent the 
President went outside federal statutes for guidance, he 
drew upon the Model Penal Code—which has been a 
source of decisional guidance in military justice, see, e.g., 
United States v. Byrd, 24 MJ 286 (CMA 1987); United 
States v. Frederick, 3 MJ 230 (CMA 1977); United States 
v. Thomas, 13 USCMA 278, 32 CMR 278 (1962)-—and 
upon patterns discerned in state death-penalty legislation. 


We note also that RCM 1004 is more specific in 
prescribing aggravating factors than is true of many state 
Statutes. It does not use terms like ‘‘heinous,’’ “‘vile,’’ 
“atrocious,” and ‘‘cruel’’—which present issues of 
vagueness and necessitate extensive judicial construction. 
See, e.g., Walton v. Arizona, Maynard v. Cartwright, and 
Godfrey v. Georgia, all supra. Thus, the ‘‘aggravating 
factors’’ under RCM 1004 are easier to apply than some 
civilian counterparts. 


As has already been emphasized, the ‘‘aggravating 
factors’’ which President Reagan prescribed in January 
1984 and which were incorporated in Manual for Courts- 
Martial, United States, 1984, were known to Congress. In 
enacting Article 106a in 1985, Congress specifically 
authorized the President to prescribe ‘‘aggravating factors”’ 
for espionage prosecutions in addition to those prescribed 
by Congress. Art. 106a(c)(4). We interpret this express 
congressional delegation to signify approval of the 
standards which the President theretofore had employed in 
prescribing “‘aggravating factors’’ for use in capital cases. 
RCM 1004(c). 


Although the guidance provided by Congress to the 
President was not so specific as that which Congress gave 


122 


to the Sentencing Commission, see Mistretta v. United 
States, supra, the President was not set adrift in an 
uncharted sea. Instead, in prescribing ‘‘aggravating fac- 
tors,”’ he was guided by the Uniform Code and other 
federal legislation and by a pattern of legislative intent 
discernible in the state statutes. Moreover, Congress not 
only acquiesced in his performance of this task but also 
tacitly ratified the ‘‘aggravating factors’’ when it enacted 
Article 106a of the Uniform Code. 


IV 


Appellant has vigorously attacked the constitutionality of 
RCM 1004, as promulgated by the President. He claims 
that the Rule should require the court-martial to have at 
least 12 members at all times.'? Appellant recognizes that 
courts-martial are not subject to the jury-trial requirements 
of the Sixth Amendment, see Ex parte Quirin, 317 U.S. at 
39-45, 63 S.Ct. at 16-19; but he reasons that to allow a 
death penalty to be imposed by less than 12 members 
violates the Eighth Amendment. His premise is that, even 
though juries in state courts are not required constitu- 
tionally to have 12 members, see Williams v. Florida, 399 
U.S. 78, 90 S.Ct. 1893, 26 L.Ed.2d 446 (1970), those 
states in which juries do participate in imposing the death 
penalty use 12-member juries for this task. Moreover, the 
Supreme Court has recognized that the number of jurors is 
related somewhat to the reliability of their decision, and 
therefore no state jury may be reduced below 6 in number 
without violating due process. Ballew v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 
223, 98 S.Ct. 1029, 55 L.Ed.2d 234 (1978), Appellant 
claims that, if there are at least 12 court-martial members. 
there will be an input of diverse viewpoints, so that any 
decision on imposing capital punishment is less likely to 
be arbitrary or capricious. 


‘In appellant's case, there were originally 15 members of the court-martial. 
but after challenges the number was reduced to 9. 


123 


The defense concedes that a civilian judge alone may be 
entrusted with imposing the death sentence, Clemons y. 
Mississippi, 494 U.S. 738, 110 S.Ct. 1441, 108 L.Ed.2d 
725 (1990); Walton v. Arizona, supra; and he may even be 
empowered to override a jury recommendation for life 
imprisonment. Spaziano v. Florida, 468 U.S. 447, 104 
S.Ct. 3154, 82 L.Ed.2d 340 (1984). However, appellant 
points out that a judge has a professional background 
which qualifies him for his sentencing task, while court- 
martial members lack similar experience. 


Under RCM 1004, the court-martial members—who 
have been chosen pursuant to the criteria set forth in 
Article 25 of the Code, 10 USC § 825—must be 
unanimous in finding aggravating factors.'® The military 
judge can, at least, recommend a commutation of a death 
sentence adjudged;'? and the convening authority is 
empowered to commute the sentence. Furthermore, a Court 
of Military Review, composed of trained appellate military 
judges, must thoroughly review the law, the facts, and the 
appropriateness of the accused's sentence. In view of all 
these safeguards, we are not convinced that a court-martial 
must have 12 members in a capital case when this is not 
required in any other type of trial. 


Under RCM 1004, the members must unanimously find 
at least one of the listed aggravating factors. Unlike the 
procedure under some state statutes upheld by the Supreme 
Court, Blystone v. Pennsylvania, 494 U.S. 299, 110 S.Ct. 
1078, 108 L.Ed.2d 255 (1990), there is no ‘‘aggravating 


'*Unanimity is not always required by state law. See Jackson v. State. 53 
So.2d 269, 271 (Fla. 1988)—the vote to recommend the death penalty was 7- 
5; Parker v. State, 476 So.2d 134 (Fla. 1985)—the vote was 8-4. 

'%We need not decide now whether the military judge is himself empowered 
to set aside a death sentence that he considers disproportionate or otherwise 
defective 


124 


factor’’ which compels the sentencing authority to impose 
the death sentence.?° Instead, all the court-martial members 
must ‘‘concur that any extenuating or mitigating circum- 
stances are substantially outweighed by any aggravating 
circumstances... .including the factors under’’ RCM 
1004(c). RCM 1004(b)(4)(C). 


The defense seems to complain that RCM 1004 does not 
prescribe any mitigating factors to be found by the 
members of the court-martial However, by omitting 
provision for such findings, this rule avoids the problem 
posed in Mills v. Maryland, 486 U.S. 367, 108 S.Ct. 1860, 
100 L.Ed.2d 384 (1988), and in McKoy v. North Carolina, 
494 U.S. 433, 110 S.Ct. 1227, 108 L.Ed.2d 369 (1990). 
There the instructions of the trial judge were construed by 
the Supreme Court to mean that a mitigating factor could 
not be considered at all unless all the jurors concurred in 
finding that it existed. Thus, such an instruction might 
enable a juror who wanted the death penalty imposed to 
hold out against any findings that mitigating factors 
existed. Instead, RCM 1004 allows an accused broad 
leeway to bring to the attention of the court-martial 
members any information which he believes would 
mitigate his sentence. Cf. Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302, 
109 S.Ct. 2934, 106 L.Ed.2d 256 (1989); Lockett v. Ohio, 
438 U.S. 586, 98 S.Ct. 2954, 57 L.Ed.2d 973 (1978). 


Appellant has contended that RCM 1004 is defective 
because it lacks any provision to prevent racial bias—like 
that included in a recently enacted federal anti-drug statute. 
Section 848(0) of Title 21, USC, requires that, in a drug 
case where the death penalty is authorized, the jury be 
instructed not to ‘“‘consider the race, color, religious 


201f the President had attempted to require that a death sentence be adjudged 
if an ‘‘aggravating factor’’ were found, we believe he would clearly have 
exceeded his constitutional authority. 


125 


beliefs, national origin, or sex of the defendant or the 
victim.”’ This statute did not become effective until after 
appellant's trial (102 Stat. 4545) and, by its own terms, 
applies only to jury trials in federal district courts. Its 
requirements—however desirable they may be*'—are not 
constitutionally mandated; otherwise, the Supreme Court 
would have applied them to capital cases tried by state 
courts. 22 


Appellant contends that court-martial members would be 
misled by the sentencing procedure, because they must find 
‘“‘any aggravating factors’’ but they do not make findings 
as to “‘mitigating factors.’’ His assumption is that, if one 
or more ‘‘aggravating factors’ are found and no 
‘mitigating factors’’ are specifically found, the members 
will inevitably conclude that the ‘‘aggravating factors” 
substantially outweigh the ‘‘mitigating factors.’’ Under this 
view, the President's attempt to allow the members the 
maximum leeway to consider mitigating evidence—in 
compliance with the principles announced in Woodson v. 
North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 96 S.Ct. 2978, 49 L.Ed.2d 
944 (1976), and Lockett v. Ohio, supra—is deemed to be a 
vice rather than a virtue. While there might be some 
advantages in the procedure urged by the defense for 
finding mitigating factors, there also can _ be 
disadvantages—as evidenced by McKoy v. North Carolina 
and Mills v. Maryland, both supra. We believe that the 
President made a constitu, onally permissible choice. 


The defense insists that RCM 1004 should require a 
separate finding by the members that “‘any extenuating or 


2'The military judge could give such instructions sua sponte or if requested by 
the defense. Such an instruction certainly seems desirable 

22Curtis, who is black, was tried by a panel which included several blacks 
Despite his claim that he had killed Lieutenant Lotz in a rage provoked by the 
victim's racial prejudice, the members voted unanimously for the death 


penalty 


126 


mitigating circumstances are substantially outweighed by 
any aggravating chcumstances.." We are convinced, 
however, that the weighing of aggravating against mitigat- 
ing factors can be adequately handled by instructions to the 
members that they must all concur as to this imbalance and 
does not require a separate finding. United States v. Evans, 
27 MJ 34, 40 (CMA 1988), cert. denied, “88 U.S. 1011, 
109 S.Ct. 797, 102 L.Ed.2d 788 (1989). Such instructions 
were given here. 


In sum, as we construe RCM 1004, it not only complies 
with due process requirements but also probably goes 
further than most state statutes in providing safeguards for 
the accused. 


Vv 


This case provides an example of matters that must be 
considered during appellate review before a death sentence 
can be approved. Here, one of the “‘aggravating factors”’ 
found by the court-martial was that Mrs. Lotz had been 
killed by appellant-in the perpetration of a burglary. 
However, two other “‘aggravating factors’ were submitted 
to the members. Specifically, the members found: 


PRES: Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, 
United States Marine Corps, this court- 
martial finds that the following aggravating 
factors have been proven beyond a reason- 
able doubt: 


That with regard to the premeditated 
murder of Mrs. Joan M. Lotz, the premedi- 
tated murder of her was committed while the 
accused, Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, 
U.S. Marine Corps, was engaged in the 
commission of a burglary: 


127 


That with regard to the premeditated 
murder of Mrs. Joan M. Lotz, that the 
accused, Lance Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, 
has been found guilty in the same case of 
another murder, to wit: That of Lieutenant 
James F. Lotz, United States Marine Corps 
Reserve, in violation of Article 118, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice; and 


That with regard to the premeditated 
murder of Lieutenant James F. Lotz, U.S. 
Marine Corps Reserve, the accused, Lance 
Corporal Ronnie A. Curtis, U.S. Marine 
Corps, has been found guilty in the same 
case of another murder, to wit: that of Mrs. 
Joan M. Lotz, in violation of Article 118, 
Uniform Code of Military Justice. 


Fither of these latter two “‘factors’’ meet the criteria of 
RCM 1004(c)(7)J): ““The accused has been found guilty 
in the same case of another violation of Article 118; 
....« (Emphasis added.) There is some authority to the 
effect that the separate findings as to these two ‘‘factors”’ 
might represent a double counting of ‘‘aggravating 
factors’; and, hence, one of the findings might need to be 
vacated. People v. Harris, 36 Cal.3d 36, 201 Cal.Rptr. 782, 
801, 679 P.2d 433, 452 (1984), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 965, 
105 S.Ct. 365, 83 L.Ed.2d 301 (1984); Wilson v. State, 300 
S.E.2d 640, 648, (Ga.), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 865, 104 
S.Ct. 199, 78 L.Ed.2d 174 (1983); State v. Goodman, 257 
S.E.2d 569 (NC 1979). We leave open this issue for 
consideration during further proceedings in this case. 
However, we observe that setting aside one “aggravating 
factor’’ where others remain does not mandate vacating the 
death sentence. Clemons v. Mississippi, supra. If it is 
decided hereafter that only two—rather than three— 


Ce A CE a 


128 


‘aggravating factors’’ should have been found by the 
court-martial, then it will be necessary for the Court of 
Military Review to determine whether the death sentence 
would have been adjudged at trial if only two *‘‘factors”’ 
had been found. Cf. United States v. Sales, 22 MJ 305 
(CMA 1986); United States v. Suzuki, 20 MJ 248 (CMA 
1985). 


Article 66(c) UCMJ, 10 USC § 866(c), provides that, 
‘“‘fiJn a case referred to it, the Court of Military Review 

. may affirm only such findings of guilty, and the 
sentence or such part or amount of the sentence, as it finds 
correct in law and fact and determines, on the basis of the 
entire record, should be approved.”’ (Emphasis added.) 
This extensive appellate review, which includes review of 
appropriateness of sentence, seems unique to military 
justice. However, many states provide for review of death 
sentences—usvally referred to as a ‘‘proportionality 
review.” See, e.g., Gregg v. Georgia, supra, 428 U.S. 153, 
96 S.Ct. 2909. 


This review is not constitutionally required in civilian 
cases where the statutory procedures adequately direct the 
sentencing authority's exercise of discretion. See, e¢.g., 
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 306, 107 S.Ct. 1756, 
1174, 95 L.Ed.2d 262, 288 (1987); Pulley v. Harris, 465 
U.S. 37, 104 S.Ct. 871, 79 L.Ed.2d 29 (1984). In view of 
the safeguards prescribed by RCM 1004, we are convinced 
that a “‘proportionality review’” is not required by the 
Eighth Amendment, which prohibits “‘cruel and unusual 
punishments,’ or by Article 55, 10 USC § 855, which 
prohibits “‘cruel or unusual punishment.’” However, we 
conclude that such a review is encompassed within the 
responsibility for determining appropriateness of sentence 
under Article 66 of the Code. Likewise, in the unique 
context of the death penalty, we believe that Congress 


129 


intended for our Court to oversee this review in order to 
assure that it is properly performed. 


In Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277, 292, 103 S.Ct. 3001, 77 
L.Ed.2d 637, 650 (1983), the Supreme Court stated: 


In sum, a court's proportionality analysis 
under the Eighth Amendment should be 
guided by objective criteria, including (i) the 
gravity of the offense and the harshness of 
the penalty: (ii) the sentences imposed on 
other criminals in the same jurisdiction; and 
(iii) the sentences imposed for commission 
of the same crime in other jurisdictions. 


With this guidance in mind, we conclude that propor- 
tionality review need not be limited to death sentences 
from the accused's own Service or even to death sentences 
imposed by courts-martial.?? 


23 An interesting South Carolina case deals with a proportionality review of a 
death sentence where there had been no prior death sentences in that 
jurisdiction that could be used for comparison. See State v. Shaw, 273 S.C 
194, 255 S.E.2d 799, 807 (1979): 
We have compared the death sentences imposed upon 

appellants with the sentences imposed in all prior capital 

cases tried under the current death penalty statu*es and are 

satisfied that there are no similar cases against which the 

proportionality of the sentences imposed upon appellants 

can be measured. 

The inability of this Court to compare this case with any 

other similar cases does not require, however, that 

appellants’ sentences be set aside. Any system of review 

that requires a comparison of each case with all similar 

prior cases must have a beginning. There will be a first 

case for each type or category of capital case that may 

appear and that first case necessarily cannot be compared to 

any other similar cases. The first case must stand alone, 

otherwise comparative sentence review would be forever 

impossible. 
(Footnote omitted.) 


130 


Accordingly, before a death sentence adjudged by a 
court-martial can be approved, the Court of Military 
Review must determine: (a) whether one or more valid 
aggravating factors have been unanimously found by the 
court-martial and this finding is factually and legally 
correct; (b) if any corrective action results in setting aside 
any such finding but leaves intact at least one *‘aggravat- 
ing factor,’ whether this error affected imposition of the 
sentence; (c) whether the death sentence adjudged is 
proportionate to other death sentences that have been 
imposed; and (d) whether under all of the facts and 
circumstances of the case the death sentence is appropriate, 
Art. 66(c). 


Vi 


We shall set this case for further argument to dispose of 
the remaining questions which have been raised by the 
defense. After deciding them, we shall issue our mandate. 


\SULLIVAN, Chief Judge (concurring): 


I concur with the scholarly and excellent opinion of 
Senior Judge Everett concerning the constitutionality of 
RCM 1004, Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, 
1984. However, I reserve judgment on the effect of Article 
66, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 USC § 866, on 
this case since such a holding is not required to answer the 
specified issues decided today. 


It is my personal view, however, that, in peacetime, a 
servicemember in a capital case should be tried by a 12- 
member court-martial. The value of a soldier's life is 
surely equal to the value of the life of his fellow citizens. 
Cf. Williams v. Florida, 399 U.S. 78, 103, 90 S.Ct. 1893, 
1907, 26 L.Ed.2d 446 (1970). Nevertheless, neither the 


131 


Constitution itself, nor Congress in legislation, nor the _ 
President by regulation has mandated a 12-member panel 
in a military capital case. See generally Van Loan, The 
Jury, the Court-Martial, and The Constitution, 57 Cornell 
L. Rev. 363, 384 n. 118 (1972). Moreover, it is the duty of 
this Court to apply the law of the land, not to legislate by 
judicial fiat, and therefore, it is beyond our power to 
mandate such a procedure. Finally, appellant himself, by 
use of his challenges, reduced in part the number of court 
members detailed to this case from 15 to 9. Moreover, he 
did not particularly object to trial by 9 members at this 
court-martial or request the detail of additional members. | 
could not find reversible error in these circumstances even 
if appellant was somehow entitled to a 12-member panel. 


COX, Judge (concurring): 


I concur with the resolution of the specified issues 
before us. I write only to reserve judgment on some other 
matters discussed by Senior Judge Everett which are used 
to illustrate the rationale of his decision. 


This was the first capital punishment case reviewed in South Carolina under 
death penalty statutes revised after Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 92 S.Ct 
2726, 33 L.Ed. 2d 346 (1972). 


132 


Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, 1984 
Rule for Courts-Martial 1004 
(Prior to 1991 Amendment) 


Capital cases 
(a) In general. Death may be adjudged only when: 


(1) Death is expressly authorized under Part IV of this 
Manual for an offense of which the accused has been 
found guilty or is authorized under the law of war for an 
offense of which the accused has been found guilty under 
the law of war; and 


%®% (2) The accused was convicted of such an offense by 
the concurrence of all the members of the court-martial 
present at the time the vote was taken; and 


(3) The requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this 
rule have been met. 


(b) Procedure. In addition to the provisions in R.C.M. 
1001, the following procedures shall apply in capital 
cases— 


*% (1) Notice. Before arraignment, trial counsel shall 
give the defense written notice of which aggravating 
factors under subsection (c) of this rule the prosecution 
intends to prove. Failure to provide timely notice under 
this subsection of any aggravating factors under subsection 
(c) of this rule shall not bar later notice and proof of such 
additional aggravating factors unless the accused demon- 
strates specific prejudice from such failure and that a 
continuance or a recess is not an adequate remedy. 


® (2) Evidence of aggravating factors. Trial counsel 
may present evidence in accordance with R.C.M. 


133 


1001(b)(4) tending to establish one or more of the 
aggravating factors in subsection (c) of this rule. 


(3) Evidence in extenuation and mitigation. The accused 
shall be given broad latitude to present evidence in 
extenuation and mitigation. 


* (4) Necessary findings. Death may not be adjudged 
unless— 


(A) The members find that at least one of the 
aggravating factors under subsection (c) existed; 


(B) Notice of such factor was provided in accordance 
with paragraph (1) of this subsection and all members 
concur in the finding with respect to such factor; and 


(C) All members concur that any extenuating or 
mitigating circumstances are substantially outweighed by 
any aggravating circumstances admissible under R.C.M. 
1001(b)(4), including the factors under subsection (c) of 
this rule. 


(5) Basis for findings. The findings in subsection (5)(4) 
of this rule may be based on evidence introduced before or 
after findings under R.C.M. 921, or both. 


*% (6) Instructions. In addition to the instructions 
required under R.C.M. 1005, the military judge shall 
instruct the members of such aggravating factors under 
subsection (c) of this rule as may be in issue in the case, 
and on the requirements and procedures under subsection 
(b)(4), (5), (7), and (8) of this rule. The military judge 
shall instruct the members that they must consider all 
evidence in extenuation and mitigation before they may 
adjudge death. 


134 


* (7) Voting. In closed session, before voting on a 
sentence, the members shall vote by secret written ballot 
separately on each aggravating factor under subsection (c) 
of this rule on which they have been instructed. Death may 
not be adjudged unless all members concur in a finding of 
the existence of at least one such aggravating factor. After 
voting on all the aggravating factors on which they have 
been instructed, the members shal! vote on a sentence in 
accordance with R.C.M. 1006. 


*® (8) Announcement. If death is adjudged, the president 
shall, in addition to complying with R.C.M._ 1007, 
announce which aggravating factors under subsection (c) of 
this rule were found by the members. 


*® (c) Aggravating factors. Death may be adjudged only 
if the members find, beyond a reasonable doubt, one or 
more of the following aggravating factors: 


(1) That the offense was committed before or in the 
presence of the enemy, except that this factor shall not 
apply in the case of a violation of Article 118 or 120; 


*% (2) That in committing the offense the accused— 


(A} Knowingly created a grave risk of substantial 
damage to the national security of the United States; or 


(B) Knowingly created a grave risk of substantial 
damage to a mission, system, or function of the United 
States, provided that this subparagraph shall apply only if 
substantial damage to the national security of the United 
States would have resulted had the intended damage been 
effected; 


* (3) That the offense caused substantial damage to the 
national security of the United States, whether or not the 


135 


accused intended such damage, except that this factor shall 
not apply in case of a violation of Article 118 or 120; 


* (4) That the offense was committed in such a way or 
under circumstances that the lives of persons other than the 
victim, if any, were unlawfully and substantially en- 
dangered, except that this factor shall not apply to a 
violation of Articles 104, 106a, or 120; 


(5) That the accused committed the offense with the 
intent to avoid hazardous duty; 


(6) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 118 
or 120, the offense was committed in time of war and in 
territory in which the United States or an ally of the 
United States was then an occupying power or in which 
the armed forces of the United States were then engaged in 
active hostilities; ‘ 


(7) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 
118(1): 


(A) The accused was serving a sentence of confine- 
ment for 30 years or more or for life at the time of the 
murder; 


(B) The murder was committed while the accused was 
engaged in the commission or attempted commission of 
any robbery, rape, aggravated arson, sodomy, burglary, 
kidnapping, mutiny, sedition, of piracy of an aircraft or 
vessel, or was engaged in flight or attempted flight after 
the commission or attempted commission of any such 
offense; 


(C) The murder was committed for the purpose of 
receiving money or a thing oi value; 


Wiis. — 


136 


(D) The accused procured another by means of 
compulsion, coercion, or a promise of an advantage, a 
service, or a thing of value to commit the murder; 


(E) The murder was committed with the intent to 
avoid or to prevent lawful apprehension or effect an escape 
from custody or confinement; 


*% (F) The victim was the President of the United 


States, the President-elect, the Vice President, or, if there 
was no Vice President, the officer in the order of 
succession to the office of President of the United States, 
the Vice-President-elect, or any individual who is acting as 
President under the Constitution and laws of the United 
States, any Member of Congress (including a Delegate to, 
or Resident Commissioner in, the Congress) or Member-of- 
Congress elect, justice or judge of the United States, a 
chief of state or head of government (or the political 
equivalent) of a foreign nation, or a foreign official (as 
such term is defined in section 1116(b)(3)(A) of title 18, 
United States Code), if the official was on official business 
at the time of the offense and was in the United States or 
in a place described in Mil. R. Evid. 315(c)(2), 315(c)(3); 


(G) The accused then knew that the victim was any of 
the following persons in the execution of office: a 
commissioned, warrant, noncommissioned, or petty officer 
of the armed services of the United States; a member of 
any law enforcement or security activity or agency, 
military or civilian, including correctional custody person- 
nel; or any firefighter; 


(H) The murder was committed with intent to obstruct 
justice; 


(1) The murder was preceded by the intentional 
infliction of substantial physical harm or prolonged, 


137 


substantial mental or physical pain and suffering to the 
victim; 


(J) The accused has been found guilty in the same 
case of another violation of Article 118; 


(8) That only in the case of a violation of Article 
118(4), the accused was the actual perpetrator of the 
killing; 


(9) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 120: 
(A) The victim was under the age 12; or 


(B) The accused maimed or attempted to kill the 
victim; 


(10) That, only in the case of a violation of the law of 
war, death is authorized under the law of war for the 
offense; 


* (11) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 
104 or 106a: 


(A) The accused has been convicted of another 
offense involving espionage or treason for which either a 
sentence of death or imprisonment for life was authorized 
by ‘statute; or 


(B) That in committing the offense, the accused 
knowingly created a grave risk of death to a persor other 
than the individual who was the victim. 


For purposes of this rule, ‘‘national security’’ means the 
national defense and foreign relations of the United States 
and specifically includes: a military or defense advantage 


AE AN ee a = 


138 


over any foreign nation or group of nations; a favorable 
foreign relations position; or a defense posture capable of 
successfully resisting hostile or destructive action from 
within or without. 


(d) Spying. If the accused has been found guilty of spying 
under Article 106, subsections (a)(2), (b), and (c) of this 
rule and R.C.M. 1006 and 1007 shall not apply. Sentencing 
proceedings in accordance with R.C.M. 1001 shall be 
conducted, but the military judge shall announce that by 
operation of law a sentence of death has been adjudged. 


(e) Other penaities. Except for a violation of Article 106, 
when death is an authorized punishment for an offense, all 
other punishments authorized under R.C.M. 1003 are also 
authorized for that offense, including confinement for life, 
and may be adjudged in lieu of the death penalty, subject 
to limitations specifically prescribed in this Manual. A 
sentence of death includes a dishonorable discharge or 
dismissal, as appropriate. Confinement is.a necessary 
incident of a sentence of death but not a part of it. 


*% Indicate changes established by executive order 12550. 


139 


Uniform Code of Military Justice Article 18 
10 U.S.C. § 818 
Jurisdiction of general courts-martial 


Subject to section 817 of this title (article 17), general 
courts-martial have jurisdiction to try persons subject to 
this chapter for any offense made punishable by this 
chapter and may, under such limitations as the President 
may prescribe, adjudge any punishment not forbidden by 
this chapter, including the penalty of death when 
specifically authorized by this chapter. General courts- 
martial also have jurisdiction to try any person who by the 
law of war is subject to trial by a military tribunal and 
may adjudge any punishment permitted by the law of war. 
However, a general court-martial of the kind specified in 
section 816(1)(B) of this title (article 16(1)(B)) shall not 
have jurisdiction to try any person for any offense for 
which the death penalty may be adjudged unless the case 
has been previously referred to trial as a noncapital case. 


_ 


140 


Uniform Code of Military Justice Article 36 
10 U.S.C. § 836 
(Prior to 1990 Amendment) 
President may prescribe rules 


(a) Pretrial, trial, and post-trial procedures, including 
modes of proof, for cases arising under this chapter triable 
in courts-martial, military commissions and other military 
tribunals, and procedures for courts of inquiry, may be 
prescribed by the President by regulations which shall, so 
far as he considers practicable, apply the principles of law 
and the rules of evidence generally recognized in the trial 
of criminal cases in the United States district courts, but 
which may not be contrary to or inconsistent with this 
chapter. 


(b) All rules and regulations made under this article shall 
be uniform insofar as practicable and shall be reported to 
Congress. 


14] 


Uniform Code of Military Justice Article 56 
10 U.S.C. § 856 
Maximum limits 


The punishment which a court-martial may direct for an 
offense may not exceed such limits as the President may 
prescribe for that offense. 


142 


Uniform Code of Military Justice Article 106a 
10 U.S.C. § 906a 


Espionage 


(al) Any person subject to this chapter who, with intent 
or reason to believe that it is to be used to the injury of the 
United States or to the advantage of a foreign nation, 
communicates, delivers, or transmits, or attempts to 
communicate, deliver, or transmit, to any entity described 
in paragraph (2), either directly or indirectly, any thing 
described in paragraph (3) shall be punished as a court- 
martial may direct, except that if the accused is found 
guilty of an offense that directly concerns (A) nuclear 
weaponry, military spacecraft or satellites, early warning 
systems, or other means of defense or retaliation against 
large scale attack, (B) war plans, (C) communications 
intelligence or cryptographic information, or (D) any other 
major weapons system or major element of defense 
strategy, the accused shall be punished by death or such 
other punishment as a court-martial may direct. 


(2) An entity referred to in paragraph (1) -is— 
(A) a foreign government; 


(B) a faction or party or military or naval force within 
a foreign country, whether recognized or unrecognized by 
the United States; or 


(C) a representative, officer, agent, employee, subject, 
or citizen of such a government, faction, party, or force. 


(3) A thing referred to in paragraph (1) is a document, 
writing, code book, signal book, sketch, photograph, 
photographic negative, blueprint, plan, map, model, note, 
instrument, appliance, or information relating to the 
national defense. 


143 


(bil) No person may be sentenced by court-martial to 
suffer death for an offense under this section (article) 
unless— 


(A) the members of the court-martial unanimously 
find at least one of the aggravating factors set out in 
subsection (c); and 


(B) the members unanimously determine that any 
extenuating or mitigating circumstances are substantially 
outweighed by any aggravating circumstances, including 
the aggravating factogs set out under subsection (c). 


(2) Findings under this subsection may be based on— 


(A) evidence introduced on the issue of guilt or 
innocence; 


(B) evidence introduced during the sentencing pro- 
ceeding; or 


(C) all such evidence. - 


(3) The accused shall be given broad latitude to present 
matters in extenuation and mitigation. 


(c) A sentence of death may be adjudged by a court- 
martial for an offense under this section (article) only if 
the members unanimously find, beyond a reasonable doubt, 
one or more of the following aggravating factors: 


(1) The accused has been convicted of another offense 
involving espionage or treason for which either a sentence 
of death or imprisonment for life was authorized by statute. 


(2) In the commission of the offense, the accused 
knowingly created a grave risk of substantial damage to 
the national security. 


144 


(3) In the commission of the offense, the accused 
knowingly created a grave risk of death to another person. 


(4) Any other factor that may be prescribed by the 


President by regulations under section 836 of this title 
(Article 36). 


145 


Uniform Code of Military Justice Article 118 
10 U.S.C. § 918 
Murder 


Any person subject to this chapter who, without justifica- 
tion or excuse, unlawfully kills a human being, when he— 


(1) has a premeditated design to kill; 
(2) intends to kill or inflict great bodily harm; 


(3) is engaged in an act which is inherently dangerous 
to another and evinces a wanton disregard of human life; 
or 


(4) is engaged in the perpetration or attempted perpetra- 
tion of burglary, sodomy, rape, robbery, or aggravated 
arson; 


is guilty of murder, and shall suffer such punishment as a 
court-martial may direct, except that if found guilty under 
clause (1) or (4), he shall suffer death or imprisonment for 
life as a court-martial may direct. 


146 


ExecuTIVE Orbe 12460 


AMENDMENTS TO THE MANUAL FOR CouRTS-MARTIAL., 
Unitep States, 1969 (Revisep Eprrion) 


JANUARY 24, 1984 


By the authority vested in me as President by the 
Constitution of the United States and by Chapter 47 of 
Title 10 of the United States Code (the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice), in order to prescribe amendments to the 
manual for Courts-Martial, United States, 1969 (Revised 
edition), prescribed by Executive Order No. 11476, as 
amended by Executive Order No. 11835, Executive Order 
No. 12018, Executive Order No. 12198, Executive Order 
No. 12233, Executive Order No. 12306, Executive No. 
12315, Executive Order No. 12340, and Executive Order 
12383, it is hereby ordered as follows: 

Section |. Paragraph 75 of the said Manual for Courts- 
Martial is amended by adding, after paragraph 75f, the 
following: 

“*g. Capital cases. 

(1) In general. Death may be adjudged only when: 

‘*() Death is expressly authorized under the code and 
this Manual for an offense of which the accused has been 
found guilty or is authorized under the law of war for an 
offense of which the accused has been found guilty under 
the law of war; and 

‘(b) The requirements of 75g (2) and (3) have been 
met. 

(2) Procedure. In addition to the other provisions in 
75, the following procedures shall apply in capital cases— 

‘*“(a) Notice. Before arraignment, trial counsel shall give 
the defense written notice of which aggravating circum- 
stances under 75g(3) the prosecution intends to prove. 
Failure to provide timely notice under this subsection of 
any aggravating circumstances under 75g(3) shall not bar 


147 


later notice and proof of such additional aggravating 
circumstances unless the accused demonstrates specific 
prejudice from such failure and that a continuance or a 
recess is not an adequate remedy. 

‘“(b) Evidence cf aggravating circumstances. Trial coun- 
sel may present evidence in accordance with 75b(4) 
tending to establish one or more of the aggravating 
circumstances in 75g(3). 

‘“(c) Evidence in extenuation and mitigation. The 
accused shall be given broad latitude to present evidence in 
extenuation and mitigation. 

‘“(d) Necessary findings. Death may not be adjudged 
unless the members find: 

‘*(i) Beyond a reasonable doubt that one or more of the 
aggravating circumstances under 75g(3) existed; and 

‘“(ii) That any extenuating or mitigating circumstances 
are substantially outweighed by any aggravating circum- 
stances including such circumstances under 75g(3) as the 
members have found existed. 

‘“(e) Basis for findings. The findings in 75g(2)(d) may 
be based on evidence introduced before the findings on the 
issue of guilt, during the sentencing proceeding, or both. 

‘“(f) Instructions. In addition to the instructions required 
under 76b(1), the military judge shall instruct the members 
on such aggravating circumstances under 75g(3) as may be 
in issue in the case and on the requirements and 
procedures under 75g (2)(d), (e), (g), and (h). The military 
judge shall instruct the members that they must consider 
all evidence in extenuation and mitigation before they may 
adjudge death. 

‘‘(g) Voting. In closed session, before voting on a 
sentence. the members shall vote by secret written ballot 
separately on each aggravating circumstance under 75g(3) 
on which they have been instructed. Death may not be 
adjudged unless all members concur-in a finding of the 
existence of at least one such aggravating circumstance. 


a 


148 


After voting on all the circumstances on which they have 
been instructed, the members shall vote on a sentence in 
accordance with 75b(2) and (3). 

‘“(h) Announcement- If death is adjudged, the president 
shall, in addition to complying with 76c, announce which 
aggravating circumstances under 75g(3) were found by the 
members. 

‘“(3) Aggravating circumstances. Death may be ad- 
judged only if the members find, beyond a reasonable 
doubt, one or more of the following aggravating 
circumstances: 

““(a) That the offense was committed before or in the 
presence of the enemy, except that this circumstances shall 
not apply in the case of a violation of Article 118 or 120; 

‘““(b) That in committing the offense the accused 
intended to: 

‘*(i) cause substantial damage to the national security of 
the United States; or 

““(ii) causé substantial damage to a mission, system, or 
function of the United States, provided that this subpara- 
graph shall apply only if substantial damage to the national 
security of the United States would have resulted had the 
intended damage been effected; 

‘“(c) That the offense caused substantial damage to the 
national security of the United States, whether or not the 
accused intended such damage, except that this circum- 
stance shall not apply in the case of a violation of Article 
118 or 120; 

‘“(d) That the offense was committed in such a way or 
under circumstances that the lives of persons other than the 
victim, if any, were unlawfully and substantially en- 
dangered, except that this circumstance shall not apply to a 
violation of Article 120; 

““(e) That the accused committed the offense with the 
intent to avoid hazardous duty; 

‘“(f) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 118 
or 120, the offense was committed in time of war and in 


149 


territory in which the United States or an ally of the 
United States was then an occupying power or in which 
the armed forces of the United States were then engaged in 
active hostilities; 

‘“(g) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 
118(1): 

‘*(i) The accused was serving a sentence of confinement 
for 30 years or more or for life at the time of the murder; 

‘*(ii) The murder was committed while the accused was 
engaged in the commission or attempted commission of 
any robbery, rape, aggravated arson, sodomy, burglary, 
kidnapping, mutiny, sedition, or piracy of an aircraft or 
vessel, or was engaged in flight or attempted flight after 
the commission or attempted commission of any such 
offense; 

‘“(iii) The murder was committed for the purpose of 
receiving money or a thing of value; 

‘‘(iv) The accused procured another by means of 
compulsion, coercion, or a promise of an advantage, a 
service, or a thing of value to commit the murder; 

‘*(v) The murder was committed with the intent to avoid 
or to prevent lawful apprehension or effect an escape from 
custody or confinement; 

‘*(vi) The victim was the President of the United States, 
the President-elect, the Vice President, or, if there was no 
Vice President, the officer next in the order of succession 
to the office of President of the United States, the Vice- 
President of the United States, the Vice-President-elect, or 
any individual who is acting as President under the 
Constitution and laws of the United States, any Member of 
Congress or Member-of-Congress elect, or any judge of the 
United States; 

‘*(vii) The accused then knew that the victim was any 
of the following persons in the execution of office: a 
commissioned, warrant, noncommissioned, or petty officer 
of the armed services of the United States; a member of 


150 


any law enforcement or security activity or agency, 
military or civilian, including correctional custody person- 
nel; or any firefighter; 

““(vil) The murder was committed with intent to 
obstruct justice; 

““(ix) The murder was preceded by the intentional 
infliction of substantial physical harm or prolonged, 
substantial mental or physical pain and suffering to the 
victim; or 

(x) The accused has been found guilty in the same 
case of another violation of Article 118; 

“For purposes of this paragraph, ‘national security’ 
means the national defense and foreign relations of the 
United States and specifically includes; (a) a military or 
defense advantage over any foreign nation or group of 
nations, (b) a favorable foreign relations position, or (c) a 
defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostile or 
destructive action from within or without, overt or covert. 
Examples of substantial damage to the national security of 
the United States may include: impeding the performance 
of a combat mission or operation; impeding the perfor- 
mance of an important mission in a place subject to hostile 
fire or imminent danger pay (see 37 U.S.C. section 310(a)) 
and disclosing military plans, capabilities, or intelligence 
such as to jeopardize any combat mission or operation of 
the armed services of the United States or its allies or to 
materially aid an enemy of the United States. 

‘““(h) That only in the case of a violation of Article 
118(4), the accused was the actual perpetrator of the 
killing; 

‘“(i) That, only in the case of a violation of Article 120: 

(i) The victim was under the age of 12; or 
““(ii) The accused maimed or attempted to kill the 
victim; or 

““(G) That, only in the case of a violation of the law of 
war, death is authorized under the law of war for the 
offense. 


1S] 


‘*(4) Spying. If the accused has been found guilty of 
spying under Article 106, 75g(1)(b), (2), and (3), and 76 
shall not apply. Sentencing proceedings in accordance with 
75a through f shall be conducted, but the military judge 
shall announce that by operation of law a sentence of death 
has been adjudged.”’ 

Sec. 2. Paragraph 76b(1) is amended by adding in the 
first sentence after the language ‘‘in 76b(2) and 76b(3),”’ 
the following language: 

‘‘and, in capital cases, 75g(2)(g),”’ 

Sec. 3 Paragraph 76b(3) is amended by adding after the 
first sentence the following language: 

‘See 75g(2)(g).”” 

Sec. 4. Paragraph 126a is amended by adding after the 
third sentence in the second paragraph the following 
language: | 

a ae 

Sec. 5. Paragraph 126b is amended by adding after the 
language ‘‘by the code’’ the second time it appears, the 
following language; 

‘‘and this Manual’’ 

Sec. 6. These amendments shall be effective imme- 
diately. These amendments shall apply in trials of capital 
offenses committed on or after this date. 

Sec. 7. The Secretary of Defense, on behalf of the 
President, shall transmit a copy of this Order to the 
Congress of the United States in accord with Section 836 
of Title 10 of the United States Code. 


RONALD REAGAN 
THe Wuite House, 
January 24, 1984. 


