4\ ® Supreme Court, t 
1) S FILED 
WY \; 

No. 95-860 » MAR 4g 1996 


- 


In The 


rie 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


¢ 


BARBARA SMILEY, 


Petitioner, 


CITIBANK (SOUTH DAKOTA), N.A., 
Respondent. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
California Supreme Court 


¢ 


AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF OF CONSUMER ACTION 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER SMILEY 


e 


James C. STURDEVANT* 
Kim E. Carp 
The Sturdevant Law Firm 
785 Market Street, Suite 500 
San Francisco, California 94103 
(415) 495-4140 


Counsel for Amicus Curiae Consumer Action 


"Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. When Congress enacted Section 30 of the 
National Bank Act of 1864, 12 U.S.C. § 85, (“section 85”) 
which allows national banks to charge “interest at the 
rate” allowed by the state in which they are located and 
thereby preempts other states’ limitations on the interest 
rates that national banks may charge, did Congress 
intend that section 85 would also preempt state statutes 
enacted for the protection of consumers that restrict or 
regulate non-interest charges, including contingent pen- 
alty fees such as the credit card late payment fees at issue 
in this action? 


2. If Congress did not intend section 85 to preempt 
state consumer protection statutes that regulate contin- 


gent penalty charges and other non-interest terms, did 
Congress intend to delegate to the various states the right 
to expand the preemptive scope of section 85 by creating 
broad, all-inclusive definitions of the term “interest”? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED ..........cccscccccescees i 
URS SIS SD oc cs vscickanbecsebactinh eat 1 
i a ee aR eT emt se 2 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ....................-. 3 
PEUGUOMVE sc viictsssriveneeadveststeineaa 5 


I. THE NATURE OF THE CREDIT CARD INDUSTRY 
DEMONSTRATES THE IMPORTANCE OF STATE 
CONSUMER PROTECTION LEGISLATION REGU- 
LATING PENALTY CHARGES ................. 5 


A. The Credit Card Industry Has Grown Expo- 
nentially in the Past Fifteen Years and Has 
Become an Increasingly Dominant Force in 
the Lives of American Consumers ......... 6 


B. The Credit Card Industry Is Dominated by 
Major Issuers Located in Small Deregulated 
SUMED... sccccccdathekeasteceecaneh ubaeees 12 


C. The Credit Card Industry Is Extraordinarily 
PUNT R a0 0 6.655 5 060 00045 0es bee 13 


D. The Credit Card Industry is Extremely Re- 
sistant to Competition on Fundamental Pric- 
NG COUN oo os eevnucadeingastbaaveenteunie 15 


E. Lack of Regulation or Pricing Competition 
Has Led to Substantial Increases in Penalty 
Fees and Other Punitive Practices in Recent 
WORED . oc cecccncsudecen bane see beeeeee 18 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


Il. THE COURT’S RESOLUTION OF THE IMPOR- 
TANT PREEMPTION ISSUE IN THIS CASE 
COULD HAVE SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON 
STATE CONSUMER PROTECTION EFFORTS.. 22 


A. Federal Preemption of State Consumer Pro- 
tection Statutes Should Be Narrowly Con- 
Ck et OFS ha ae eee 22 


B. A Finding of Broad Preemption in this Case 
Could tinder Consumer Protection Efforts 
in Other Important Areas.................. 25 


C. A Finding of Broad Preemption in this Case 
Will Create Pressure on Other States to 
RCS aie leis on cas nc cece oncecs.. 28 


SE lc a 30 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 


Cases 
Anderson Nat'l Bank v. Luckett, 321 U.S. 233 (1944) .... 23 


Beasley v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 235 Cal.App.3d 


1383, 1 Cal.Rptr.2d 446, rev. denied (1991) ......... 22 
California v. ARC America Corp., 490 US. 93, 101 
GUUEED . 0 v0cececevetstncadessudeuummiiomumeaiess 22 


Cippollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504 (1992) .... 23 


Hitz v. First Interstate Bank of California, 38 
Cal.App.4th 274, 44 Cal.Rptr.2d 890, rev. denied 


(OTTER w 0 osc ctvevccscccsvceddustcedéttondalbeasecss 22 
Lewis v. BT Investment Managers, Inc., 447 U.S. 27, 
TD GIG oc cvcnsacccveccuscucncscsecesbedvewcsotes 23 


Perdue v. Crocker National Bank, 38 Cal.3d 913, 216 
Cal.Rptr. 345, 702 P.2d 503 (Cal. 1985), appeal 


dismissed, 475 U.S. 1001 (1986) ...............5005. 23 
Smiley v. Citibank, 11 Cal.4th 138, 44 Cal.Rptr.2d 
G65, SED FBG GOO (USTED oc vc cccccccccccscecs 3, 21, 24 


Statutes, Rutes AND REGULATIONS 


SD Bs Be nc cccsccccdsctdccssndessnsenceess passim 

SepeaD Geese TD SPD ck cdsevcccvscdbcsvcceucdencs 1 

OTHER 

Lawrence Ausubel, The Credit Card Market 
Revisited, November, 1994 (unpublished) ....... 14, 17 


Lawrence Ausubel, The Failure of Competition in the 
Credit Card Market, The American Economic 
Review, March 1991 ................ 10, 14, 16, 17, 18 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


Paul S. Calem, The Strange Behavior of the Credit 
Card Market, Federal hom of Phila- 
— Business Review, January /Februa 
SUED vuvbeddetdsdesrags st ediokGcecds..c al: , 16, 17 


Credit Card Management, Card Industry Directory: 
The Blue Book of the Credit and Debit Card arts 
try in the United States (1992 a 7, 12 


Saul Hansell, A Shaky House of Plastic With No 
Quick Fix in Sight, New York Times, December 


i Mibateshesnstscvarecine 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 
Higgins, You Win Some, You Win Some More, Credit 
ard Management, February 1994.............._.. 29 


Kelley Holland & Richard Melcher, Plastic: Are 
Banks Over Their Limit? Business Week, March 6, 
SEP nvivedestevkaddisteaecniinc thn... 7, 11, 17 


Nancy Ann Jeffrey, Fees on Variable-Rate Credit 
Cards Rise, Wall Street Journal, January 5, 1995 15, 16 


Penny Lunt, Lean and Mean Is the Name of the Game, 
ABA Banking Journal, March 1995..10, 13, 14, 16, 17 


Margaret Mannix, When Credit Turns Painful, U.S. 
News & World Report, November 27, 1995 ....10, 19 


Peter Passell, A = Bankers Love: How Do 
Credit Cards Stay So Profitable? The New York 
Times, August 17, 1995.................... 10, 13, 14 


Linda Sherry, High Rates Obscured by “Teaser” 
Come-ons, Consumer Action News, March/ 


Me tedédanunnd deeseudeusattcee.... 17 
Linda Stern, Credit Card Crunch, Newsweek, Feb- 
ME ES 6 Ske cndcace i euiuds cdeckWkedeeres, 7,8 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued . 
age 


John Stewart, How Penalty Fees Are Rewarding 
Banks, Credit Card Management, November 
BES cccccdcccccccccccecccccecsccesséosensecacets 18, 20 


United States General Accounting Office, Report 
to Congressional Requesters, U.S. Credit Card 
Industry: Competitive Developments Need to be 
Closely Monitored, April 1994............6000: passim 


A Credit Card Conundrum, Business Week, January 
BE, FOOD. ccicccccdesccdtdbescounes Ueendeectess< 10, 18 


The Big Squeeze, The Economist, November 2, 1991 .. .8, 9 


The Card Industry Rides a Wave of Profitability, 
Credit Card News, April 1, 1994............... 13, 14 


The Global Growth of Credit Cards, The Futurist, 
Bamt Pipes, BOGD oo osiicdccvavecccccsascasvcesss 7, 8, 11 


Group Advocates State Regulation of Credit Cards, 
American Banker, p. 3 (July 29, 1987)............. 28 


Legal Issues: It's Win One, Lose One for Card Lobby- 
ists in 1994, Credit Card News (February 1, 


BODE, ci cvsccccescécenctencncwstbangeceapevce svete 28 
Mad As Hell About Late Fees, Business Week (Feb- 

FURTY DO, TOUR 6 oc cdsccdcdscccedesccccescecccecess 28 
Small States Teach a Big Banking Lesson, Chicago 

el. A, DE, Dn cccavcccktesbsctounenecéss 12, 28 
The Nilson Report, November 14, 1991.............. 13 


INTEREST OF AMICUS! 


Consumer Action is a non-profit, membership con- 
sumer education and advocacy organization, based in San 
Francisco, California. The organization was established 
23 years ago and currently has more than 1400 members. 
As a service to consumers and community organizations 
in California and elsewhere, Consumer Action publishes 
and distributes approximately 1 million pieces of litera- 
ture per year, free of charge, in eight different languages, 
on banking, credit and utility issues, including an annual 
survey of bank credit card interest rates and fees. In 
addition, the organization is a member of the Consumer 
Federation of America, and is actively involved in policy 
development, research, and legislative advocacy on credit 
and banking issues on behalf of consumers at both the 
state and national levels. 


Consumer Action has a long-standing interest in this 
litigation because the issue presented has profound sig- 
nificance for consumers in California and throughout the 
country. Consumer Action monitors the credit card indus- 
try on behalf of its members and other consumers, and 
advocates against excessive penalty fees imposed by 
credit card issuers, and other unfair, deceptive or puni- 
tive practices of card issuers that affect consumers. This 
Court's reaffirmance that states have the right to legislate 
consumer protections in the area of credit penalty fees is 
vital to Consumer Action’s efforts to advocate on behalf 


' Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 37.2, copies of letters 
expressing the written consent of the parties to the filing of this 
brief on behalf of amicus curiae Consumer Action are filed 
separately herewith. 


of consumers at both the state and federal level. Accord- 
ingly, Consumer Action submits this brief in support of 
Appellant Smiley, and urges the Court to reverse the 
decision below of the California Supreme Court. 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


The issue presented for review in this Court is 
whether Section 30 of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. 
§ 85, (hereinafter “section 85”) which allows national 
banks to charge “interest at the rate allowed” “emphasis 
added) by the state in which they are located, includes 
within the term “interest . . . rate” credit card penalty 
charges, in this case late fees, that are imposed for minor 
breach of contract separate from and in addition to inter- 
est, such that California’s regulation of such charges is 
preempted for out-of-state national banks, including 
Respondent Citibank, chartered in South Dakota. In par- 
ticular, the issue is whether section 85 permits national 
banks that choose to locate in “deregulated” states, such 
as South Dakota, Ohio, and Delaware, states which have 
revoked consumer protection statutes and created an 
environment favorable to banking interests, to “export” 
contingent penalty charges allowed in their home states 
to consumer credit card customers solicited in other 
states in which such charges are prohibited, or otherwise 
limited or regulated, by common law or consumer protec- 
tion statutes. 


As will be addressed at length by petitioner Smiley, 
penalty fees, including late payment fees and over-credit- 
limit fees, are not “interest” under any mode of inter- 
pretation, whether it be the plain and ordinary meaning 


CUMMINS 


3 


of the term, or its historical or common law interpreta- 
tion. Penalty fees are imposed upon a breach of the credit 
card contracts for a deterrent or punitive purpose, and are 
imposed entirely separate from and in addition to the already 
substantial, and continually accruing, interest rate 
charges. Nevertheless, in a sharply divided opinion 
below, the majority of the California Supreme Court held 
that the term “interest” could be construed broadly to 
include late fees, and therefore section 85 preempts lim- 
itations on credit card penalty fees applicable under Cali- 
fornia law. Smiley v. Citibank, 11 Cal.4th 138, 44 
Cal.Rptr.2d 441, 900 P.2d 690 (1995). Consumer Action 
submits that the decision below is wrong, and should be 
reversed by this Court. 


« 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


As the Court reviews the legal issue presented in this 
case, amicus Consumer Action respectfully suggests that 
the Court should also consider the important economic 
context in which the issue arises, and the serious negative 
ramifications for consumers that are likely to result from 
a ruling upholding the broad preemption analysis of the 
California Supreme Court. In the lower courts in this 
action, and in other actions around the country in which 
the same preemption issue has been litigated, some banks 
and their amici have implied that the underlying dispute 
in the action is relatively unimportant because credit card 
late payment fees are essentially de minimis charges that 
have little or no real impact on “good” consumers. The 
banks have also suggested that their profitability depends 
on the imposition of late payment and other non-interest 
fees, and therefore a decision in favor of the banks is 


necessary to protect them from economic harm. As will 
be discussed in this brief, both of these notions are belied 
by the economics of the credit card industry, including its 
increasing dominance in the consumer economy and its 
extraordinary profitability, and the true cost to consumers 
of increasingly excessive penalty fees. 


Moreover, the issue presented in this case is not 
simply about credit card late fees; rather it is fundamen- 
tally about the right of the states to legislate on behalf of 
consumers on banking issues, a power traditionally 
reserved to the states, and to enforce such duly-enacted 
consumer protection statutes against all banks, whether 
national or state-chartered, that choose to solicit and to 
profit from the state’s consumers. This Court's resolution 
of the preemption issue will not only impact on the 
ability of the states to protect consumers from excessive 
and unfair credit card penalty fees, but will also have an 
impact on many other consumer credit card and banking 
practices in which the states have, or may in the future, 
legislate protections on behalf of consumers. Accordingly, 
for the reasons set forth below, Consumer Action respect- 
fully urges the Court to reverse the decision of the Cali- 
fornia Supreme Court, and to reaffirm that states have the 
power to enforce their duly-enacted consumer protection 
statutes regulating credit card penalty charges. 


SI 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE NATURE OF THE CREDIT CARD INDUSTRY 
DEMONSTRATES THE IMPORTANCE OF STATE 
CONSUMER PROTECTION LEGISLATION REGU- 
LATING PENALTY CHARGES. 


As is addressed below, there are at least five salient 
facts about the credit card industry in the United States 
that are relevant to the issue presented in this case, and 
that should provide a important factual context for the 
Court’s consideration of the legal issue presented. 


1. The credit card industry has grown exponentially in 
the past 15 years in every measurable aspect, including the 
number of consumers holding credit cards; the number of 
credit cards held by the average consumer; the number of 
credit card transactions made each year; and the total 
amount of credit card debt carried by American con- 
sumers. 


2. Although there are thousands of credit card 
issuers, the industry is dominated by a relatively small 
number of mega-issuers located ir small, deregulated states, 
such as South Dakota, Delaware, and Ohio. 


3. The credit card industry is phenomenally profitable, 
far more so than any other aspect of the banking industry, 
and has been consistently for at least the past ten years. 


4. Although the credit card industry often is charac- 
terized as “highly competitive,” competition among issuers 
generally has focused on non-pricing terms. With the excep- 
tion of recent “teaser rate” offers, which revert to the 
traditional high rates after a specified period, credit card 


interest rates have been extremely resistant to competi- 
tion. There is no evidence of competitive forces at work in 
the area of penalty charges. 


5. Led by the major banks located in deregulated 
states, credit card issuers have substantially increased their 
penalty fees in recent years, including late and over-credit- 
limit charges, bringing the fees to average levels of $18 to 
$20 or more, and resulting in a total annual cost to 
consumers of approximately $2 billion. 


It is within this economic context that a conflict has 
arisen between states’ attempts to enact protections for 
consumer credit card users, and the mega-issuers 
attempts to invoke the cloak of federal preemption. 


A. The Credit Card Industry Has Grown Exponen- 
tially in the Past Fifteen Years and Has Become 
an Increasingly Dominant Force in the Lives of 
American Consumers. 


Statistics from a variety of sources demonstrate the 
increasing dominance of credit cards in the United States 
consumer economy. In general, the industry’s startling 
growth curve over the past fifteen years is evidenced by: 
(1) a five-fold increase in the volume of charges during 
the 1980's, (2) a doubling in the number of major credit 
cards in circulation, and (3) a tripling of the average debt 
owed by consumers per card. 


According to a comprehensive statistical summary 
published annually by Credit Card Management, out- 
standing balances on bank credit cards increased by more 
than 560 percent from 1981 to 1990, growing from $31.8 
billion in 1981 to $180.5 billion in 1990. See Credit Card 


Management, Card Industry Directory: The Blue Book of the 
Credit and Debit Card Industry in the United States (1992 
Edition), at 26. During that same time, the charge volume 
(total dollar amount charged per year) increased on Visa 
cards from $33 billion to $158.1 billion, and on Master- 
cards from $26.1 billion to $93.1 billion. Id. at 24. These 
increases represented an average annual growth in Visa 
and Mastercard outstanding balances of 23 and 21 per- 
cent, respectively. See Paul S. Calem, The Strange Behavior 
of the Credit Card Market, Federal Reserve Bank of Phila- 
delphia Business Review, January/February 1992, at 6. By 
1994, the outstanding balances on Visa and Mastercards 
had reached a record $256 billion,. tepreseni.ng yet 
another increase of at least 24 percent over the previous 
year. See Kelley Holland & Richard Melcher, Plastic: Are 
Banks Over Their Limit?, Business Week, March 6, 1995, at 
92. By the end of 1995, outstanding credit card balances 
had increased again by 19 percent, reaching a total of 
more than $305 billion. Saul Hansell, A Shaky House of 
Plastic With No Quick Fix in Sight, New York Times, 
December 28, 1995, at C1. 


In 1984, there were approximately 157 million major 


credit cards in use in the United States. By 1993, that 


number had risen to an estimated 331 million. The Global 
Growth of Credit Cards, The Futurist, Sept/Oct, 1995, at 
53-54. Recent statistics indicate the average cardholder 
has been adding about one credit card per year, and in 
1994, used about 10 different bank, gas and store cards. 
See Linda Stern, Credit Card Crunch, Newsweek, February 
13, 1995, at 54. Another publication has reported that the 
average cardholder now carries nine different cards, con- 
tributing to the more than one billion credit cards of all 
types currently in circulation in the United States. The 


Global Growth of Credit Cards, supra, The Futurist, supra, at 
54. 


The amount of credit card debt carried by consumers 
also has increased sharply in recent years. Between 1982 
and 1989, the average balance carried by consumers in 
active credit card accounts increased annually at an aver- 
age rate of 10 percent, climbing to about $1300 at the end 
of 1989. Calem, supra, at 6. In only ten years, the average 
outstanding balance owed to Visa and Mastercard 
increased from less than $400 per card in the early 1980s, 
to almost $1,100 per card in 1993. Global Growth of Credit 
Cards, supra, at 54. Other statistics suggest that the aver- 
age balance now owed on credit cards has risen to more 
than $1,700. Stern, supra, Credit Card Crunch, at 54. 


These statistics demonstrate three important trends 
in consumer use of credit cards in the past fifteen years. 
See The Big Squeeze, The Economist, November 2, 1991, at 
13. First, more people than ever before have become 
credit cardholders, including millions of consumers in 
lower income brackets, and other categories formerly 
considered too risky by card issuers. See Hansell, A Shaky 
House of Plastic, supra, at C1 (card issuers are aggressively 
seeking customers who would have been seen as too 
risky before); Global Growth of Credit Cards, supra, 
(approximately 82 percent of full-time college students 
have credit cards as a result of aggressive marketing).? 


2 See also United States General Accounting Office, Report 
to Congressional Requesters, U.S. Credit Card Industry: 
Competitive Developments Need to be Closely Monitored, April 
1994, at 13, (hereinafter “1994 GAO Report”), which reported 
that “(higher credit card interest rates enabled issuers to offer 
cards to riskier customers who previously may not have 


Second, consumers now use credit cards much more often 
than in the past (this is represented by the increase in 
charge volume). The average household charged $885 per 
year at the beginning of the 1980s, by 1990, the average 
household was charging approximately $3,753 per year. 
The Big Squeeze, supra, at 13. Credit cards are now a 
necessity for many transactions, including car rentals, 
ticket purchases, and hotel reservations, and can be used 
in virtually all stores and restaurants, as well as most 
supermarkets, movie theaters, gas stations, and fast food 
chains.3 


The third trend is the increasing debt carried by 
consumers on their credit cards. In 1980, a typical card- 
holder owed approximately $350 total debt on all of his 
or her credit cards; by 1990, that figure had increased to 
an average of $2,350. The Big Squeeze, supra, at 13. Ibid. By 
the end of 1995, it was estimated that the average total 
credit card debt per household exceeded $3,000. Hansell, 
supra, A Shaky House of Plastic, December 28, 1995, at C1. 


This ballooning increase in the number of credit 
cards and the amount of credit card debt carried by 
consumers is not simply the product of unrestrained 


qualified . . . Data also indicate that the percentage of 
households with at least one credit card account increased in all 
income groups.” The Report showed significant increases in the 
lower income brackets, including households with less than 
$10,000 in annual income, and those with $10,000 to $19,999 in 
annual income. 


* In light of the fact that credit cards are now required for 
many transactions, consumers are far more likely to choose a 
card based on its degree of acceptance and level of service, 
rather than, as is discussed in Section D below, the penalty fees 
that might be imposed in the event of breach. 


10 


spending by consumers. Rather, the increase is largely the 
result of a deliberate strategy and massive effort on the 
part of credit card issuers to solicit more customers, and 
to encourage higher borrowing by raising credit limits. 
As will be discussed below, credit card operations are 
extremely profitable, more so than almost any other sec- 
tor of the financial industry, leading many issuers to 
pursue aggressive expansion programs.‘ The New York 
Times reported in December, 1995, that credit card com- 
panies sent out nearly 2.7 billion solicitations in 1995, 
with most households receiving three or four each month. 
See Hansell, supra, at C1. It is important to note in this 
respect that because the primary source of profit in the 
industry is annual percentage rate (APR) revenue, the 
most profitable, and therefore most desirable, customers 
are the higher risk “borrowers,” i.e., those who carry a 
high balance, and not the “convenience users,” i.e., those 
who pay off their balance every month. See e.g. Lawrence 
Ausubel, The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Mar- 
ket, The American Economic Review, March 1991, at 
70-71; A Credit Card Conundrum, Business Week, January 
16, 1995, at 24. Indeed, the safe, low-risk convenience 
users are considered “dead weight” in the industry. Mar- 
garet Mannix, When Credit Turns Painful, U.S. News 
& World Report, November 27, 1995, at 88.5 


* See discussion infra. See also e.g. Penny Lunt, Lean and 
Mean is the Name of the Game, ABA Banking Journal, March 1995, 
at 43; Peter Passell, A Mystery Bankers Love: How Do Credit Cards 
Stay So Profitable? The New York Times, August 17, 1995, at D2. 


5 Mannix reports that it is a growing practice in the 
industry for card issuers to dump cardholders who pay off their 
balance in full each month or who do not use their card enough. 
Some issuers have also eliminated the “grace period” for 
convenience users. Mannix, supra, November 27, 1995, at 88-89. 


11 


Because of this peculiar characteristic of the industry, 
card issuers aggressively encourage increased borrowing 
by cardholders, assuming the risks in pursuit of the 
profits. 


One final trend that has resulted from the phenome- 
nal growth in the use and prevalence of consumer credit 
cards, and the aggressive marketing by issuers, is that 
more consumers than ever before are encountering diffi- 
culty in meeting their minimum repayment obligations. 
The delinquency rate in 1990 was 27 percent higher than 
in 1985, a factor that cannot be attributed solely to reces- 
sionary forces. See Global Growth of Credit Cards, supra, at 
54. Some experts have predicted that delinquencies will 
rise significantly in the next several years as consumers 
become unable to repay balances on the numerous cards 
pushed on them since in the early 1990's. See Holland & 
Melcher, supra, at 92. The New York Times reported in 
December, 1995, that the number of consumers seeking 
help from credit counselors in repaying credit card bills 
has reached record levels. Hansell, supra, The New York 
Times, December 28, 1995, at C1. 


This increasing dominance of credit cards in the con- 
sumer economy, and its significant effect on consumers 
carrying ever higher levels of debt, demonstrates the 
importance of the states’ ability to legislate against 
abuses and overreaching by the industry in the area of 
non-interest penalty fees. 


12 


B. The Credit Card Industry Is Dominated by 
Major Issuers Located in Small Deregulated 
States. 


The enforcement of state consumer protection stat- 
utes is particularly important in light of the increasing 
concentration of major credit card issuers in a few small, 
deregulated states. Although there are more than 6000 
issuers of credit cards in the United States industry, (see 
1994 GAO Report, supra, at 2), the market is dominated 
by a relatively small number of mega-issuers. In fact, the 
ten largest issuers (measured by total outstandings) con- 
trol more than 55 percent of the total market, and the top 
25 issuers control more than 75 percent of the market. See 
Card Industry Directory, supra, 1993 ed., at 33, 66. Respon- 
dent Citibank, the single largest issuer in the country, is 
located in South Dakota. Six of the remaining top ten 
issuers, are located in Delaware. 


South Dakota and Delaware, and a handful of other 
“deregulated” states, have undertaken a deliberate strat- 
egy to attract large credit card operations by creating an 
extremely favorable regulatory environment. See Small 
States Teach a Big Banking Lesson, Chicago Fed. Letter, 
June, 1986. In the early 1980's, these two states repealed 
consumer protection statutes that regulated consumer 
lending, passed laws favorable to banking interests, and 
undertook an aggressive campaign to entice credit card 
issuers to relocate from other states. Id. The strategy has 
been highly successful. Id. Unfortunately, the actions of 
the deregulated states have also had a significant detri- 
mental impact on consumers residing in other states 
throughout the country. While the issue of exportation of 
penalty fees that is currently pending before this Court 
has remained unresolved, the major issuers located in 


13 


deregulated states have routinely exported excessive pen- 
alty charges and other fees unregulated by their home 
state to consumers residing in other states. In 1993, late 
payment and overlimit penalty fees cost consumers 
throughout the country more than $1.9 billion. See The 
Card Industry Rides a Wave of Profitability, Credit Card 
News, April 1, 1994, at 2. 


C. The Credit Card Industry Is Extraordinarily 
Profitable. 


A 1995 publication characterized the credit card busi- 
ness as “about the most profitable in the financial indus- 
try,” and reported that in 1994, the average credit card 
portfolio generated a 4 percent return on assets, a 60 basis 
point improvement since 1992. “A look at the most prof- 
itable bank credit card subsidiaries in 1994 shows ROAs 
[return on assets] as high as 11%, 7.7% and 6%.” Lunt, 
supra, Lean and Mean is the Name of the Game, ABA Bank- 
ing Journal, March 1995, at 43. (emphasis in original) In 
August, 1995, The New York Times reported that in 1994, 
eight of the top nine commercial banks, ranked by return 
on assets, specialized in credit card loans. Passell, supra, 
A Mystery Bankers Love, at D2. In 1993, the credit card 
industry earned more than $4.4 billion in after-tax profits, 
continuing a string of several years of annual profits in 
the $3.5-$4.5 billion range. See The Card Industry Rides a 
Wave of Profitability, supra, Credit Card News, April 1, 
1994, at 1; The Nilson Report, November 14, 1991, at 1. 


Credit card profits are extraordinary even in the 
banking industry. In a much-cited 1991 study and article, 
Lawrence M. Ausubel, then Professor of Economics 
at Northwestern University (currently Professor of 


14 


Economics at the University of Maryland), demonstrated 
that banks consistently earn profits on their credit card 
operations three to five times greater than the ordinary 
rate of return for the banking industry as a whole. See 
Ausubel, supra, The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card 
Market, at 50 (hereinafter “Ausubel, 1991”).° 


The 1994 GAO Report on the credit card industry not 
only confirms Ausubel’s findings on the extraordinary 
profitability of the industry through the 1980's, but also 
documents that, after a very slight dip in 1991 at the 
height of the recession, the industry continued to earn 
very high profits through 1993. The Report notes that, 
between 1983 and 1990, Visa and Mastercard issuers’ 
earnings averaged 4.68 percent of outstanding balances, a 
reliable measure of return on assets for credit card opera- 
tions, while the overall earnings of banks in general 
averaged just .57 percent of assets. 1994 GAO Report, 
supra, at 19. 


Although some aspects of Ausubel’s analysis have 
been controversial, particularly his conclusions regarding 
the failure of the competitive model in the industry 
(addressed in the following section), the consistently 
supernormal profitability of the credit card industry has 
been confirmed in numerous publications over the past 
several years, and cannot be disputed. See e.g. Passell, 
supra, A Mystery Bankers Love, The New York Times, 
August 17, 1995, at D2; Lunt, supra, at 43; Credit Card 
Rides a Wave of Profitability, supra, at 1. 


© Ausubel recently reaffirmed these findings in The Credit 
Card Market Revisited, November, 1994 (unpublished paper), 
which was presented to the National Bureau of Economic 
Research in July, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as “Ausubel, 1994 


Paper”). 


15 


D. The Credit Card Industry is Extremely Re- 
sistant to Competition on Fundamental Pricing 
Terms. 


A number of explanations have been offered for the 
high rate of profitability in the industry. It is clear, how- 
ever, that one of the primary reasons is that, for the most 
part, the credit card industry has been extremely resistant 
to competition on long-term annual interest rates and 
other non-interest fees, including penalty charges. As a 
result, interest rates and other fees charged to consumer 
cardholders have remained very high even as the cost of 
funds for issuing banks has fluctuated over the years, and 
card issuers have amassed huge profits. In its 1994 Report 
on the industry, the GAO released statistics showing that, 
except for a slight dip in 1992 and 1993, average credit 
card interest rates have remained virtually constant at 
approximately eighteen percent for the past twenty years, 
with even higher rates charged by some major issuers.” 
During this same time, the interest rates at which issuing 
banks could borrow funds (a measure of lending costs) 
fluctuated regularly, plunging to between five and six 


7 More recent data indicate that the slight drop in average 
interest rates in 1992 and 1993 was temporary, and that rates 
increased again in 1994. The Wall Street Journal reported in 
January, 1995 that “[i]nterest rates on credit card purchases now 
average about 17.7%, up from 16.65% last spring. With some 
economists expecting the Fed to raise rates again this year, ‘(t]he 
scenario is set for rates to actually exceed what they were in the 
1980's.” Nancy Ann Jeffrey, Fees on Variable-Rate Credit Cards 
Rise, Wall Street Journal, January 5, 1995, at C1, quoting Robert 
McKinley, President of RAM Research Corp., a Frederick, 
Maryland firm that tracks the bank card industry. 


16 


percent in the early 1990's. 1994 GAO Report, supra, 
Figure 1.2, at 16. 


It has been documented that interest rates on credit 
cards have remained artificially elevated because issuing 
banks strenuously resist market competition on the basis 
of long-term interest rates or other significant pricing 
terms. Thus, although the industry likes to characterize 
itself as fiercely competitive, that competition focuses 
primarily on non-price terms, such as service, advertis- 
ing, affinity programs, benefits, rebates, and other perks, 
and rarely reaches to the key pricing terms such as 
annual interest rates. See Ausubel, 1991, supra, at 53; 
Calem, supra, at 9. 


Two recent industry trends appear, at least super- 
ficially, to indicate a slight break in this historical resis- 
tance to price competition. The first is the increase in the 
number of cards with variable rates; and the second is the 
recent “teaser rate” war among issuers. As late as 1991, 
only one-third of credit cards had a variable interest rate; 
today more than 70 percent of credit cards have variable 
rates. See e.g. Jeffrey, supra, at C1; Lunt, supra, at 43. When 
the variable rate cards were first issued, (largely in 
response to Congressional threats to impose caps on 
excessive credit card interest rates), they resulted in a 
decline in the “average most common interest rate” from 
18.23% in 1991, to 17.76% in 1992, to 16.83% in 1993. See 
1994 GAO Report, supra, at 15-18. In 1994 and 1995, 
however, these variable rates climbed again as the prime 
rate increased, bringing many consumers’ rates back to 
the 18 to 20 percent range. 


Similarly, in the past year, many card issuers have 
attempted to lure customers by offering an initial low 


17 


“teaser rate” that reverts to a much higher rate within a 
specified period, typically from three to six months. See 
Lunt, supra, at 45; Holland & Melcher, supra, at 92. Amicus 
Consumer Action regularly monitors developments in the 
credit card industry and publishes an annual survey of 
credit card terms. In its 1995 survey, the organization 
concluded that the prevalence of low teaser rates offered 
as bait to consumers is actually obscuring the consider- 
able jump in average rates that occurred between 1994 
and 1995. Linda Sherry, High Rates Obscured by “Teaser” ~ 
Come-ons, Consumer Action News, March/April 1995, at 
1. The survey also found that many of the teaser rates 
revert to “shockingly high” rates after the initial grace 
period. Thus, the variable-rate and teaser-rate trends in 
the industry represent nothing more than superficial 
competition and marketing strategies that have no signif- 
icant impact on the long-term interest rates that con- 
sumers pay. 


The significance of the industry’s resistance to com- 
petition on interest rates is three-fold. First, it under- 
scores the long-term profitability of the industry which is 
linked to the high interest rates issuers are able to main- 
tain in the marketplace. Second, it highlights the fact that, 
for a variety of reasons unique to the industry, the exer- 
cise of consumer choice apparently has little effect on 
interest rates or other fees.* And third, the lack of compe- 
tition on pricing terms is particularly applicable to non- 
interest penalty fees. Because most cardholders do not 


® For discussions of these barriers to competition in the 
marketplace, see e.g. Ausubel 1991, supra, 68-72; Ausubel 1994, 
supra, at 22-27; Calem, supra, 11-3; 1994 GAO Report, supra, 
37-39. 


18 


intend, at the time they accept a card, to make late 
payments or to exceed their credit limit - minor breaches 
which, in most cases, result from either simple inattention 
or circumstances beyond the cardholder’s control — con- 
sumers do not choose a card based on the amount of penalty 
fees charged by the issuer. As a result, there is no competi- 
tive incentive for issuers to charge lower penalty fees. 
Indeed, to do so would attract precisely the kind of 
cardholder they wish to avoid — the user who anticipates 
paying such fees at some point in the future.’ As is 
discussed in the following, section, this lack of market 
control has caused penalty fees to rise sharply in recent 
years, and further highlights the need for state regula- 
tion. 


E. Lack of Regulation or Pricing Competition Has 
Led to Substantial Increases in Penalty Fees 
and Other Punitive Practices in Recent Years. 


In the absence of regulatory and competitive 
restraints, and led by the banks located in deregulated 
states, card issuers have steadily increased their penalty 
fees in recent years. According to Consumer Action’s 
1995 Credit Card Survey, late fees are now almost univer- 
sal among card issuers, whereas ten years ago, only about 
half of the card issuers charged a late or overlimit fee. See 
Stewart, How Penalty Fees Are Rewarding Banks, Credit 


® See e.g., Credit Card Conundrum, supra, at 24 (“It may well 
be that the economics of price-cutting backfire in the credit card 
business. Companies choosing new customers with low rates 
simply lose profits . . . [because] the customers most likely to 
switch because of a rate cut are the riskier ones”). See also 
Ausubel, 1991, at 70; 1994 GAO Report, at 34. 


— ——— 


19 


Card Management, November 1991, at 39-40. Signifi- 
cantly, the size of the charges also has increased sharply 
in recent years. The average late fee for a regular Visa 
card shot up 22 percent, from $6.56 in 1987 to $8.03 in 
1989, while the average overlimit charge at the end of 
1989 was $11. Id. By 1995, the average late fee was up to 
$15, and most major banks were charging $18 or $20. 
Mannix, supra, When Credit Turns Painful, at 88. 


Equally important, card issuers have begun imposing 
the fees more aggressively and in situations that appear 
patently unreasonable or unfair. According to a recent 
report: 


[Card issuers] used to give cardholders 10 days 
to get a payment in before slapping on a late fee. 
Now issuers will impose the fee any time the 
payment hasn’t arrived by the due date -evenif , 
it’s just one day late. . . . Issuers are also becom- 
ing less tolerant of trivial violations of the credit 
ceiling. If a cardholder went 10 or 20 percent 
over the credit line, the issuer used to look the 
other way. Now some issuers wallop card- 
holders who exceed the limit by a mere dollar. 


Mannix, supra, at 88. The same article reported that card 
issuers are also beginning to engage in other punitive 
practices as a way of boosting profits. For example, many 
issuers now sharply increase a cardholder’s interest rate 
if he or she makes only a single late payment, or other- 
wise “fails to meet the [undefined] requirements” of the 
card agreement. Other issuers have begun reviewing 
their cardholder's credit reports every six months. If an 
increase in “risk” is detected, which may be construed as 
nothing more than the act of applying for a car loan, the 
cardholder's interest rate is jacked up significantly, even 


20 


if the cardholder has an impeccable record with the 
issuer. Id. at 87-88. 


Although issuers claim penalty fees are necessary to 
recover costs caused by delinquent borrowers, penalty 
fees are, in reality, a significant profit source. According 
to an industry publication, penalty fees “represent a sig- 
nificant revenue opportunity” that far exceeds any 
increased costs to issuers caused by late payments or 
overlimit charges. 


Some issuers argue they make the charges to 
cover extra costs incurred. But Auriemma Con- 
sulting Group Inc. looked at a broad range of 
nuisance fees — tariffs for card replacement and 
extra copies of statements as well as late pay- 
ment, bounced checks and exceeding credit 
limits — and concluded they account for at least 
60 basis points of the average bank card return 
on assets, up from around 30 points a few years 
ago. 


See Stewart, supra, at 39-43. 


It is well-known in the industry that the vast majority 
(75 percent or more) of consumers who miss a payment 
due date, make the payment before the next billing cycle. 
Thus, most consumers who are charged a late fee do not 
“default” in the sense that they fail to repay their debt. 
Rather, for any variety of reasons (e.g., extended vaca- 
tion, sudden absence from home for family, work or 
medical reasons, temporary financial misfortune, etc.), 
these consumers simply fail to mail in a minimum pay- 
ment by the due date. As such, for most of these con- 
sumers, the card issuer incurs little or no increased cost. 


—— 


21 


These consumers do not cause, and should not be sad- 
dled with, the card issuer’s entire cost of defaulting card- 
holders, i.e. those cardholders who never repay their 
debt.'° On the contrary, the risks and costs of default that 
are inherent in the credit card industry are reflected in 
the higher interest rates charged for unsecured borrow- 
ing; late payment and other penalty fees are essentially 
double-billing for the same risk. 


While card issuers might reasonably impose a small 
late charge on cardholders for whom there is actually 
some form of increased collection activity as a result of a 
seriously delinquent payment or substantial over-credit- 
limit borrowing, the $18-$20 late fees and $20-$25 over- 
limit fees currently imposed by most major issuers bear 
no relationship whatsoever to actual costs associated with 
simple overdue payments or overlimit charges. The fees 
are fixed at an amount intended to deter and to punish 
minor breaches, while at the same time generating the 
greatest possible profit without triggering consumer 


10 The importance of this distinction is demonstrated by 
Justice Mosk’s erroneous contention in the decision below that, 
as a matter of public policy, “late payment fees may be 
employed to impose default costs on late payers, who are 
responsible for them, . ..” Smiley, supra, 11 Cal.4th at 161. While 
some late payers obviously do, in fact, default in repaying their 
debt, most commit only the minor offense of missing a single 
due date. If late payment fees are-sanctioned as a legitimate 
attempt by issuers to recover the costs of defaulting 
cardholders, then cardholders who do nothing more than pay 
their bill a few days late are being unfairly allocated the costs of 
cardholders who never repay. Ultimately, however, the issue of 
whether credit card late fees are good or bad as a matter of 
public policy is an issue for state legislators; it is not an issue to 
be resolved by judicial expansion of section 85. 


22 


backlash. Such fees are entirely unrelated to the amount 
of the overdue payment or overlimit charge, the degree of 
delinquency, if any, or the cardholder’s payment his- 
tory."' Unless states are allowed to enforce consumer 
protections in this area, card issuers located in deregu- 
lated states will continue to export excessive, unnecess- 
ary, and even abusive penalty fees to consumers 
throughout the country. 


Il. THE COURT’S RESOLUTION OF THE IMPOR- 
TANT PREEMPTION ISSUE IN THIS CASE 
COULD HAVE SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON STATE 
CONSUMER PROTECTION EFFORTS. 


A. Federal Preemption of State Consumer Protec- 
tion Statutes Should Be Narrowly Construed. 


It is well-established that consumer protection is one 
of the “historic police powers of the States.” See e.g. 
California v. ARC America Corp., 490 U.S. 93, 101 (1989); 


't Consumer litigation filed against banks in California has 
confirmed that the penalty fees imposed by card issuers are 
generally far in excess of any increased costs incurred as the 
result of late payments or other cardholder breaches. In Beasley 
v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 235 Cal.App.3d 1383, 1 Cal.Rptr.2d 446, 
rev. denied (1991), a jury awarded, and the Court of Appeal 
affirmed, $5.2 million in refunds for late and overlimit fees the 
bank had collected in excess of its actual damages resulting 
from breach. In a separate action against First Interstate Bank of 
California, tried in 1992, the class recovered approximately $5 
million in excess fees. See Hitz v. First Interstate Bank of 
California, 38 Cal.App.4th 274, 44 Cal.Rptr.2d 890, rev. denied 
(1995). Moreover, the $3 to $5 late fees and $10 overlimit fees 
proven excessive in these actions were significantly lower than 
the $18-$20 late and overlimit fees currentiy charged by most 
major issuers. 


ee 


23 


Lewis v. BT Investment Managers, Inc., 447 U.S. 27, 38 
(1980); Perdue v. Crocker National Bank, 38 Cal.3d 913, 216 
Cal.Rptr. 345, 702 P.2d 503, 520 (Cal. 1985), appeal dis- 
missed, 475 U.S. 1001 (1986). It also has long been recog- 
nized, and reaffirmed by this Court on numerous 
occasions, that states have the power to regulate banking 
practices, including the practices of nationally-chartered 
and interstate banks, for the protection of consumers or 
other purposes. See Lewis v. BT Investment Managers, 
supra, 447 U.S. at 38 (“both as a matter of history and as a 
matter of present reality, banking and related financial 
activities are of profound local concern”); Anderson Nat'l 
Bank v. Luckett, 321 U.S. 233, 248 (1944) (“[n]ational banks 
are subject to state laws, unless those laws infringe the 
national banking laws or impose an undue burden on the 
performance of the banks’ functions.”). See also Perdue v. 
Crocker National Bank, supra, 702 P.2d at 520-21 (national 
banks are subject to both federal and state regulation, and 
are generally governed more by state law than by federal 
law in their day to day operations, except when there is 
an express conflict). 


Thus, it is clear that states have the power to regulate 
the activities of national banks for the protection of con- 
sumers. As such, this Court has repeatedly emphasized 
that “ ‘the historic police powers of the States [are] not to be 
superseded by . . . Federal Act unless that [is] the clear and 
manifest purpose of Congress.’” See Cippollone v. Liggett 
Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 516 (1992), (emphasis added) 
and cases cited therein. Accordingly, preemption provi- 
sions must be construed narrowly “in light of the pre- 
sumption against the preemption of state police power 
regulations. This presumption reinforces the appropriate- 
ness of a narrow reading of [the express preemption 
provision].” Id. at 518. 


24 


In this action, the court below essentially disregarded 
this fundamental principle of limited federal preemption, 
paying lip service to the applicable authorities, but then 
engaging in precisely the kind of broad construction and 
implied preemption analysis that is specifically prohib- 
ited. This fatal flaw in the majority’s decision was empha- 
sized by Justice Arabian in his dissent, in which he 
observed that the majority adopted an “expansive defini- 
tion” of interest, “not because of any evidence that Con- 
gress actually had such an idea in mind when it enacted 
the National Bank Act, but because of the majority’s own 
theory about the state of American banking at the time.” 
Smiley v. Citibank, supra, 11 Cal.4th at 166 (Arabian Dis- 
sent) (emphasis in original). Justice Arabian went on to 
demonstrate not only that the majority’s expansive inter- 
pretation of the term “interest” was insupportable as both 
a matter of law and history, but also that the majority's 
entire theory about the purpose of the National Bank Act 
was incorrect and based on historical inaccuracies. Id., 11 
Cal.4th at 167-172. Chastising the majority for abandon- 
ing the concept of limited federal preemption, Justice 
Arabian quoted from another court that rejected preemp- 
tion under the same circumstances: “ ‘a proposition that 
is not obvious from the plain meaning of a statute's 
language, nor from its legislative history, simply cannot 
be regarded as a clear manifestation of congressional 
intent.” Id. at 4, quoting Copeland v. MBNA America, N.A., 
supra, 820 F.Supp. at 541.!2 


'2 Under the applicable authorities of this Court, as 
acknowledged by Justice Arabian in his dissent, if statutory 
language is unclear, the interpretation must be narrow and the 
construction limited, such that any aspect of preemption not 
specifically included must be rejected. The majority below did 


25 


B. A Finding of Broad Preemption in this Case 
Could Hinder Consumer Protection Efforts in 
Other Important Areas. 


If this Court affirms the broad preemption analysis of 
the majority below, the ruling could have a significant 
negative impact on state consumer protection legislation 
in the consumer banking area. The preemption issue in 
this case is not simply about the amount of late payment 
and overlimit fees that may be exported by national 
credit card banks located in deregulated states; it is also 
about the manner and circumstances under which the fees 
may be imposed, and whether other non-interest rate fees 
and practices may be regulated by the states. In the 
absence of regulation in their home states, many issuers 
now impose a substantial late fee even if a cardholder's 
payment is only one day late, through no fault of the 
consumer. Others repeatedly increase the cardholders’ 
credit limits, approve overlimit charges at the point of sale, 
and then hit consumers with a $20 overlimit fee even if 
they exceed their limit by only a few dollars. California 
and a number of other states have found these practices, 
as well as the amount of the penalty fees, to be unfair to 
consumers, and have chosen to enact protections. These 
state consumer protection efforts should not be blocked 
by other states’ cynical re-definitions of the term “inter- 
est.” Moreover, if this Court interprets section 85 broadly, 
declaring late payment fees to be “interest,” credit card 


exactly the opposite. It conceded that the statute was unclear, 
but then interpreted it expansively, finding that the statute 
preempted late charges not because they were specifically 
included in section 85, but because they were not specifically 
excluded. 


26 


issuers located in deregulated states are likely to assert 
that any number of other fees and charges, including 
annual fees, returned check fees, collection costs, and 
attorneys’ fees, are also “interest” exempt from any state 
consumer protection regu! ation. 


This Court's decision is also likely to have a signifi- 
cant impact in other areas in which states’ attempts to 
regulate consumer banking practices may encounter 
claims of federal preemption. For example, there is likely 
to be spillover effect in the area of state “lifeline” banking 
laws. Increasing bank fees for checking accounts have 
priced many lower income consumers out of the feder- 
ally-insured banking system. In the absence of national 
legislation requiring banks to offer low-cost checking 
accounts to consumers, several states have considered 
state “lifeline” laws. New Jersey passed such a law in 
1991; New York followed in 1994. Maryland currently has 
such legislation under consideration. Amicus Consumer 

ction endorses these state legislative efforts on behalf of 
low-income consumers. 


In 1992, however, the Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency (OCC) issued a determination asserting that 
New Jersey's Consumer Checking Account Act was pre- 
empted by federal banking statutes, specifically the 1991 
Bank Enterprise Act, which had established a system for 
supporting voluntary “lifeline” accounts, but did not 
require national banks to provide such accounts. There 
was considerable opposition to the OCC’s determination. 
As a result, the OCC recently issued a new Federal Regis- 
ter Notice, 61 Fed.Reg. 4515 (February 6, 1996), seeking 
comment on the request of the New Jersey Department of 


27 


Banking that the preemption determination be re-consid- 
ered. The OCC’s tentative decision is to reverse its earlier 
preemption determination. 


Although there are differences between the credit 
card late fee issue in this case and the “lifeline” checking 
account issue, both raise the same important concern - 
whether federal banking statutes that evidence no intent 
by Congress to occupy the field of consumer banking 
nevertheless may be interpreted broadly to preempt state 
consumer protection statutes as applied to national 
banks. 


Another area in which this Court's determination on 
the preemptive scope of section 85 is likely to have an 
effect is in state regulation of a whole new panoply of 
fees that banks are beginning to charge for services that 
were traditionally provided without charge, or that are 
attached to new technological services, including com- 
puter on-line banking fees, ATM surcharges, interlink 
fees, “human teller” fees, research and copying fees, 
bounced check fees, and fees for any number of non- 
banking services and products. A finding of broad pre- 
emption under section 85 might also lead national banks 
to assert preemption when states attempt to regulate non- 
fee practices, including advertising, lending practices, 
and debt collection practices. Consumer Action is con- 
cerned that its efforts to advocate against excessive fees, 
and other unfair practices in the area of credit cards and 
consumer banking not be stymied by specious claims of 
federal preemption, particularly when the practice at 
issue is not subject to any federal control or regulation. 


28 


C. A Finding of Broad Preemption in this Case 


Will Create Pressure on Other States to Deregu- 
late. 


Finally, it is important to note that a ruling from this 
Court that credit card late fees may be “exported” pur- 
suant to section 85 from deregulated states will create 
substantial pressure on other states throughout the coun- 
try to deregulate as well. If the dominant banks located in 
deregulated states are exempt from other states’ con- 
sumer protection statutes, even when soliciting and prof- 
iting from consumers in those states, and are allowed to 
export not only interest rates, but also substantial penalty 
fees and any number of other non-interest rate charges 
and terms, local banks in states with consumer protec- 
tions may be placed at a competitive disadvantage." 
Claiming such a disadvantage, card issuers around the 
country have threatened to leave states that limit or pro- 
hibit penalty charges and move to nearby deregulated 
states. In order to retain these local banks, and the associ- 
ated jobs and revenues, many state legislatures have been 
forced to consider the repeal of consumer protection stat- 
utes limiting late charges and other non-interest fees.'4 


'S Note that enforcement of state statutes against out-of- 
state national banks does not result in discrimination against 
national banks, but merely makes them subject to the same 
restrictions that are applicable to all banks that solicit 
consumers in the state. 


4 See Small States Teach a Big Banking Lesson, Chicago Fed. 
Letter, supra; Group Advocates State Regulation of Credit Cards, 
American Banker, p. 3 (July 29, 1987); Mad As Hell About Late 
Fees, Business Week, (February 24, 1992), at 32; Legal Issues: It's 
Win One, Lose One for Card Lobbyists in 1994, Credit Card News, 
(February 1, 1994); You Win Some, You Win Some More, Credit 
Card Management, (February 1994), at 60-62. 


29 


An industry publication noted in February, 1994, that 
“(t]he industry has done well in winning relaxed limits 
on, and out-right deregulation of, credit card fees, partic- 
ularly late fees. Virginia and New York lifted restrictions 
in 1992, and several states followed suit last year, includ- 
ing Idaho, Illinois, Massachusetts, West Virginia and 
Michigan.” See Higgins, You Win Some, You Win Some 
More, Credit Card Management, February 1994, at 60. The 
pattern was repeated last year in California when a jobs- 
versus-consumers debate ultimately resulted in the enact- 
ment of a new statute allowing higher late charges and 
overlimit fees in credit card contracts under certain speci- 
fied conditions. 

In contrast, if this Court finds that section 85 is 
limited to its express intent to limit interest rates, state 
consumer protection statutes regulating penalty charges 
will apply equally to both local and out-of-state banks, 
whether national or state-chartered, such that no bank is 
placed at a competitive disadvantage. 


It may well be that it is in the interest of consumers 
throughout the country to have a nationwide standard of 
allowable non-interest rate terms for consumer credit 
card customers, including late payment fees. If that is to 
be the case, however, it is an issue to be addressed by 
Congress, after the serious research and debate the issue 
warrants, and with due consideration for the interests of 
consumers. In the absence of such action by Congress, 
deregulated states such as South Dakota and Delaware 
which have chosen to subordinate consumer interests to 
banking revenues, should not be allowed to make this 
same choice for other states, and, in effect, to deregulate 
the consumer credit card industry for consumers nation- 
wide. 


30 


CONCLUSION 


Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, amicus Con- 
sumer Action urges this Court to reverse the decision of 
the court below. 


Dated: March 1, 1996 
Respectfully Submitted, 


James C. StuRDEVANT* 

Kim E. Carp 

THe SturDEvANT Law Firm 
A Professional Corporation 


By: James C. SturRDEVANT 


Attorneys for Amicus Curiae 
Consumer Action 


*Counsel of Record 


