Gq FILED 
Y, yan 1 1996 
No. 95-860 
| cue aan 
In The sal 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
o 


BARBARA SMILEY, 


Petitioner, 


CITIBANK (SOUTH DAKOTA), N.A., 


Respondent. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To 
The California Supreme Court 
. 


AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF OF THE 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS AND THE 
STATES OF ARKANSAS, CONNECTICUT, 
FLORIDA, HAWAIL INDIANA, IOWA, KENTUCKY, 
MAINE, MARYLAND, MICHIGAN, MINNESOTA, 
MISSISSIPPI, NEW HAMPSHIRE, NEW JERSEY, 
NEW MEXICO, NORTH CAROLINA, NORTH 
DAKOTA, RHODE ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA, 
TENNESSEE, TEXAS, VERMONT, WASHINGTON, 
WEST VIRGINIA AND DISTRICT OF 
COLUMBIA IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 
° 


Scott HARSHBARGER 
Attorney General 
of Massachusetts 


Ernest L. SARASON, JR. 

(Counsel of Record) 

Assistant Attorney General 

One Ashburton Place, 19th Floor 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 . 
(617) 727-2200 


(Additional Counsel On Inside Cover) 


——_——— ee 
a a 


COCKLE LAW SRIEF PRINTING CO. (800) 225-094 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 42-2431 ’ 


WINsTON BryYANT 
Attorney General 
of Arkansas 


RicHARD BLUMENTHAL 
Attorney General 
of Connecticut 


CuHartes F.C. Rurr 
Corporation Counsel 
of District of Columbia 


Rosert A. ButrerwortH 
Attorney General 
of Florida 


Jo ANN Ucnipa 
Executive Director 
State of Hawaii 
Office of Consumer 
Protection 


Pameca F. Carter 
Attorney General 
of Indiana 


THomas J. MiLier 
Attorney General 
of lowa 


A.B. CHANDLER 
Attorney General 
of Kentucky 


ANDREW KeETTERER 
Attorney General 
of Maine 


J. Josep: Curran, Jr. 
Attorney General 
of Maryland | 


Frank J. Kelley 
Attorney General 
of Michigan 


Husert H. Humpnreey III 
Attorney General 
of Minnesota 


Mixe Moore 
Attorney General 
of Mississippi 


Jerrrey R. Howarp 
Attorney General 
of New Hampshire 


DesoraH T. Porrrz — 
Attorney General 
of New Jersey 


Tom UDALL 
Attorney General 
of New Mexico 


Micuaet F. Eastey 
Attorney General 
of North Carolina 


Hem Herrxamp 
Attorney General 
of North Dakota 


Jerrrey B. Pine 
Attorney General 
of Rhode Island 


Pru S. Porrer 

Administrator 

State of South Carolina 

Department of Consumer 
Affairs 


CHaRLes W. Burson 
Attorney General 
of Tennessee 


Dan Morates 
Attorney General 
of Texas 


Jerrrey L. Amestoy 
Attorney General 
of Vermont 


Curistine Grecoire 
Attorney General 
of Washington 


Darrett V. McGraw, Jr. 
Attorney General 
of West Virginia 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


l. THE LOWER COURT'S DECISION IMPROP- 


ERLY LIMITS STATES’ POLICE POWERS AND 
WILL SERIOUSLY ERODE STATE CONSUMER 
ee at, ee i as 


A. Smiley Improperly Elevates South Dakota 
Law, Not Federal Law, On Late Payment 
Penalties Above The Laws Of Every Other 
State, Regardless Of Each State’s Distinct 
Legislative Decisions ............ 


B. Smiley's Holding Will Reach Beyond Laws 
Limiting Late Payment Penalty Charges To 
Eviscerate All State Consumer Credit Laws 


C. The Decision Below Will Thwart State 
Efforts To Formulate And Enforce Non- 
discriminatory Consumer Credit Laws 


SMILEY’S UNWARRANTED INTRUSION INTO 
SUBSTANTIVE STATE CONSUMER CREDIT 
POLICY OVERLOOKS THE FUNDAMENTAL 
PREMISE THAT A STATE’S POLICE POWER 
CAN BE NEGATED ONLY WITH A CLEAR 
MANDATE FROM CONGRESS AND THE LAN. 
GUAGE AND HISTORY OF THE FEDERAL 
STATUTE AT ISSUE 


11 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 


A. Smiley Refers To But Does Not Apply The 
Preemption Principles Developed By This 
rrr er ee 11 


B. Section 30 Was Enacted in 1864 As A Usury 
Statute That Prescribed The Rate Of Interest 
National Banks Are Permitted To Charge. 
The Scope Of Preemption Must Be Inter- 
preted As Narrowly As Is Consistent With 
Its Plain Meaning..............-------++-- 14 


C. There Is No Conflict Preemption Because 
State Laws Limiting Late Payment Penalties 
Do Not Make Compliance With § 85 Impos- 
sible Or Unduly Obstruct The Banking Busi- 
REDD. cc ccccececepctctcoadeedcessdcoeees cece 17 


Ill. AGENCY INTERPRETATIONS SUPPORTING 
PREEMPTION UNDER § 85 ARE NOT ENTI- 
TLED TO DEFERENCE BECAUSE THEY CON- 
TRADICT CONGRESSIONAL INTENT TO 
PREEMPT STATE CONSUMER CREDIT LAWS 
PE cc ccicedscttsdevcdvbecdbcetitescsce 22 


GENES ccccvcdconsccusecscconshcstewstecans 26 


sas 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Aldens, Inc. v. LaFollette, 552 F.2d 745 (7th Cir 
1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 880 (1977)......_. inde 
Aldens, Inc. v. Miller, 610 F.2d 538 (8th Cir. 1979), 
cert. denied, 446 U.S. 919 RR ae pe ees 4,19 
Aldens, Inc. v. Packel, 524 F.2d 38 (3rd Cir. 1975), 
cert. denied, 425 US. 943 ES ae 4,19 
Beasley v. Wells Fargo Bank, 1 Cal. Rptr. 2d 446 (Ct. 
EAE el aia 9 


California v. ARC America Corp., 490 U.S. 93 (1989) ..... 4 


Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504 (1992) 
Pebeeesevedaseldebecocesecticccbdeséeees 11, 12, 13, 14 


Citibank (South Dakota), N.A. v. Thomas ]. Miller as 
Attorney General of the State of lowa, C.A. 88-258- 


) i 9 aes Suis Qes isin tele aaa 6 
City of Burbank v. Lockheed Air Terminal, Inc., 411 

i AS i en i tla Ds a 12 
CSX Transp., Inc. v. Easterwood, 113 S. Ct. 1732 

ae Pébdsbdubedsseedadsdcees 17 


Davis v. Elmira Savings Bank, 161 US. 275 ( 1896) .... 18 
Freightliner Corp v. Myrick, 115 S.Ct. 1483 (1995)..11, 17 


Garrett v. Coast & Southern Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 
oe ee ee ee ee y 


Gower v. Carter, 3 lowa 244 (1856) .................. 16 


Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 818 
(Ist Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1052 (1993) ..8, 12 


Gregory v. Ashcroft, 111 S. Ct. 2395 (1991) ........... 12 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Griffith v. Connecticut, 218 U.S. 563 (1910) .........-.. 4 


Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of 
Omaha Service Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978) ..4, 6, 13, 17 


McClellan v. Chipman, 164 US. 347 (1896) ........... 18 
MCI Telecommunications v. AT&T, 114 S.Ct. 2223 

CIGDED cv cccccctcccccvecchosdevebssbestbsrsceeteess 25 
Mercantile Bank v. New York, 121 U.S. 138 (1887)..... 20 
National Bank v. Commonwealth, 76 U.S. (9 Wall.) 

SED Gc dec cccdoddacdoaecaqesscetacdanetuads es 17 
National Bank v. Johnson, 104 U.S. 271 (1881)......... 15 
Penn Dairies, Inc. v. Milk Control Comm'n, 318 U.S. 

ee ee Pee PPro Seer 12 
Perdue v. Crocker Nat'l Bank, 702 P.2d 503 (Cal. 

1985), appeal dismissed, 475 U.S. 1001 (1986)....... 24 
Ramsey v. Morrison, 39 N.J.L. 591 (1877)............. 16 


Randall v. Home Loan & Investment Co., 12 N.W. 2d 
GD Gs Tes de cdewivccudvedewetrcackevebess so’ 16 


Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218 (1947).... 11 


Sherman v. Citibank (South Dakota), N.A., No. 
A-102-94 slip op. (N.J. Nov. 28, 1995)............. 21 


State of lowa v. Citibank (South Dakota) CE 
029-16973 (lowa District Court for Polk County, 


PEs voce ccccccccaseesncséscescesesbenssbénesseess 6 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
State of Wisconsin v. Ameritech Corporation, et al. 
Dane County Circuit Court Case No. 92CV1013 
(1995) (complaint dismissed), Case No. 95-3426 
a UO epee 6 
Tiffany v. National Bank of Missouri, 85 U.S. (18 
Co 8 NE Tr ee .. 14, 15 
Wiseman v. State Bank and Trust, 854 S.W. 2d 725 
eS SU cele na NOUS sas doueaed eres Vadickhckec cers 7 
Feperat Statutes AND Lecistative Resources 
Se EE EP Ache tehdes dnadbestcctosssoultive: passim 
AE TN ae AD SR ee | 
PN sd oT. Yosh. fieds evn oe. 20 
I 20 
By I oo vn chen ceunceosercseuscce.. 20 
Be IID a ne ccvctaccusicccenncceveses. 20 
ep es Fb. cnn cb ev Webadecovecoscs 20 


P.L. 103-328, Sept. 29, 1994, 108 Stats. 2328 § 114.... 23 


H. Conf. Rept. No. 651, 103rd Cong., 2nd Sess. 
PP bouSe ebb ibbusebinvencePedsdocdccWuccccccesc: 24 


State STATUTES 


Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. c. 140, § 114B (1991 & 
SEED Radin dn utetculindeedvndsonsnataey ¥sea0s's 8 


S.D. Codified Laws Ann. § 54-3-1 (1990)............. 5 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Wisconsin Senate Bill 505 (1996) ..................... 8 
Wisconsin Stats. Sec. 421.201(10)(a).................. 10 
RULES AND REGULATIONS 
SS CR. BPMs vidcdcdne thsceebwedabecdeoke 22, 23 
MISCELLANEOUS 
17 Am. Jur. 2d, Consumer and Borrower Protection 

Pe Goes 6 09 vercenee chides tao 8 ine hret 9 
Burgess and Ciolfi, Exportation or Exploitation? A 

State Regulator’s View of Interstate Credit Card 

Transactions, 42 Bus. Law 929 (1987) ............... 7 
Crandall, The Wisconsin Consumer Act: Wisconsin 

Consumer Credit Laws Before And After, 73 Wis. L. 

SO, Se GUM a ncn ceudhubatuidas cabaieunirada tc. 9 
Credit Card News (Apr. 1, 1994)................0005, 5 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, “Small States 

Teach a Big Banking Lesson,” Chicago Fed. Let- 

ft, 2 , §. SS ee ae Tree 7 
Ginsburg, Interstate Banking, 9 Hofstra L. Rev. 1133 

GUPUEEG 0.002 cccncevneksecoeb ekki nada tbeedebas coeases 7 
Uniform Consumer Credit Code [1968 Act], 7 U.L.A. 

GOP sos steccsasnnnutpnd blpkndcciyinteeanednnetins 10 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST 


The amici curiae Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
and the states of Arkansas, Connecticut, Florida, Indiana, 
lowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, 
Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, 
North Carolina, North Dakota, Rhode Island, Tennessee, 
Texas, Vermont, Washington, and West Virginia through 
their Attorneys General, the District of Columbia through 
its Corporation Counsel, South Carolina’s Department of 
Consumer Affairs through its Administrator, and 
Hawaii's Office of Consumer Protection through its Exec- 
utive Director,’ support petitioner Smiley’s position that 
federal laws do not preempt California laws limiting 
excessive late payment penalties in credit card transac- 
tions. Preemption of these California laws will impede 
amici’s authority to enforce their laws regulating credit 
card delinquency and late charges against out-of-state 
national banks. 


' The actual participants in this Amicus Curiae Brief are 
listed on the signature page. Of the 26 States Participating, 23 
are represented by the Attorney General of the state. Hawaii is 
represented by the Office of Consumer Protection which, while 
not part of the state Attorney General’s Office, is statutorily 
authorized to undertake consumer protection functions, 
including legal representation of the state and enforcement of 
that state’s consumer protection laws. The District of Columbia 
is represented by its Corporation Counsel. South Carolina is 
represented by its Department of Consumer Affairs which 
administers, enforces and interprets the South Carolina 
Consumer Protection Code which regulates late charges, 
overlimit charges, other default charges and debt collection 
practices in South Carolina. For the sake of simplicity, amici will 
hereafter be referred to as the “Attorneys General” or “States.” 


The Amici states have a great interest in this case. 
This Court's interpretation of the scope of the preemption 
of Section 30 of the National Bank Act, codified as 12 
U.S.C. §§ 85 and 86, will have a profound impact on their 
protection of their citizens. This Court’s decision will 
determine whether the Attorneys General may enforce 
state laws that limit excessive penalty charges and other 
non-interest terms in credit transactions entered into by 
their residents. 


As the chief law enforcement officers of their states, 
the amici wish to emphasize their view, based on long- 
standing principles of statutory and constitutional inter- 
pretation, that acts of Congress which do not explicitly 
preempt state laws must not be read more broadly than 
Congress intended. This is of particular concern in a case 
such as this one where the state laws are based on a 
state's traditional police powers to protect consumers in 
credit transactions. 


Consumer protection and consumer credit are tradi- 
tional and critical areas of state concern. Amici states 
have established comprehensive regulatory systems to 
ensure fairness in the relationship between consumer bor- 
rowers and their creditors. These laws reflect each state's 
own assessment of how best to balance protecting con- 
sumers with providing creditors sufficient incentive to 
lend profitably to their residents. 


S 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The lower court's majority decision destroys a state’s 
ability to enforce laws regulating late charges in con- 
sumer credit transactions. The decision also places in 
doubt the validity of every state’s consumer credit laws 
by inte: preting “interest” expansively for purposes of 
preemption analysis. This unwarranted intrusion into 
substantive state consumer credit policy misreads both 
the language and history of the federal statute at issue 
and the fundamental premise that a state’s historic police 
powers can be negated only with a clear mandate from 
Congress. 


The lower court's decision also undermines this 
country’s dual banking system which has been one of the 
most significant characteristics of American banking 
since the National Bank Act was passed in 1864. Histori- 
cally, Congress has deferred to the interests of the states 
in the regulation of national banks as to all matters except 
those essential to their role as federal instrumentalities. 


Application of the decision’s preemption analysis 
will permit a national bank to use the law of its home 
state to override the consumer protection legislation of 
California and all other states under the guise of federal 
preemption. Amici submit that Congress never intended 
this result. 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE LOWER COURT’S DECISION IMPROPERLY 
LIMITS STATES’ POLICE POWERS AND WILL 
SERIOUSLY ERODE STATE CONSUMER CREDIT 


LAWS. 
A. Smiley Improperly Elevates South Dakota Law, 
Not Federal Law, On Late Payment Penalties 


Above The Laws Of Every Other State, Regard- 
less Of Each State’s Distinct Legislative Deci- 


California prohibits the assessment of excessive late 
payment penalty charges on credit card accounts when 
consumers are delinquent in making payments.? These 
charges, however, are permitted in South Dakota. Cit- 
ibank, located in South Dakota, imposes such charges on 
California residents. Citibank claimed, as the basis for its 
authority, 12 U.S.C. § 85 which, under certain circum- 
stances, preempts state restrictions on interest rates. 
Respondent also relied on Marquette National Bank of Min- 
neapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978), 


2 Consumer protection is a traditional and important 
component of the police power of the states. Griffith v. 
Connecticut, 218 U.S. 563, 568-569 (1910); California v. ARC 
America Corp., 490 U.S. 93, 101 (1989). Typical areas of state 
consumer credit regulation include requirements of truthful 
advertising, restrictions or prohibitions on automatic wage 
assignments or authorizations to confess judgment, limitations 
on security interests and restrictions on debt collection charges 
and practices. The need for state regulation in this area has long 
been judicially acknowledged. See Aldens, Inc. v. Packel, 524 F.2d 
38 (3rd Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 425 U.S. 943 (1976); Aldens, Inc. v. 
Miller, 610 F.2d 538 (8th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 919 
(1980). 


as authority to export these charges throughout the coun- 
try. 


In order to override California law limiting excessive 
late payment penalty charges, the Smiley majority used a 
flawed preemption analysis to define the term “interest” 
in § 85 expansively to include late payment penalty 
charges.* Proceeding on this premise, shown below to be 
incorrect, the majority in Smiley incorrectly concluded 
that California law is superseded because the legislature 
of South Dakota permits the imposition of unlimited late 
payment penalty charges in consumer credit transac- 
tions.* 


The result of the lower court's majority decision will 
be to enshrine South Dakota’s policy of deregulation as a 
nationwide policy, regardless of other states’ laws to the 
contrary. 


* “Late payment charges exacted by credit card issuing 
banks totaled almost $2 billion in 1992, according to one 
industry source. (Credit Card News (Apr. 1, 1994) at p.2).” 
Smiley at Pet.App. 62 (Arabian, J., dissenting). 


* South Dakota has legislatively expanded the definition of 
“interest” to be “compensation allowed by law for the use, or 
forbearance, or detention of money or its equivalent, including 
without limitation, points, loan origination fees, credit service 
or carrying charges, charges for unanticipated late payments, 
and any other charges, direct or indirect, as an incident to or as a 
condition of the extension of credit.” $.D. Codified Laws Ann. 
§ 54-3-1 (1990). 


ee eT en ee 


6 


B. Smiley's Holding Will Reach Beyond Laws 
Limiting Late Payment Penalty Charges To 
Eviscerate All State Consumer Credit Laws. 


Although this case is limited to consideration of late 
payment penalty charges, national banks elsewhere, 
using Marquette as a lever, have attempted to push the 
preemptive force of § 85 to virtually all terms of credit 
transactions with consumers. For example, at least one 
national bank has argued that state laws limiting collec- 
tion costs and attorney fees following default are pre- 
empted.5 To support this position this bank has 
incorporated the following term in its credit card agree- 
ment: 


All terms and conditions of this Agreement 
(including the change of terms provision, the 
applicable law provision, and the finance 
charge, late charge, returned check charge, and 
research charge provisions) are deemed to be 
interest under this Agreement and material to 
the determination of the finance charge.® 


° State of Wisconsin v. Ameritech Corporation, et al., Dane 
County Circuit Court Case No. 92CV1013 (1995) (complaint 
dismissed), Dst. IV, WI Ct. of Appeals, Case No. 95-3426 (appeal 
stayed pending decision in this matter). See also Citibank (South 
Dakota), N.A. v. Thomas J. Miller as Attorney General of the State of 
lowa, C.A. 88-258-E (S.D. lowa 1988); State of lowa v. Citibank 
(South Dakota), CE 029-16973 (lowa District Court for Polk 
County, 1988). These cases were settled in November, 1989; no 
judicial decision on the merits was reached. 


® This credit card agreement is part of the record in State of 
Wisconsin v. Ameritech Corporation, et al., Wis. Ct. Appeals, Dst. 
IV, Case No. 95-3426, (R. 60, p. 4). 


If this Court upholds Smiley and confirms the expor- 
tation theory promoted by some national banks, the 
states’ legislative ability to balance consumers’ interests 
with lenders’ interests will be severely curtailed. 


Lenders doing business in states with strong con- 
sumer protection measures will be at a competitive disad- 
vantage against financing sources based in states which 
have forsaken consumer protection in order to attract 
banking interests.”? Nationa’ banks, located in states 
responsive to banking interests, eventually will dominate 
not only the credit card industry, but all credit markets.* 
The states that provide a greater measure of consumer 
protection will be confronted with the unenviable choice 
of eliminating these public protection provisions so that 


” Although the statutory basis for interest rate exportation 
is more than one hundred years old, this court first considered 
the issue in Marquette. Following that decision, several states 
chose to eliminate consumer safeguards in credit transactions to 
attract national banks. Ginsburg, Interstate Banking, 9 Hofstra L. 
Rev. 1133, 1370 (1981); Burgess and Ciolfi, Exportation or 
Exploitation? A State Regulator’s View of Interstate Credit Card 
Transactions, 42 Bus. Law 929, 933-34, 939 (1987). A few states’ 
efforts to attract credit card issuers from other states have been 
successful. “Small States Teach a Big Banking Lesson,” Chicago 
Fed. Letter, No. 10 (June 1986). Today, of the top ten credit card 
issuers, six are located in Delaware, while the respondent, the 
single largest issuer of Visa cards and Mastercards, is in South 
Dakota. 


* In states with consumer credit laws in place, local 
merchants, such as appliance stores and car dealers, already 
offer financing from institutions located in states where 
consumer credit has been deregulated. See Wiseman v. State Bank 
and Trust, 854 S.W. 2d 725 (Ark. 1993) (interest rate for motor 
vehicle loan determined by law where bank is located). 


local creditors may compete with out-of-state creditors or 
watching the local financing sources move elsewhere.’ 


C. The Decision Below Will Thwart State Efforts 
To Formulate And Enforce Nondiscriminatory 
Consumer Credit Laws. 


It is appropriate for each state to define as a matter of 
policy and law consumer credit terms for transactions 
within its borders. States such as Delaware and South 
Dakota have the undisputed right to deregulate rates for 
their own citizens." However, every state’s right to set 
standards for fair practices in the consumer credit area 
within its respective borders will be curtailed if the deci- 
sion below is upheld. 


“Because credit has become a way of life for con- 
sumers, and their need for protection in that area is great, 
the most important protective efforts in the field of con- 
sumer protection in recent years relate to consumer credit 


* See, e.g., the Massachusetts Legislature’s 1993 amendment 
allowing credit card late charges of up to $10.00 in place of its 
previous prohibition of such late charges, after the First Circuit 
allowed the preemption of that prohibition in Greenwood Trust 
Co. v. Commonwealth, 971 F.2d 818 (1st Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 506 
U.S. 1052 (1993). Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. c. 140, § 114B as 
amended by 1993 Mass. Acts Chapter 151, § 43. The Wisconsin 
Legislature is considering a proposal to eliminate limits on late 
payment penalties, over-the-limit fees and other non-interest 
rate charges in the event this Court determines that late 
are “interest” under § 85. Wisconsin Senate Bill 505 (1996). 


° Indeed, the Smiley court seems to have substituted its 
policy judgments for those of the California lesislature. See 
discussion at Pet. App. 35 (e.g. “As a general matter at least, late 
payment has no social utility”). 


9 


protection.” 17 Am. Jur. 2d, Consumer and Borrower Protec- 
tion § 1 (1990). State consumer credit laws reflect the now 
familiar differences between commercial transactions and 
consumer transactions.'' Commercial transactions pre- 
sumably involve two knowledgeable parties. One party 
does not rely on the other party for fairness or know!l- 
edge. Terms of a commercial agreement are usually 
understood, even if not expressly bargained for by the 
parties. The parties to a commercial transaction custom- 
arily have comparable economic positions or interests at 
stake, or can select their respective bargaining position in 
the marketplace. 


On the other hand, consumer transactions are for 
personal, not business, use. Consumers frequently lack 
experience from repeated transactions and have a more 
limited knowledge of the marketplace than the seller. 
Most often, contractual documents are not read, much 
less bargained for, by consumers. 


Under the lower court's ruling, consumers subjected 
to unfair or illegal credit and collection practices by an 
out-of-state national bank will have no recourse to their 
state consumer protection authorities.'2 These officials 
will be precluded from enforcing consumer credit laws 


** For example, see Crandall, The Wisconsin Consumer Act: 
Wisconsin Consumer Credit Laws Before and After, 73 Wis. L. Rev. 
334, 357 (1974). 


Courts have ruled that national banks have engaged in 
improper practices and have taken advantage of customers. See 
Beasley v. Wells Fargo Bank, 1 Cal. Rptr. 2d 446 (Ct. App. Ist Dist. 
1991); Garrett v. Coast & Southern Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn, 108 Cal. 
Rptr. 845, 511 P.2d 1197 (1973). 


10 


against out-of-state national banks. Further, consumers 
will not be able to pursue private statutory or common 
law remedies. Moreover, consumer protection authorities 
in the state where the bank is located may be less moti- 
vated to take action against a local national bank based 
on complaints from consumers in another state. 


States have expressly extended the territorial applica- 
tion of their consumer credit laws to ensure evenhanded 
coverage of all credit offers made to consumers within 
their borders. These efforts have included statutory 
invalidation of choice of law contract terms that provide 
that the law of a foreign state controls a consumer credit 
transaction.'* As the drafters of the Uniform Consumer 
Credit Act recognized in the mid 1960's: 


The danger that creditors may be able to 
induce consumers to agree that the applicable 
law will be that of a creditors’ haven that has no 
effective consumer credit protection has led to 
invalidating choice of law agreements except 
where the law chosen is that of the state of the 
consumer's residence.” Uniform Consumer 
Credit Code [1968 Act], Comment § 1.201, 7 
U.L.A. 595, 619. 


State residents are entitled to and reasonably expect 
the protection of their own state’s laws. Consumers 
should not be subject to the non-interest laws of other 
states. While the market arguably regulates the “interest 
rates” offered across state lines, it does not regulate back- 


'S For example, see Sec. 421.201(10)(a), Wis. Stats.; Aldens, 
Inc. v. LaFollette, 552 F.2d 745 (7th Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 
880 (1977). 


11 


end late fees or other penalties after a loan default. Banks 
usually do not compete on the basis of penalties for the 
contractual breach, nor are consumers particularly sensi- 
tive to those penalties when choosing credit cards. 
Because such penalties, like late fees, can be more oppres- 
sive than market-based “interest,” the resident states 
have a superior interest in limiting such charges when 
compared to the interest of a bank’s home state. 


Il. SMILEY’S UNWARRANTED INTRUSION INTO 
SUBSTANTIVE STATE CONSUMER CREDIT POL- 
ICY OVERLOOKS THE FUNDAMENTAL PREM- 
ISE THAT A STATE’S POLICE POWER CAN BE 
NEGATED ONLY WITH A CLEAR MANDATE 
FROM CONGRESS AND THE LANGUAGE AND 
HISTORY OF THE FEDERAL STATUTE AT ISSUE. 


A. Smiley Refers To But Does Not Apply The Pre- 
emption Principles Developed By This Court. 


“Consideration of issues arising under the Suprem- 
acy Clause ‘start[s] with the assumption that the historic 
police powers of the States [are] not to be superseded 
by . . . Federal Act unless that [is] the clear and manifest 
purposes of Congress.’ ” Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 
505 U.S. 504, 516 (1992), citing Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator 
Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230 (1947). The requirement that 
preemption be found only when there is clear evidence of 
Congressional intent applies to consideration of both 
express statutory preemption and implied conflict pre- 
emption. Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, 115 S.Ct. 1483, 1488 
(1995). 


This axiom is essential to the states. Appropriate 
deference to state laws helps ensure that Congress does 


12 


not supersede state legislative enactments except through 
deliberate action. Principles of federalism demand no 
less.'* By finding that state laws may be preempted by 
stretching the definition of a federal law, the majority 
opinion below is incompatible with this Court's preemp- 
tion decisions.'5 


The majority in Smiley did not recognize the clear 
meaning and import of this Court’s preemption decisions. 
The California Supreme Court initially reviewed the lan- 
guage of § 85 and concluded that the term “interest” was 
not defined.'© Having done so, it should then have 
applied the standard set out in Cipollone: where there is 


'* As Chief Justice Rehnquist has emphasized: “Unless the 
requisite pre-emptive intent is abundantly clear, we should 
hesitate to invalidate state and local legislation for the added 
reason that ‘the state is powerless to remove the ill effects of our 
decision, while the national government, which has the ultimate 
power, remains free to remove the burden.’ ” City of Burbank v. 
Lockheed Air Terminal, Inc., 411 U.S. 624, 643 (1973) (Rehnquist, J., 
dissenting) (quoting Penn Dairies, Inc. v. Milk Control Comm'n, 
318 U.S. 261, 275 (1943)). 


'® As Justice O’Connor has explained, the right to preempt 
state law under the Supremacy Clause is an extraordinary 
power in a federalist system. The use of this power will not be 
implied unless Congress has made its intention clear. To depart 
from this standard would place in jeopardy the federalist 
system of joint sovereigns. Gregory v. Ashcroft, 111 S. Ct. 2395, 
2399 (1991). 


‘© The First Circuit Court of Appeals made the same error 
in Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 818 (Ist Cir. 
1992), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1052 (1993), by continuing its 
preemption analysis despite finding that“... DIDA’s text and 
legislative history are, at bottom, inconclusive.” Id. at 828. 


13 


no clear evidence of preemptive intent, a finding of fed- 
eral preemption is foreclosed. This approach would have 
properly limited § 85 to its plain meaning - numerical 
interest rates. Instead, without conducting any preemp- 
tion analysis whatsoever, the majority relied on Marquette 
for the proposition that § 85 preempts state laws relating 
to “interest,” and framed the issue as one centering on 
the scope of preemption.'” At this point the Smiley major- 
ity abandoned preemption principles and looked to sec- 
ondary sources to define interest broadly to encompass 
any payments obtained from a borrower. Ultimately, the 
majority concluded that the power of South Dakota to 
dictate non-interest rate terms for California was 
“implicit” in the word “interest” as meant by the framers 
of the National Bank Act.'* Both the plain meaning of the 
statute and its legislative history were ignored. 


By forging ahead with an analysis of secondary 
sources while overlooking the purpose of § 85 and its 


7 In a separate opinion in Cipollone joined by Justices 
Kennedy and Souter, Justice Blackmun concurred with the 
majority and noted: “The principles of federalism and respect 
for state sovereignty that underlie the Court's reluctance to find 
pre-emption where Congress has not spoken directly to the 
issue apply with equal force where Congress has spoken, 
though ambiguously. In such cases, the question is not whether 
Congress intended to pre-empt state regulation, but to what 
extent. We do not, absent unambiguous evidence, infer a scope 
of pre-emption beyond that which clearly is mandated by 
Congress’ language.” Cipollone, 505 U.S. at 533. (Emphasis in the 
original.) 


* “Had Congress intended to limit protection, it would 
doubtless have made itself plain. It did not. Its silence is 
especially deafening. . . . ” Smiley at Pet. App. 24. 


14 


legislative history, the decision misapplied important pre- 
emption principles. The Smiley majority turned the Cip- 
ollone standard on its head by reasoning that because 
Congress did not speak plainly to preemption, it must 
have intended or implied limitless preemption. 


B. Section 30 Was Enacted In 1864 As A Usury 
Statute That Prescribed The Rate Of Interest 
National Banks Are Permitted To Charge. The 
Scope Of Preemption Must Be Interpreted As 
Narrowly As Is Consistent With Its Plain Mean- 


ing. 

The primary objective of Section 30 of the National 
Bank Act was to enact a federal usury law for national 
banks. This measure, today codified as 12 U.S.C. §§ 85 
and 86, prescribed an interest rate ceiling and federal 
remedy for usury. It also protected national banks from 
discriminatory state usury laws under the “most favored 


lender” doctrine articulated by this Court in Tiffany v. 
National Bank of Missouri, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 409 (1874). 


Discriminatory state usury laws are not at issue in 
this case. The explicit language of this statute does not 
speak to late payment penalty charges or credit terms 
other than the rate of interest. The majority in Smiley 
conceded correctly that language addressing late pay- 
ment penalties or delinquency charges was not present in 
the statutory scheme. Further, the legislative history 
reveals no evidence of Congressional intent to displace 


15 


state law regarding penalty charges or payments other 
than for interest.!9 


The term “interest” in § 85 must be given federal 
definition, independent of unique state definitions. This 
principle was recognized by this Court in Tiffany which 
held that “interest” must “receive a strict, that is literal 
construction” to avoid subjecting banks to double interest 
penalties under the Act. Id. at 410. While maximum rates 
of interest would vary among the states because of differ- 
ent state interest rate ceiling laws, the meaning of interest 
rate for national banks would be uniform across all the 
states. See National Bank v. Johnson, 104 U.S. 271, 277 
(1881) (§ 85 of the National Bank Act federalizes the 
“rate” of interest, not the character of bank contracts). 


In setting limits on rates of interest charged by 
national banks under the National Bank Act, Congress 
showed great deference to the states: the usury ceiling for 
a national bank would be the usury ceiling of that bank’s 
home state. Respondent's attempt to use this provision of 
the Act, more than one hundred years after its passage, to 
engage in wholesale exportation of South Dakota’s caveat 
emptor regime, thereby eviscerating the non-usury con- 
sumer protection laws of all the other states, turns upside 
down Congressional intent and violates Congressional 
deference. 


19 Justice Arabian's dissent details the historical record 
regarding the enactment of the National Bank Act by the 38th 
Congress in 1864. The majority does not dispute this analysis, 
but takes the term “interest” out of its statutory context and 
looks to secondary sources as a basis for its expansive meaning. 


16 


The Smiley majority failed to point to evidence that 
by enacting a federal usury statute, Congress intended to 
preempt charges that were not customarily considered in 
determining compliance with these laws. The majority 
avoided historical authority and reasoning advanced in 
the dissenting opinions by suggesting that such authori- 
ties concern “lawful interest” in contrast to the more 
general concept of “interest” (Smiley, Pet.App. 20, n.8). 
However, this distinction would have made no sense to 
members of Congress in 1864. Today, this has no greater 
persuasive significance. 


Section 85 preempts state usury laws but nothing 
more. In the 1860’s, late payment penalties were not 
included in determining the rate of interest.2° Therefore, 
late payment penalties were irrelevant to usury analyses, 
imposition of those penalties did not violate state usury 
laws, and the regulation of those penalties did not con- 
flict with federal usury laws. Today, state laws limiting 
late payment penalty charges remain beyond the scope of 
federal preemption. The federal usury provisions of the 
National Bank Act look to the laws of a national bank’s 
home state only to determine the maximum interest rate, 
not the laws that regulate (or more precisely, fail to 
regulate) late payment penalty charges. 


20 See Gower v. Carter, 3 lowa 244 (1856); Ramsey v. Morrison, 
39 N.J.L. 591 (1877); Randall v. Home Loan & Investment Co., 12 
N.W. 2d 915 (Wis. 1944). 


17 


C. There Is No Conflict Preemption Because State 
Laws Limiting Late Payment Penalties Do Not 
Make Compliance With § 85 Impossible Or 
Unduly Obstruct The Banking Business. 


In the absence of express statutory preemption, con- 
flict preemption may be implied where it is impossible to 
comply with both state and federal requirements, or 
where state law stands as an obstacle to achieving the 
intent of Congress. Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, 115 S. Ct. 
1483 (1995). As with express preemption, conflict pre- 
emption will not be found unless it is the clear intent and 
purpose of Congress. CSX Transp., Inc. v. Easterwood, 113 
S. Ct. 1732, 1737 (1993). 


When considering preemption under the National 
Bank Act, this Court has consistently and repeatedly rec- 
ognized that state laws are not to be set aside simply to 
accommodate the commercial convenience of national 
banks.?! In National Bank v. Commonwealth, 76 U.S. (9 
Wall.) 353, 362 (1869), this Court stated: 


[National banks] are subject to the laws of the 
State, and are governed in their daily course of 
business far more by the laws of the State than 


21 The Smiley majority suggests that these cases are 
inapposite because Marquette determined that state laws related 
to “interest” were preempted due to “conflict” with federal law. 
(Smiley, Pet.App. 12, n.4) However, Justice Brennan looked to 
the plain meaning of the statutory text to determine that the rate 
of interest was determined by the law of the state where the bank 
was located. Marquette did not hold that the preemption 
analysis of prior decisions under the National Bank Act was 
inapplicable when express terms of the Act do not conflict with 
state law. 


18 


of the nation. All their contracts are governed 
and construed by state laws. Their acquisition 
and transfer of property, their right to collect 
their debts, and their liability to be sued for 
debts, are all based on state law. It is only when 
the state law incapacitates the banks from dis- 
charging their duties to the government that it 
becomes unconstitutional. 


This principle has been balanced with national banks’ 
role as federal instrumentalities. State action which con- 
flicts with or frustrates the purpose of the federal act is 
void. Davis v. Elmira Savings Bank, 161 U.S. 275, 283 
(1896). Almost one hundred years ago this Court recon- 
ciled these principles in McClellan v. Chipman, 164 U.S. 
347, 357 (1896): 


These two propositions, which are distinct, 
yet harmonious, practically contain a rule and 
an exception, the rule being the operation of 
general state laws upon the dealings and con- 
tracts of national banks, the exception being the 
cessation of the operation of such laws when- 
ever they expressly conflict with the laws of the 
United States or frustrate the purpose for which 
the national banks were created, or impair their 
efficiency to discharge the duties imposed upon 
them by the law of the United States. 


The application of these principles to this case does 
not evidence a clear intent to preempt state laws as held 
by the majority below. First, it is not impossible for 
national banks to comply with both § 85 and non- 
discriminatory state laws limiting late payment penalty 
charges and other non-interest terms so as to infer con- 
gressional intent to preempt contrary state law. National 
banks may comply with home state interest rate limits, 


19 


while conforming to laws governing non-interest charges 
and other terms of the states where their customers res- 
ide.?2 


Second, the Smiley majority did not demonstrate that 
the state laws limiting late payment penalty charges frus- 
trated the purposes of the National Bank Act or somehow 
prevented banks from discharging their duties under fed- 
eral law. The federal duties or purposes of national 
banks were laid out in the National Bank Act and its 
legislative history and include: “to establish a system of 


22 The majority’s concern that limiting national banks to the 
“varying laws of the several states .. . might ‘throw into 
confusion the complex system of modern interstate banking.’ ” 
(Smiley, Pet.App. 29), quoting Marquette, 439 U.S. at p. 312) is ill- 
founded. Justice Brennan was concerned about using the place 
of the transaction, not the customer’s state of residence, as the 
basis for selection of the law to be applied. Moreover, 
sophisticated computer technology enables other interstate 
sellers to conform to consumer protection laws of states where 
customers reside. Today, creditors, other than financial entities 
under federal interest rate laws, operate on a national scale and 
extend consumer credit terms which comply with the laws of 
the states where the customer resides. See Aldens, Inc. v. Packel, 
524 F.2d 38 (3d Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 425 U.S. 943 (1976); Aldens, 
Inc. v. Miller, 610 F.2d 538 (8th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 
919 (1980). 


23 The Smiley majority suggests that an obstacle to federal 
policies would exist if a state were to set interest rates to 
unprofitably low rates, yet permit lenders other than national 
banks to impose high penalty charges so as to drive national 
banks out of business. (Pet.App. 22) However, this scenario is 
not realistic. It assumes, inter alia, that favored banks would 
seek out chronic delinquents (and jeopardize repayment of 
principal and interest) so as to maximize late payment penalties. 


20 


national banking institutions, in order to provide a uni- 
form and secure currency for the people and facilitate the 
operations of the Treasury of the United States.” Mercan- 
tile Bank v. New York, 121 U.S. 138, 154 (1887). 


State laws regarding credit terms other than the rate 
of interest do not impede, frustrate, or incapacitate 
national banks from achieving these federal purposes. 
The Smiley majority does not point to a real impediment 
created by requiring national banks to be subject to state 
laws in an area traditionally reserved to the states. 


Furthermore, federal intervention in the consumer 
credit area does not occupy the field and foreclose state 
involvement apart from interest rate limits under usury 
laws. Far from evidencing a desire to occupy the entire 
field of consumer credit, the federal government's inter- 
vention in this area has been cautious, limited and delib- 
erately deferential to state laws.24 Generally, federal 
provisions only preempt state law when state law either 
offers less protection than, or is inconsistent with, the 
federal law.?5 


24 For example, the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. 
1601 et seq., regulates consumer lending disclosures but 
explicitly leaves intact substantive state consumer protection 
laws. See, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1610. Similar deference to state law is 
demonstrated in the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 15 U.S.C. 
secs. 1691-1691f (see, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1691d(f)), the Fair Debt 
Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. secs. 1692-16920 (see, 15 
U.S.C. sec. 1692n) and the Electronic Fund Transfers Act, 15 
U.S.C. sec. 1693-1693r (see, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1693q). 


25 For example, the legislative history of the Depository 
Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980 
(DIDA), 12 U.S.C.A. § 1831, is instructive to an understanding of 


21 


The test for preemption is not inconvenience, nor 
even a claim of financial detriment to a private institu- 
tion, but whether the state laws frustrate the purpose of 
the federal legislation. State laws are not preempted 
because they may modify defendants’ options in a partic- 
ular state; they are preempted only if they interfere with 
the federal purpose behind the National Bank Act. 
Absent federal preemption, states, not banks, and not 
even national banks, determine the laws, benefits and 
protection afforded to their consumers. 


Congress’ intent with respect to the notion of interest contained 
in the National Bank Act. “Although the NBA [National Bank 
Act] was enacted 100 years earlier, the same tensions, namely 
parity between federal and state lenders and preservation of 
local usury laws, were present and these conflicting 
considerations generated substantial concerns surrounding the 
passage of the earlier banking statute. The record of 
Congressional debate and deliberation concerning the 
enactment of DIDA strongly supports the understanding that 
preemption of credit-card regulation under DIDA is confined to 
traditional numerical interest rates .. . . Thus, the fact that 
Congress was specifically concerned about effecting a 
preemption limited to numerical interest rates is significant. If 
we cannot attribute to legislative initiative of 15 years ago the 
intent to include discrete, specialized charges within a 
definition of interest, we cannot ascribe that expansive 
definition of a legislative initiative that occurred over 100 years 
earlier.” Sherman v. Citibank (South Dakota), N.A., No. A-102-94 
slip op., Pet.App. 151, 160-64 (N.J. Nov. 28, 1995). 


22 


Ill. AGENCY INTERPRETATIONS SUPPORTING 
PREEMPTION UNDER § 85 ARE NOT ENTITLED 
TO DEFERENCE BECAUSE THEY CONTRADICT 
CONGRESSIONAL INTENT TO PREEMPT 
STATE CONSUMER CREDIT LAWS NARROWLY. 


The decision below bolsters its expansive construc- 
tion by reference to interpretations of the Office of Comp- 
troller of the Currency (OCC) and its rulemaking 
proposal to define “interest” broadly to include almost 
any charge a national bank may impose upon a borrower. 
60 Fed. Reg. at 11940 (March 3, 1995). Recently the OCC 
issued the final rule which includes such a sweeping 
definition of interest.26 However, the lower court did not 
base its decision on these administrative actions which 
are entitled to neither weight nor deference. 


Although the OCC rule purports to define “interest,” 
the obvious consequence will be the wholesale preemp- 
tion of state laws limiting charges not included in calcu- 
lating a rate of interest imposed by out-of-state national 


26 The final text is as follows: “The term ‘interest’ as used in 
12 U.S.C. 85 includes any payment compensating a creditor or 
prospective creditor for an extension of credit, making available 
of a line of credit, or any default or breach by a borrower of a 
condition upon which credit was extended. It includes, among 
other things, the following fees connected with credit extension 
or availability: numerical periodic rates, late fees, not sufficient 
funds (NSF) fees, overlimit fees, annual fees, cash advance fees, 
and membership fees. It does not ordinarily include appraisal 
fees, premiums and commissions attributable to insurance 
guaranteeing repayment of any extension of credit, finders’ 
fees, fees for document preparation or notarization, or fees 
incurred to obtain credit reports.” 60 Fed. Reg. at 4869 (February 
9, 1996). 12 C.F.R. § 7.4001(a). 


23 


banks.?” However, Congress has never explicitly pre- 
empted state limitations on non-interest charges such as 
late charges, default charges or state limitations on 
charges related to collection costs, such as attorney fees. 


The OCC’s rulemaking attempt to preempt state laws 
conflicts with the spirit if not the letter of § 114 of the 
Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency 
Act of 1994, P.L. 103-328, Sept. 29, 1994, 108 Stats. 2338. 
That Act requires agencies to specify particular state 
banking laws which are to be administratively pre- 
empted. The OCC did not attempt in the preamble or in 
the text of the rule to identify those state laws, thereby 
depriving states of adequate notice of the potential pre- 
emptive impact of the proposed rule. Without such 
notice, many states may not realize that substantial por- 
tions of their versions of the Uniform Commercial Code, 
the Uniform Consumer Credit Code, the Retail Install- 
ment Sales Act and the common law of contracts, collec- 
tions, attorney fees and penalties have been displaced by 
administrative fiat. 


The legislative history of Riegle-Neal makes clear 
Congressional intent to narrowly preempt state consumer 
protection laws: 


27 The OCC’s definition of “interest” does not apply to all 
transactions. In order to enable national banks located in states 
with fixed interest rate limits to avoid violating these usury 
laws ~ a likely result if late payment penalty fees and other 
charges were included as part of the interest rate - OCC’s rule 
states that the definition is not to be used for credit extended 
within the state where the bank is located. 12 C.F.R. § 7.4001(c). 
The OCC offers no reasoned explanation for this approach. 


24 


States have a strong interest in the activities and 
operations of depository institutions doing busi- 
ness within their jurisdictions. States have a 
legitimate interest in protecting the rights of 
their consumers, businesses, and commu- 
nities . . . Congress does not intend that the 
Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act 
of 1994 alter this balance and thereby weaken 
States’ authority to protect the interests of their 
consumers, businesses, or communities. . . . 


It is of utmost concern to the Conferees that 
the agencies issue opinion letters and in 
tive rules concluding that Federal law preempts 
state law regarding community reinvestment, 
consumer protection, fair lending, or establish- 
ment of intrastate branches only when the agency 
has determined that the Federal policy interest in 
preemption is clear. 


H. Conf. Rep. No. 651, 103rd Cong., 2nd Sess. 53 
reprinted in 1994 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2068, 2074 (emphasis 
added) 


Long-standing principles of administrative law pro- 
hibit giving any weight to the OCC’s actions. First, there 
is no explicit congressional mandate to the OCC regard- 
ing § 85 or relating to the definition of the preemptive 
reach of the Act. The interpretations and rule definition 
do not advance traditional administrative objectives or 
fill in the gaps of statutory coverage or explain how the 
comptroller will exercise discretion in the future. Cf. Per- 
due v. Crocker Nat'l Bank, 38 Cal. 3d 913, 702 P.2d 503, 523, 
n. 38 (Cal. 1985), appeal dismissed, 475 U.S. 1001 (1986). 


Second, the interpretations themselves are of ques- 
tionable authority as they are not based on the banking 


25 


expertise of the agency. Instead they are quasi-judicial 
determinations of whether state consumer protection 
laws are preempted by federal banking laws. 


Finally, as has been shown above, the conclusion 
advanced by the OCC - that interest rate includes other 
charges - cannot be reconciled with the plain language 
and Congressional intent of § 85. “|A]n agency’s inter- 
pretation of a statute is not entitled to deference when it 
goes beyond the meaning that the statute can bear... ” 
MCI Telecommunications v. AT&T, 114 S.Ct. 2223, 2231 
(1994). These recent interpretations and rulemaking are 
nothing more than an attempt to shore up the position of 
national banks in pending litigation. The courts, not an 
administrative agency without authorization from Con- 
gress, are the final authority on these issues of statutory 
construction. Administrative constructions which are 
contrary to clear congressional intent must be rejected. 
The OCC should not have attempted to accomplish indi- 
rectly what Congress only recently has refused to pre- 
empt directly. 


26 


CONCLUSION 


For the above reasons, the judgment of the California 
Supreme Court should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Scott HARSHBARGER 
Attorney General 
of Massachusetts 


Ernest L. SARASON, JR. 

(Counsel of Record) 

Assistant Attorney General 

One Ashburton Place, 19th Floor 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
(617) 727-2200 


Date: March 1, 1996 


