_ BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF AUTHIORITIES...............:c0cccecsscsscscseseesees iii 
I ci his scdctitnaneccnccstacchadenedinhtcledande ] 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ...00000..02..00.0..cccccccceeeeeeeee 2 
NET A RE NOT RCO Ae A SUT 6 
I. SECTION 85 HAS PROMOTED NATIONAL 
COMPETITION IN THE CREDIT CARD 
a ce aa an esa Rs ANF I 6 
Il. THE CREDIT CARD INDUSTRY IS INTENSELY 
ESL ANE SSDP a TRAD 10 
A. The Industry Is Structurally Competitive......... 1] 
B. The Industry Is Characterized By Aggressive 
National Competition ........2........0.......0ccceccccees 13 
C. The Performance Of The Industry Reflects Its 
Competitive Structure ..00000....0...0.....0ccccccceeeeeees 16 


Il. LOAN COMPENSATION MAY BE CALCU- 
LATED IN THE MANNER ALLOWED BY 
THE LAWS OF A NATIONAL BANK’S HOME 


- 
B. The Potentially Unworkable Hodgepodge Of 

ESAS OE! <> AST A PI Ey, Pea 21 TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
C. Choice Of Price Structures Furthers Efficient CASES Page(s) 


American Tinsber & Trading Co. v. First Nat'l Bank of Ore., 


IV. PRICE CONTROLS LIMIT CREDIT $11 F.2d 980 (9th Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 421 U.S. 


AVAILABILITY AND HARM CONSUMERS .... = I 19 
V. SECTION 85 INCREASES THE EFFICIENCY | 
Bluefield Water Works & Improvement Co. v. Public 
OF PROVIDING CREDIT CARD SERVICES..... id Service Comm 'n, 262 U.S. 679 (1923) ooo. 18 
TENE Ne te TO 30 Brown v. Hiatts, 82 U.S. (15 Wall.) 177 (1873). ........0.----..3 


Citizens’ Nat'l Bank v. Donnell, 195 U.S. 369 (1904) .........5, 19 
Daggs v. Phoenix Nat'l Bank, 177 U.S. 549 (1900)........ 19 
FPC v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591 (1944)... .....18 


Gavey Properties/762 v. First Fin. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 
CS 


Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 818 
(Ist Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1052 (1993) .........8, 20 


Marquette Nat'l Bank v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 
EE Se a ... passim 


Meilink v. Unemployment Reserves Comm., 314 U.S 


National Collegiate Athletic Assoc. v. Board of Regents, 
EE ee a ... 16 


NationsBank of North Carolina, N.A. v. Variable 

Annuity Life Ins. Co., 115 S. Ct. 810 (1995)... 3 
SCFC ILC, Inc. v. VISA USA, Inc., 36 F.3d 958 (10th 

Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 2600 (1995) .............. 12 
Tiffany v. Nat'l Bank of Missouri, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 

EE ENE Os SS ees Ee eee 19 
United States v. General Dynamics Corp., 415 U.S. 

EEE Se he ee 1] 
United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 

RRR A eI IE Mert 11 
STATUTES, REGULATIONS & RULES 
| | | ee B28 a 8 
BS Es WD enerisscsvuiisitchipniaiiiaiitinindiniinaleiiitingtaaleneael passim 
Sections 521-523 of the Depository Institutions 

Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, 

Pub. L. No. 96-221, 94 Stat. 132 (1980)... passim 
rT EE 28 
Cal. Fin. Code § 4001(a)(3) ..........o..ccccccccccccccecceceeeeeeeneees 28 
Ind. Code § 24-4.5-3-203.5 ooo. oococccccceoeeeee ae 28 


Mass. Gen. L. ch. 140 § 1140 ooo cceceeecsneeeeneeee 28 


en OI OR a icccsecntenictesininane 22 
DUK. Gham, Arum, BF BODAGD cen eccencnncaccssvnceecececeeee 21 
Okla. Stat. Amn. tit. 14A, § 3-203(5) <.0----c-cccccoseeeeoeeoee 28 
Pa. Stat. Amn. tit. 69, § 1906 .000...0---cccccocssessessssseeeeeesnee 21 
S.C. Code Ann. § 37-3-202(1)(CMi) .......-.eeeceseecoee-eeevenssoee 28 
Wisc. Stat. Amn. § 422.201(10m) 0... .c-o-eecsccsoceoeeeeevoe 22 
Wisc. Stat. Amn. § 421.301(20) ....----cccco-eecseessoeeeevensoe 22 
61 Fed. Reg, 4849 (1996)... ooo eccecesseseevsevesseseevnnseen 3 
aa 
OTHER AUTHORITIES 
IIA Phillip E. Areeda, Herbert Hovenkamp & John L. 

Solow, Antitrust Law (1995) ....0.......----ccccocso-oeessvssooooe 1 


Lawrence M. Ausubel, 7he Failure of Competition in 
the Credit Card Market, 81 Am. Econ. Rev. 50 


William F. Baxter, Section 85 of the National Bank Act and 
Consumer Welfare, 1995 Utah L. Kev. 1009 (1995) ........ passim 


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The 
Profitability of Credit Card Operations of Depository 
Institutions,” An Annual Report Submitted to Congress 
Pursuant to Section 8 of the Fair Credit and Charge 
Card Disclosure Act of 1988 (Sept. 1995) ....0.... oo... passim 


Robert H. Bork, The Antitrust Paradox (1978).................... 15 


Dagobert L. Brito & Peter R. Hartley, Consumer 
Rationality and Credit Cards, 103 J. Pol. Econ. 


Glenn B. Canner & Charles A. Luckett, Developments in the 
Pricingof Credit Card Services, 78 Fed. Res. Bull. 652 
ES Cee ae Pe ee ee passim 


Gienn B. Canner & James T. Fergus, The Economic 


Effects of Proposed Ceilings on Credit Card Interest 
Rates, 73 Fed. Res. Bull. 1 (1987) .02.2.o.....oeccccccceees 26 


Christopher C. DeMuth, 7he Case Against Credit 
Card Interest Rate Regulation, Yale J. on Reg. 
| a a Ate A ee 11, 15, 26, 27 


David S. Evans & Richard L. Schmalensee, The 
Economics of the Payment Card Industry (1993)............. 4,29 


Edward C. Lawrence, L. Douglas Smith & Malcolm 


Rhoades, An Analysis of Default Risk in Mobile 
Home Credit, 16 J. Banking & Fin. 299 (1992)... 24 


Page(s) 

Robert E. Litan, The Economics of Credit Cards 

Re eee eee 24 
Eugene A. Ludwig, Comptroller of the Currency, A 

Profitable Market Opportunity, Remarks Before 

the Community Development Conference, OCC 

—  & A A 9 
Loretta J. Mester, Why Are Credit Card Rates Sticky?, 

TD 10, 15 
Harold C. Nathan, Economic Analysis of Usury Laws, 

8 EE 26, 27 


A. Joseph Newman, Jr., Delaware Bank Finds Way to 
“Export” Card Fees, Am. Banker, Aug. 31, 19° %........... 21 


OCC Interpretive Letter No. 676, reprinted in [1994- 
1995 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) 
$83,618 (Feb. 17, 1995) ooo ccccscscecssessssveeesessseevece 3 


Alexander Raskovich & Luke Froeb, Has Competition 
Failed in the Credit Card Market? (U.S. Dep’t of 
Justice Antitrust Div. Econ. Analysis Group Working 


Group Paper 92-7, Jume 12, 1992) 2000000... ooooocccececeees passim 
F_M. Scherer & David Ross, /ndustrial Market Structure 
and Economic Performance (3d ed. 1990) ...00..0...0.00.0..... 11 


Joseph F. Sinkey & Robert C. Nash, Assessing the 
Riskiness and Profitability of Credit-Card Banks, 
7 J. Fin. Services Res. 127 (1993) ..000.00..0.....cccccccceceeee. 19 


Page(s) 
Top 50 Companies in Managed Bank Credit Card 
Loans, Am. Banker, Sept. 11, 1995 .00.0.......ccccccccecseceeeeeens 12 
Tracey Tucker, Discount Mortgage Broker to Originate 
Loans On-Line Via Compuserve, Am. Banker, July 27, 
DODD nccccecsncsedancssctatiisitsntehatinbiiihesiiasdiiasiabiaidaababaaninde 9 


U.S. Dep’t of Justice and Federal Trade Comm'n, 
Horizontal Merger Guidelines (Apr. 2, 1992), 
reprinted in 4 Trade Reg. Rep. (CCH) { 13,104 .............. 11, 16 


U.S. General Accounting Office, United States Credit 
Card Industry: Competitive Developments Need to 


Be Closely Monitored (April 1994) ..........ccc00scs0esssseesseeee 12, 13, 16, 17 


Vendors Join First Union in Its Electronic Mall, 
eam, GRRE, GED, BB, TOW secccccesocivtiesccivinneresncntnctocinsesces 9 


INTEREST OF AMICI 


This amici curiae brief is filed by American Bankers 
Association (“ABA”), American Financial Services 
Association (“AFSA”), Consumer Bankers Association 
(“CBA”), | MasterCard International _Incorporated 
(“MasterCard”), National Retail Federation (“NRF”), and 


VISA U.S.A. Inc. (“VISA”) (collectively, “Amici”) in support 
of respondent Citibank (South Dakota), N.A.’ 


The ABA is the largest national trade association of the 
commercial banking industry in the United States, 
representing approximately 90 percent of the domestic assets 
of all American commercial banks. The AFSA represents 
over 300 companies, including many depository institutions, 
that operate more than 10,000 offices extending consumer 
credit in the United States. The CBA represerts institutions 
that collectively hold nearly 80 percent of all consumer 
deposits and about 70 percent of all consumer credit held by 
federally-insured depository institutions. VISA and 
MasterCard are associations that, as of year-end 1994, had 
approximately 17,000 and 13,600 depository institution 
members, respectively The NRF is a trade association 
comprised of more than 55,000 members who are engaged in 


Depository institutions are vitally interested in the 
question of whether late fees on credit card accounts are 
“interest” within the meaning of 12 USC. §85 
(“Section 85”). That section governs the interest that may be 
charged on any loan made by a national bank, but other banks, 
savings associations, and credit unions also are affected by 
this Court’s interpretation of Section 85 because 
Sections 521-523 of the Depository Institutions Deregulation 


' Petitioner and Respondent each have provided consent to 
Amici’s filing, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 37.3. 


and Monetary Control Act of 1980, Pub. L. No. 96-221, 94 
Stat. 132 (1980) (“DIDA”), grant these institutions the same 
federal interest authority that national banks have under 
Section 85. Members of the NRF are affected significantly by 
Section 85 because credit cards issued by depository 
institutions provide a crucial payment mechanism and source 
of credit necessary for the retail sales industry.” 


Federally-insured depository institutions have relied on the 
long-standing interpretation of Section 85 by the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency (“OCC”) in lending tens, if not 
hundreds, of billions of dollars on interstate credit card 
programs. If the OCC’s position is set aside in this case, these 
credit card issuers could be subject to late fee limits under the 
various laws of the borrowers’ states. Over 45 lawsuits and 
state administrative enforcement actions on this issue have 
been filed in recent years in Alabama, California, Colorado, 
Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Wisconsin. If the th ories 
asserted by the plaintiffs in these cases were successiul, the 
potential liability under state law could include loss of 
periodic percentage charges on the accounts, as well as 
multiples of the late fees being challenged, for the applicable 
statute of limitations period under state law. Any such result 
would seriously undermine the justifiable reliance that 
depository institutions have placed on the federal banking 
agencies’ interpretations of the laws they administer. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The OCC, the federal regulatory agency charged with 
interpreting and enforcing the National Bank Act, has issued a 


2 This brief relates to credit cards issued by depository 
institutions, and does not address credit cards issued by retailers. The 
members of the NRF thus, in this brief, express the views of merchants 
that accept credit cards rather than issuers of credit cards. 


regulation that late fees are covered by Section 85. 61 Fed. 
Reg. 4849, 4869 (1996) (to be codified at 12 CFR. § 
7.4001(a)). This interpretation reflects the agency’s long-held 
position and is supported by extensive authority, including this 
Court’s decisions which hold that the term “interest” includes 
“compensation allowed by law, or fixed by the parties, for the 
use or forbearance of money, or as damages for its detention.” 
Brown v. Hiatts, 82 U.S. (15 Wall.) 177, 185 (1873)? The 
OCC’s regulation thus should be controlling in this case. See 
NationsBank of North Carolina, N.A.v. Variable Annuity 
Life Ins. Co., 115 S. Ct. 810, 813 (1995). 


Marquette Nat’! Bank v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 
U.S. 299 (1978), established conclusively that a national bank 
is authorized by Section 85 to charge interest at the rate 
allowed by the laws of the state in which the bank is located 
on loans made to borrowers who reside in other states (the 
“home state interest rule”). In doing so, this Court 
recognized that Section 85 was intended to foster national 
competition that allows borrowers to choose from a wide 
variety of credit products offered by lenders located 
nationwide under the laws of their respective states. 
Congress reaffirmed the primary importance of such national 
competition by providing other federally-insured depository 
institutions with the benefits of the home state interest rule 
when it enacted Sections 521-523 of DIDA. 


Marquette recognized that borrowers shop nationally for 
credit by interstate mail and telephone. Borrowers now also 
Section 85 provides that the interest laws of the bank’s state 
apply to these interstate loans, just as if the borrower were to 
obtain a loan by physically visiting a branch of the bank in 


> The compelling reasoning for this interpretation is restated at 
length in OCC Interpretive Letter No. 676, reprinted in [1994-1995 
Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 83,618 (Feb. 17, 1995). 


another state. The laws of the borrower’s state are not 
properly applied to such interstate transactions occurring in 
the bank’s state. 


The benefits of national competition in the credit industry 
are well-illustrated by the credit card industry, which is the 
subject of this brief. This Court’s decision in Marquette and 
the home state interest rule have been instrumental in 
developing true national competition.‘ Credit card issuers 
located across the country vie for the business of borrowers 
who reside in every state. The result has been what the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (“Board”) has 
described as an intensely competitive credit card industry. 
Indeed, the industry is structurally competitive by traditional 
measures, and its growth, entry of new competitors, 
pricing and profitability all belie any assertion that the industry 
does not perform competitively. 


Petitioner’s interpretation of Section 85 would eviscerate 
Marquette by allowing state-by-state regulation of a 
significant component of the loan compensation on interstate 
credit cards.* Periodic percentage charges, late fees and other 
interest charges on credit card accounts are interdependent as 
a matter of both law and economics. Requiring state-by-state 
compliance with late fee limits effectively would require state- 
by-state compliance with all elements of loan compensation 


* See William F. Baxter, Section 85 of the National Bank Act and 
Consumer Welfare, 1995 Utah L. Rev. 1009, 1021 (1995) (“Baxter”) 


. For ease of reference, this brief refers to interest (compensation 
for the use, forbearance or detention of money) as “loan compensation.” 


and unduly interfere with national competition in the credit 
card industry. 


Petitioner’s argument also fails to recognize that this 
Court has held that Section 85 incorporates state law on the 
permissible methods (or rates) by which interest is calculated, 
and not merely any limit on the ultimate amount of interest 
that may be charged. See, e.g., Citizens’ Nat'l Bank v. 
Donnell, 1°5 U.S. 369 (1904). The laws of the bank’s state 
thus determine whether loan compensation may be calculated 
by a flat or percentage rate, and whether applicable rates are 
applied during the term of the loan to calculate periodic 
charges or, when a borrower misses a payment, to calculate a 
late fee. The laws of the bank’s state therefore determine the 
permissible allocation of loan compensation between the APR 
and late fees.° 


If Section 85 does not apply to late fees, the federal 
standard can prove unworkable in many situations because 
Section 85 would adopt only a portion of the state standard 
that relates to loan compensation. For interstate loans, 
Section 85 thus could create an unworkable hodgepodge of 
laws of the bank’s state and the borrower’s state that was not 
intended by either state, and could cause anamolous results 


Petitioner’s theories, if accepted, would harm consumers. 
The home state interest rule allows consumers to choose from 
alternative price structures (methods of calculating loan 
compensation) under the laws of any state in the nation. 
Consumers can choose the price structure that best meets 
Gate lett itd ‘Alain on rics 
, i iin wie bine Ged har missible pr ~ nemgem 


* For purposes of this brief, the term “APR” refers to the annual 
percentage rate that corresponds to the monthly or other periodic 
percentage rate charged on the account. 


which late payers who present higher credit risks and cause 


increased operational expenses can be charged appropriately 
without subsidization from other borrowers. 


Imposing state law limits on the price at which credit is 
made available in the competitive credit card industry 
unnecessarily restricts the availability of credit, particularly to 
those borrowers that have the most difficulty obtaining credit. 
Petitioner’s interpretation of Section85 also needlessly 
applies multiple state laws on the price of credit cards, which 
decreases the efficiency of providing credit card services and 
leads to higher prices and/or lower-quality services for 
consumers. 


In sum, Petitioner’s arguments should be rejected because 
they are inconsistent with both the congressional policies 
underlying Section 85 and this Court’s decisions, and do not 
benefit consumers. 


ARGUMENT 


I. SECTION 85 HAS PROMOTED NATIONAL 
COMPETITION IN THE CREDIT CARD 
INDUSTRY 


Marquette firmly establishes that Congress adopted the 
home state interest rule in Section 85 with full knowledge of 
the extensive interstate lending activities in which national 
banks would be engaged. The Court explained: 


[The] debates [surrounding Section 85] 
occurred in the context of a developed interstate 
loan market. As early as 1839 this Court had 
occasion to note: “Money is frequently 
borrowed in one state, by a corporation created 
in another. The numerous banks established by 
different states are in the constant habit of 


These usages of commerce and trade have been 
so general and public, and have been practiced 
for so long a period of time, and so generally 
acquiesced in by the states, that the Court 


439 U.S. at 317 (alterations in original; citations omitted). 
Marquette thus recognized that Section 85 authorizes national 
banks located in different states with different interest laws to 
compete with each other nationally on the basis of the interest 
charges allowed by their home states. 


When Section 85 wvas first enacted at the time of the Civil 
War, there were good reasons to adopt federal banking laws 
Congress prevented balkanized state credit industries by 
ensuring that national banks could compete freely on a 
national basis. From the borrowers’ perspective, the rule 
ensured that they would have the opportunity to obtain credit 
at national prices in the truest sense: any price allowed by the 
laws of any state in the nation. Section 85 thus significantly 
increased both the available sources and the terms of credit. 


The national competition recognized by Marquette occurs 
when borrowers who reside in one state obtain a loan product 
in another state at the price allowed by the other state. In 
upholding the home state interest rule against the claim that it 
improperly impaired the states’ ability to “enact effective 
usury laws,” Marquette noted that such impairment “has 
always been implicit in the structure of the National Bank Act, 


since citizens of one State were free to visit a neighboring 
State to receive credit at foreign interest rates” and that such 
impairment “may in fact be accentuated by the ease with 
which interstate credit is available by mail through the use of 
modern credit cards.” Jd. at 318-19. Marquette thus 
established that a borrower obtains an interstate loan in the 
bank’s state as if he or she visited that state in person. Cf. 12 
U.S.C. § 81 (a national bank must conduct its loan business at 
its licensed branches or main office). 


Congress reaffirmed its commitment to national 
competition in the credit industries, including the credit card 
industry, just two years after Marquette when Sections 521- 
523 of DIDA were enacted. This legislation provided other 
federally-insured depository institutions with the same interest 
authority that national banks have under Section 85.’ Other 
federally-insured lenders thus were authorized to offer their 
home states’ interest rates nationally without regard to state 
limits under the laws of the borrowers’ states. The result was 
increased national competition from numerous other federally- 
insured depository institutions. 


The enactment of Sections 521-523 of DIDA is significant 
in at least two respects. First, these federal statutes were 
enacted with the express congressional goal of establishing 
competitive equality between the other federally-insured 
depository institutions and national banks regarding the 
interest that could be charged. See Greenwood Trust Co. v. 
Massachusetts, 971 F.2d at 826. The ability to charge home 
state interest on interstate loans was a significant competitive 
advantage that national banks had over. other 
institutions before enactment of Sections 521-523 of DIDA. 


” See generally Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 
818 (1st Cir. 1992) (Section 521), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1502 (1993); 
Gavey Properties/762 v. First Fin. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 845 F.2d 519 
(Sth Cir. 1988) (Section 522). 


Absent that authority, borrowers would not have the choice of 
the pricing offered by these depository institutions under the 
laws of other states. 


Second, Sections 521-523 of DIDA were enacted when 
interest rates were at historic highs and low interest rate limits 
under some state laws significantly reduced the availability of 
credit to the point of adversely affecting the economy. /d 
Sections 521-523 helped alleviate this credit crunch by 
authorizing additional depository institutions located in higher 
interest rate states to charge those rates to borrowers in low- 
rate states. 


The importance of national competition in the credit card 
industry increases almost daily with fast-paced technological 
advances. Just as developments in interstate mail and 
telephone systems have facilitated the ability of cardholders to 
obtain credit in the bank’s state, borrowers currently can 
obtain credit from a multitude of lenders nationwide through 
computer networks such as the Internet.’ As technological 
advances quickly expand consumers’ access to credit in other 
states, the home state interest rule embodied in federa! law 
preserves for consumers the ability to shop for credit in 
different states and to obtain credit products available under 
those states’ laws.” 


* See, e.g., Vendors Join First Union in Its Electronic Mall, Am. 
Banker, Aug. 11, 1995, at 9 (bank offering applications for credit cards 
on-line), Tracey Tucker, Discount Mortgage Broker to Originate Loans 
On-Line Via Compuserve, Am. Banker, July 27, 1995, at 16 (mortgage 
broker offering on-line mortgage loan brokerage services and anticipates 
soon offering other credit services, including credit cards). 


* The OCC has recognized that technological developments 


Development Conference, OCC N.R. 96-21 (Feb. 23, 1996). 


10 


To be sure, there is a tension between the home state 
interest rule and the ability of a state to regulate the conduct 
of its citizenry, it conduct outside the state’s borders. 
However, as Marquette recognized, the “protection of state 
usury laws is an issue of legislative policy, and any plea to 
alter § 85 to further that end is better addressed to the 
wisdom of Congress than to the judgment of this Court.” 439 
U.S. at 319. Congress, after Marquette, examined the 
wisdom behind Section 85 when it considered Sections 521- 
523 of DIDA and reaffirmed the primary importance of 
national competition by extending the home state interest rule 
to additional lenders. 


Il. THE CREDIT CARD INDUSTRY IS INTENSELY 
COMPETITIVE 


Congress’s efforts to promote national competition in the 
credit industries have been unambiguously successful in the 
credit card industry. In September 1995, the Board reported 
to Congress that competition in the credit card industry 
remains intense, with thousands of firms offering credit cards 
to consumers. '° The Board found that the credit card industry 
has been characterized by growth, new entry, aggressive 
profitability. FRB Report at 7-9. A number of governmental 
and academic economists who have studied competition in the 
credit card industry have reached the same conclusion. '! 


° Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “The 
Profitability of Credit Card Operations of Depository Institutions,” An 
Annual Report Submitted to Congress Pursuant to Section 8 of the Fair 
Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act of 1988, at 6 (Sept. 1995) (“FRB 
Report”). 


" Eg. Baxter at 1014; Dagobert L. Brito & PeterR Hartley, 
Consumer Rationality and Credit Cards, 103 J. Pol. Econ. 400 (1995) 
(Brito & Hartley”), Loretta J. Mester, Why Are Credit Card Rates 


In assessing the competitiveness of an industry, courts and 
economists generally focus on three factors: (1) the structure 
of the industry, (2) the conduct of firms in the industry; and 
(3) the economic performance of the industry. See United 
States v. General Dynamics Corp., 415 U.S. 486, 501-06 
(1974); F.M. Scherer & David Ross, /ndustrial Market 


lessen competition. Scherer & Ross at 71. See also United 
States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 363 (1963). 
The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (or “HHI”) is the tool most 


12 


F.3d 958, 967-68 & n.13 (10th Cir. 1994) (HHI is below 
500), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 2600 (1995). 


One of the principal reasons why the credit card industry 
is SO unconcentrated is that there are “few barriers to entry for 
depository institutions that wish to issue credit cards.” GAO 
Report at 25. Virtually any federally-insured bank, savings 
association, or credit union can join the MasterCard or VISA 
system and issue its own card. Indeed, since Marquette, the 
number of issuers has grown dramatically. “Approximately 
4,500 of the 6,000 depository institutions that issue credit 
cards joined VISA and/or MasterCard between 1980 and 
1991.” Id.” Each of these institutions determines the specific 


profitability “seem generally to disappear once the share of the four 
leading firms falls below 50 to 55 percent or the Herfindahl falls below 
1,000”). 


'° Credit card issuers compete not only against one another, but 
also against other methods of payment, including proprietary credit 
cards (issued by department stores, oil companies and the like), debit 
cards, checks and cash. The HHI would be significantly lower if these 
competing payment methods were included in the calculus. 


'* See also US. General Accounting Office, United States Credit 
Card Industry: Competitive Developments Need To Be Closely 
Monitored 25 (April 1994) (“GAO Report”) (“most analysts place the 
HHI value for the credit card industry at less than 564”). 


“ Many of the recent entrants into the industry have been quite 
successful. For example, the Discover Card (launched in 1985) and the 
AT&T Universal Card (first offered in 1990) have become the third and 
sixth largest credit card programs, respectively, based on outstanding 
balances. Top 50 Companies in Managed Bank Credit Card 
Loans, Am. Banker, Sept. 11, 1995, at 33-34. 


13 


package of services it will offer, and independently sets the 
price and terms of its product offerings. 


B. The Industry Is Characterized By Aggressive 
National Competition 


song elhpeey aay ER, eg Mivyy Roeder ydbren 
products. These products differ in both price and service 
dimensions, including annual fees, APRs, late fees, rebates or 


industry today. This is because the statistics cited 

calculated by taking the unweighted average of APRs charged 
by a sample of large banks to some of their customers; they 
“[do] not capture the diversity of interest rates that a typical 
issuer may Offer its entire customer base,” including lower 
fixed rate and variable rate plans. GAO Report at 15. In fact, 
the Board reported last fall that many credit card issuers, 
i ing nearly all of the largest issuers, have lowered APRs 
on many of their accounts. FRB Report at 7. A 1992 study 
by two Board economists observed that, of the 150 issuers 


studied, “[s]eventeen percent of the issuers . . . charged rates 


14 


below 16 percent per year. Nearly one-fourth offered 
variable-rate plans . . . [and] an additional 4 percent offered 
plans with a tiered rate structure, in most cases assessing 
lower rates on higher balances.” Canner & Luckett at 654- 


card issuers, some analysts have argued that the supposed 
stability of APRs on credit cards presents an economic 
anomaly. In a competitive industry, they contend, APRs 


To be sure, a number of issuers still offer credit cards with 
fixed APRs. ists at the Board, at the Department 


‘© See, e.g., Lawrence M. Ausubel, The Failure of Competition in 
the Credit Card Market, 81 Am. Econ. Rev. 50 (1991). 


15 


indices for other borrowing rates.’ Their conclusion is that 
this alleged anomaly does not reflect a failure of competition. 
On the contrary, they explain, in a competitive market these 


response to changes in that cost. Baxter at 1016. 


In addition to price competition, issuers vie for customers 
by offering enhanced features and services. See Robert H. 


increasing the number of offerings they make available; 
“[mJore than 2 billion direct mail solicitations were sent by 
issuers during 1994” alone. FRB Report at 8 n.12. These 
offerings frequently are accompanied by special incentives to 
switch. The Board reports that “many issuers have attempted 
to gain or maintain market share by offering very low, 


'" Eg., Baxter at 1015-19; Brito & Hartley at 429; Mester at 505- 
07; Raskovich & Froeb at 11-12; DeMuth at 228-31. 


16 


temporary rates on balances rolled over from competing 
firms.” Jd. at7. The AT&T Universal Card, for example, 
“attained top-ten status within months of its inauguration 
primarily by inducing switches from rival cards.” Raskovich 
& Froeb at 1 nl. The pace of consumer switching has 
accelerated in recent years. Indeed, during the first half of 
1994 alone, “VISA cardholders transferred some $10.8 billion 
between issuers, almost six times more than during the same 
period in 1992.” FRB Report at 8 n.12. 


C. The Performance Of The Industry Reflects Its 
Competitive Structure 


The economic performance of the credit card industry 
over the last decade reflects the intense competition described 
above. As this Court has observed, non-competitive 
industries tend to be characterized by restricted output, 
limited entry, and stable market shares. See, e.g., National 
Collegiate Athletic Assoc. v. Board of Regents, 468 U.S. 85, 
106-07 (1984) (absent competition, “[p]rice is higher and 
output lower than they would otherwise be, and both are 
unresponsive to consumer preference”); see also DOJ/FTC 
Merger Guidelines § 2.1. The credit card industry, as even its 
critics acknowledge, has none of these characteristics. 


The supply of credit available through credit card lending 
has grown dramatically over the last fifteen years. See 
Amicus Brief of Consumer Action at6. As the GAO 
observes, before the 1980s, state usury laws “suppressed the 
growth of the credit card industry insofar as issuers in states 
with low [APR] ceilings issued cards only to the most 
creditworthy individuals” GAO Report at 12-13. This 
Court’s decision in Marquette enabled issuers to expand the 
base of customers they served, leading to a significant surge in 
demand for credit card loans during the 1980s. Jd at 13. 
Indeed, the GAO found that “[t]he percentage of American 
households with at least one credit card grew rapidly during 


17 


the 1980s, from about 38 percent in 1977 to 54 percent in 
1989.” Jd. The Board reports that this trend has continued 
unabated: “The aggressive competition for new customers 
during 1994 was at least partly the cause of a 19 percent 
increase from 1993 in the number of VISA and MasterCard 
[credit cards] in circulation, to a total of 341.3 million.” FRB 
Report at 8. 


New credit card offerings have come from established 
issuers and new entrants alike. These companies have fought 
with one another for credit card customers 
nationwide by offering a diverse array of products with 
different prices and features. This competition, in turn, “has 
led to substantial shifts in market shares among the industry’s 
largest firms” over the past several years. Jd. at 7. Where, as 
here, a national industry is characterized by rapid growth, 
significant new entry, price competition, innovative product 
offerings, and significant shifts among the industry leaders, 
there can be no doubt that it is functioning in a competitive 
manner. 


Some doubts have been expressed, however, by critics of 
the industry who believe that the profits earned by credit card 
issuers are abnormally high. See Amicus Brief of Consumer 
Action at 13-14. Economists at the Board and at the 
Department of Justice, as well as a number of academic 
them."* Measured properly, rates of return on credit card 
operations are consistent with the rates of return earned by 
enterprises engaged in businesses of comparable risk. 

To begin with, there is conflicting evidence on the 
question of whether the rates of return earned by credit card 
operations are, in fact, higher than those earned by other 


'8 Baxter at 1018-19; Brito & Hartley at 429; Raskovich & Froeb 
at 11-12 & n.10; Canner & Luckett at 661-62. 


18 


enterprises. The Board’s 1995 report to Congress on the 
profitability of credit card operations of depository institutions 
observes that, based on one set of time series data, “credit 
card operations have not been exceptionally profitable.” FRB 
Report at 3. From 1974 through 1994, “the annual net 
earnings of bank credit card plans averaged 2.26 percent of 
balances outstanding,” while “average net returns on other 
major types of bank lending have been quite similar: 2.42 
percent on real estate mortgages, 2.26 percent on commercial 
and other loans, and 2.26 percent on installment loans.” Jd. 


More importantly, the rates of return cited by the 
industry’s critics are accounting rates of return. As Professor 
Baxter observes, however, “high accounting returns do not 
imply high economic profits.” Baxter at 1018. With respect 
to credit card operations specifically, the use of this measure 
“tends to overstate the profitability of credit card operations 
relative to other lending services.” Jd This is because credit 
card operations require the use of far more non-capital assets, 
such as marketing, advertising, and customer service. As an 
accounting matter, these expenditures are treated as expenses, 
not assets, and therefore are excluded from the base of 
“assets” on which the accounting rates of return are 
calculated. /d.; see also Raskovich & Froeb at 11 n.10. 


Finally, as this Court has recognized, in a competitive 
industry the rate of return earned by a particular business will 
be commensurate with the level of risk incurred by that 
business. The higher the risk of an enterprise, the higher the 
return it must provide investors to attract capital. See FPC v. 
Hope Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591, 603 (1944); Bluefield 
Water Works & Improvement Co. v. Public Service Comm'n, 
262 U.S. 679, 692-93 (1923). Credit card lending therefore 
“should be more profitable than other forms of bank lending 
because it is accompanied by greater risk.” Baxter at 1019. 
In fact, economists who have carefully studied rates of return 
associated with credit card operations have concluded that, on 


19 


a risk-adjusted basis, these rates of return are consistent with 
those earned by other competitive enterprises.’” 


Ill. LOAN COMPENSATION MAY BE CALCULATED 
IN THE MANNER ALLOWED BY THE LAWS OF 
A NATIONAL BANK’S HOME STATE 


Section 85 promotes national competition in the manner 
of calculating loan compensation, and not merely in the 
amount of loan compensation. Thus, this Court’s decisions 

that Section 85 applies to the method by which 
interest is calo:lsted as well as the amount of interest. 


Indeed, a fundamental policy underlying Section 85 is to 
protect national banks against unfriendly state laws regulating 
interest. Tiffany v. Nat'l Bank of Missouri, 85 U.S. (18 
Wall.) 409, 412-13 (1874). Federal law would provide little, 
if any, protection to national banks if states could favor other 
lenders through the manner in which loan compensation is 
calculated. Section 85 therefore must incorporate as the 
federal standard not only the amount of loan compensation 
allowed by state law, but also the manner in which such loan 
compensation is calculated under state law. See Daggs v. 
Phoenix Nat'l Bank, 177 U.S. 549, 555 (1900). Section 85, 


state law limits on total loan compensation. See Citizens’ 
Nat'l Bank v. Donnell, 195 U.S. at 374; see also American 
Timber & Trading Co. v. First Nat'l Bank of Ore., 511 F.2d 
980, 983 (9th Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 421 U.S. 921 (1975) 
(calculation on a 365/360-day basis). 


'? Joseph F. Sinkey & Robert C. Nash, Assessing the Riskiness 
and Profitability of Credit-Card Banks, 7 J. Fin. Services Res. 127, 144 
(1993); see also Brito & Hartley at 429; Canner & Luckett at 661-62; 
Raskovich & Froeb at 11-12 & n.10. 


20 


A. Late Fees Involve A Method Of Calculating Loan 
Compensation 


Section 85 authorizes the collection of loan compensation 
at the “rate” allowed by state law. Thus, the laws of the state 
where the national bank is located govern whether loan 
compensation may be calculated, for example, using a one- 
time flat rate or a periodic percentage rate. See Greenwood 
Trust Co., 971 F.2d at 824. Similarly, Section 85 
incorporates state laws regarding when the rates for 
determining loan compensation may be applied: during the 
term of the loan (i.e., as periodic percentage charges) and/or 
at delinquency (i.e., as late fees). 


Petitioner’s argument that late fees are not covered by 
Section 85 fails to recognize that Section 85 incorporates 
state law on the permissible methods (rates) by which interest 
can be calculated. The OCC and case law recognize that 
compensation. Petitioner’s claim essentially is that late fees 
are not covered by Section 85 because the manner in which 
the loan compensation is calculated is not covered by 
Section 85. But under the home state interest rule, the laws 
of the bank’s state determine not only the amount of loan 
compensation, but also the manner of calculating the 
compensation, and thus the allocation of the compensation 
between the APR and late fees. 


The fallacy of Petitioner’s argument is illustrated by 
considering three price structures (or calculation methods) 
that a credit card issuer might adopt for cardholders who pay 
late: (1) the periodic percentage charge could be set at a 
higher rate at the time the loan is made on the basis of the 
cardholder’s late payment history on other loans; (2) the 
periodic percentage charge for a loan could be increased after 
late payments on that loan; or (3) a fee could be assessed for 
each late payment, calculated on the late payment amount and 


21 


the delinquency period. In Petitioner’s view, Section 85 
draws an artificial distinction between these price structures 
and flat late fees. In fact, although these alternative 
calculation methods (rates) differ from a flat fee assessed 


upon late payments, they all are covered by Section 85.” 


B. The Potentially Unworkable Hodgepodge Of State 
Laws 


State laws that limit credit prices commonly impose 
comprehensive and interrelated limits on the permissible 
amount of, and methods of calculating, loan compensation.’ 
A state thus may require all loan compensation to be included 
in periodic percentage charges and prohibit all other loan 
compensation. Another state may allow loan compensation 
through a combination of periodic percentage charges and up- 
front fees (e.g., origination fees). Yet another state may allow 
flexibility in the price structure that can be offered, either with 
or without a limit on the amount of loan compensation.” 


2° After lowa challenged the ability of out-of-state banks to charge 
late fees in 1988, one credit card issuer merely converted the manner in 
which it calculated interest by imposing higher periodic percentage 
charges after late payment rather than late charges. See A. Joseph 
Newman, Jr., Delaware Bank Finds Way to “Export” Card Fees, 
Am. Banker, Aug. 31, 1988, at 2. 


7! See, e.g., Pa. Stat. Ann. tit. 69, § 1906 (“the service charge 
shall include all charges incident to investigating and making” the 
credit card account, and “[n]o fee, expense, delinquency, collection or 
other charge whatsoever” may be collected if not provided for in the 
statute); N.J. Stat. Ann. 17:16C-50 (no “further or other amount for 
costs, charges, . . . expense, interest, discount, fees, fines, penalties or 
other things of value” are allowed unless expressly permitted). 


2 For example, a state may limit the amount of loan 
compensation by imposing a maximum yield calculated on an actuarial 
basis, and still allow the lender flexibility to adopt whatever price 
structure the lender chooses by which to receive that compensation. 


¥ 


Petitioner’s argument that Section 85 incorporates only a 
portion of state law governing the manner of calculating loan 
compensation, if accepted, could render the statute 
unworkable. Some state laws limit the total loan 
compensation including late fees, see, e.g., Wisc. Stat. Ann. 
§§ 421.301(20), 422.201(10m) (finance charges, which are 
limited under state law, may include late fees), while other 
states allow late fees only if periodic percentage charges are 
not imposed on loan balances that are paid late. See, e.g., 
Mont. Code Ann. § 31-1-235. Petitioner suggests that a loan 
to a borrower in one of these states would be subject to the 
limit on late fees, but would not be subject to limits on 
periodic percentage charges. It would be difficult, however, if 
not impossible, to determine compliance with such an 
unintended and unpredictable patchwork of laws from the 
bank’s state and the borrower’s state. 


Petitioner’s reading of Section 85, if adopted, would 
adversely affect national competition in the credit card 
industry. The laws of the bank’s state might provide for late 
fees to compensate for a relatively low periodic percentage 
charge, while the laws of the borrower’s state might permit a 
relatively high periodic percentage charge and prohibit late 
fees. Petitioner’s interpretation could result in the bank’s 
charging a relatively low periodic percentage charge set by its 
state, but not being able to charge the late fee that the bank’s 
state intended to compensate for the low periodic percentage 
charge. This could substantially disrupt the ability of the 
national bank to calculate loan compensation in the manner 
allowed by its home state laws, and thereby artificially restrain 
the bank’s ability to compete with lenders in the borrower’s 
State. 


23 


C. Choice Of Price Structures Furthers Efficient 


periodic percentage charges. _ Indeed, numerous 
not restrict price structures for loan compensation. 


Consumers are in the best position to determine whether they 
will be better off paying loan compensation on a periodic 
percentage charge basis or on some other bases. For instance, 
consumers who pay their account balances in full each month 
can choose credit cards with a price structure that has a 
higher component of the loan price attributable to periodic 
percentage charges and a lower annual fee because that 
structure is best for them. Consumers who carry a revolving 
balance on their accounts instead can choose a price structure 
that includes an annual fee and reduced periodic percentage 
charges. 


The ability to choose a credit card with late fees benefits 
consumers by allowing issuers to offer lower APR products. 
Each of the thirty-one national credit card programs on the 
Bankcard Holders of America’s list of low-cost credit cards, 
except one, includes a late fee to compensate for the low 


APR.” Thus, issuers who cannot collect late fees will need to 
increase the APR or other fees to receive an appropriate level 
of gross revenues. 


Late fees are a fair and efficient method of allocating the 
costs of operating a credit card program. Borrowers who pay 
late create operational costs directly attributable to their 
failure to comply with the terms of their agreements. Credit 
card issuers must adopt systems to track such behavior and 
respond to it appropriately. Individuals who pay late also 
present a greater credit risk than those who pay on time.” 
payment behavior. 

Lenders may consider several different methods of 
calculating loan compensation to address this. The cost of 
credit might be increased at loan origination by identifying 
such behavior on other loans and imposing a higher periodic 
percentage charge or origination fee. Late fees do the same in 


> See Bankcard Holders of America, Bankcard Holders of 
America Low-Interest/No-Fee Credit Card List (Feb. 1995). 


** See Robert E. Litan, The Economics of Credit Cards at 7-8 
(Jan. 1993) (“chargeoff rate of customers who at one point have been 
assessed a late fee has been between four and six times higher than 
credit losses on all accounts generally”); EdwardC. Lawrence, 
L. Douglas Smith & Malcolm Rhoades, An Analysis of Default Risk in 
Mobile Home Credit, 16 J. Banking & Fin. 299, 311 (1992) (“[Flor 
loans that are several years old, the borrower's payment history is 
paramount in estimating default risk. This history is registered through 
the length of time that the loan has been in effect, the borrower's most 
recent delinquency status, and frequency of 30-day and 60-day 
delinquencies in the previous year”), Meilink v. Unemployment Reserves 
Comm'n, 314 U.S. 564, 567 (1942) (“It is common knowledge that 
interest rates vary... according to the hazard of particular classes of 
loans. Delinquent taxpayers as a class are a poor credit risk; tax 
default... is... a signal of distress”). 


25 


a more efficient manner by imposing the higher cost in direct 
response to a late payment. Late fees are no less loan 
compensation covered by Section 85 merely because they are 
calculated in this manner. 


Limiting the ability of issuers to charge late fees is 
behavior cannot then be required to pay for the consequences 
of their conduct. Instead, lenders must increase loan 
compensation in another manner, such as by increasing the 
APR or annual fee. Many consumers who pay these other 
charges, however, pay on time. Forcing issuers to recover the 
costs created by late payers from all borrowers provides, in 
short, an economic subsidy for those who pay late. This 
inequitable result is exacerbated by the fact that the number of 
late payers increases as the cost to individuals of paying late 
decreases. 


In sum, consumers are benefited, and the national 
competitive policies underlying Section 85 are furthered, if 
consumers can shop nationally for a wide variety of price 
structures on credit cards. 


IV. PRICE CONTROLS LIMIT CREDIT 
AVAILABILITY AND HARM CONSUMERS 


Contrary to Petitioner’s suggestion that state limits on 
credit card late fees benefit consumers, such laws are 
detrimental to the very consumers whom these laws seek to 
protect. The intense national competition in the credit card 
industry efficiently sets the prices for credit by the free market 
principle of supply and demand. Externally imposed limits on 
the price at which credit is made available simply restrict the 
amount of credit that is available, particularly to those 


generally Harold C. Nathan, Economic Analysis of Usury 
Laws, 10 J. Bank Res. 200 (1980) (“Nathan”). 


The home state interest rule does not restrict the ability of 
a state to limit the price of credit offered by local national 
banks. To the extent that the price structure for credit cards 
allowed by a state’s law is desirable to consumers and 
acceptable to lenders, national banks located in that state will 
respond to the demand and offer a product at that price to 
customers who qualify. Similarly, national banks located in 
at a competitive price to creditworthy customers, even if not 
required to do so. Baxter at 1020-21. 


A state law limit affects the marketplace where the law 
sets a price that is lower than the price at which lenders 
otherwise are willing to make loans to some borrowers. In 
determine that they are unwilling to extend credit at an 
artificially low price and will limit the availability of credit.” 
Credit cards will not be offered to those individuals who 
lenders determine are the highest credit risks. Canner & 
Fergus at 9 (“lower-income families and families headed by 
younger persons would seem to be among those most likely 
to be denied credit”). 


If lenders are constrained by state price limits, they would 
reallocate resources from those markets that do not allow a 
competitive return on investment to those that do. The result 
would be that some lenders would make fewer credit card 
loans and would increase the supply of other types of credit 
that are not regulated at artificially low prices. Alternatively, 
credit card issuers may choose not to make credit card loans 


> DeMuth at 218; Baxter at 1021-22; Glen B. Canner & James T. 


Fergus, The Economic Effects of Proposed Ceilings on Credit Card 
Interest Rates, 73 Fed. Res. Bull. 1, 6-7 (1987) (‘Canner & Fergus”). 


27 


to borrowers who reside in states that impose artificially low 
price limits, resulting in the balkanization of credit availability, 
in direct conflict with the national competition envisioned by 


Congress and Marquette.” 


Permitting the borrower’s state to impose artificial limits 
on the availability of credit cards is especially undesirable 
because, in today’s marketplace, the credit card is an 
important payment device. Credit cards can be virtually 
indispensable in many common transactions, such as renting a 
car, making a purchase by mail or telephone, or guaranteeing 
a hotel room for late arrival. Consumers who use a credit 
card to make multiple purchases during a month at numerous 
establishments conveniently receive a single statement 
itemizing ali of those purchases. State laws that effectively 
restrict the availability of credit cards to less creditworthy 
consumers deprive those consumers of these important 
benefits. 


V. SECTION 85 INCREASES THE EFFICIENCY OF 
PROVIDING CREDIT CARD SERVICES 


Application of the home state interest rule in place of 
multiple state interest rules increases the efficiency of credit 
card issuers that compete nationally. Issuers are able to 
provide credit services more efficiently if they offer their 
products under a single federal interest law rather than having 
to comply with numerous different and often conflicting state 
laws on loan compensation. These efficiencies are passed 


7° DeMuth at 241-42 (“The benefits of increased competition 
would be lost if . . . interest rate controls . . . [resulted in] the withdrawal 
of card programs to state and local markets”), Nathan at 209 (“[U]}sury 
ceilings .. . . cause severe economic distortions that extend far beyond 
the market they were intended to regulate. The major example of 
distortion is inefficient resource allocation between states.”). 


28 


along to credit card customer: *» the form of lower prices or 


covered by Section 85. For example, card issuers could be 
forced to adopt state-specific pricing with respect to annual 
states set rules on the refundability of annual fees, or on how 
far over limit an account must be before an overlimit fee can 
be assessed.” In a national credit card program, variations in 


” See, e.g., Ind. Code § 24-4.5-3-203.5 and Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 
14A, § 3-203(5) (fees vary with CPI); Cal. Fin. Code § 4001(a)(1) ($7 if 
payment is 5 days late, $10 if 10 days late, or $15 if 15 days late). 


8 See, e.g., Mass. Gen. L. ch. 140 § 114C (annual fee); Cal. Fin. 
Code § 4001(a)(3) (overlimit by $500 or 120%, whichever is less); S.C. 
Code Ann. § 37-3-202(1)(c)(ii) (no second overlimit fee unless account 
balance reduced to the lesser of 10% or $100 below credit limit and then 
increased to the lesser of 10% or $100 above credit limit). 


state laws such as these would create enormous operational 
burdens. 


card issuers to this level of state price control. From the legal 
compliance standpoint, it requires card issuers initially to 
determine the relevant state law limits through review of state 
statutes, regulations, interpretive letters and cases. In the 
highly technical consumer credit area, this undertaking is 
substantial in a single state, let alone a large number of states. 
Issuers also must continuously monitor statutory, regulatory, 
and other developments in the laws of various states, and 


and consumers. 


Complicated operational issues also need to be addressed. 
The computer systems used for billing on the accounts need 
to be programmed to reflect all of the individual state 
variations. Different forms of agreements are needed for 
different states, or complicated forms showing the relevant 
fees for residents of the various states are necessary. Changes 
in these state law-specific systems and agreements are 
required when a consumer moves to a different state. 
on-line data systems need to know the particular state fee 
structure applicable to each cardholder. 


A likely consequence of this burden would be that fewer 
issuers would be able to compete nationally. Card issuers 
would not have the nationwide market in which to achieve the 
economies of scale that have assisted the development of 
large credit card programs. Evans & Schmalensee at 28-29. 
Similarly, issuers would need to adopt particular underwriting 
and credit policies based on the price structures of their home 
state that must be revised if pricing structures vary between 
states. The added complexity of state-by-state price 


30 


regulation will benefit only the lawyers and other service 
providers who will be needed to develop and maintain the 
compliance structure necessary for the additional regulatory 
burden. 


In sum, Petitioner’s theory, if adopted, would result in 
fewer credit card issuers, higher interest charges, and less 
consumer choice, thereby undermining the very purposes of 
Section 85. 


CONCLUSION 


Petitioner’s interpretation of Section 85 is inconsistent 
with the national competition that was envisioned by 
Congress and recognized by Marquette, and would not benefit 
consumers. The decision of the court below thus should be 
affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Attorneys for Amici Curiae SHIRLEY M. HUFSTEDLER 
American Bankers Association, Counsel of Record 
American Financial Services L. RICHARD FISCHER 


Association, JAMES A. HUIZINGA 
Consumer Bankers Association, |W. STEPHEN SMITH 
MasterCard International - MORRISON & FOERSTER LLP 
Incorporated, 2000 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
National Retail Federation, Washington, DC 20006 
and VISA U.S.A. Inc. (202) 887-1500 


March 29, 1996 


