Petitioner, 


Crrrmpanx (SourH DAKoTA), N.A., 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
California Supreme Court 


BRIEF OF THE STATES OF 
COLORADO, DELAWARE, GEORGIA, 
ILLINOIS, MONTANA, NEBRASKA, 

NEVADA, NEW YORK, OHIO, SOUTH DAKOTA, AND 
UTAH, THE COMMONWEALTHS OF PENNSYLVANIA 
AND VIRGINIA, THE ARIZONA STATE BANKING 
canines AND THE LOUISIANA OFFICE OF 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, AS AMICI CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


Betty D. MONTGOMERY 

Ohio Attorney General 
Jerrrey S. SUTTON * 

State Solicitor 
DIANE R. RICHARDS 

Chief, Chief Counsel Section 
State Office Tower 
30 East Broad Street 
Columbus, OH 43215-8428 
(614) 466-8980 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


ARGUMENT 


SECTION 85 RECOGNIZES THE CENTRAL- 
ITY OF STATE LAW IN BANKING REGULA- 
TION .. 


I. 


Il. 


ITl. 


A. 


B. 


Section 85 Provides A Uniform National 
Choice Of Law Rule For Interstate Loans 


Petitioner’s Construction Of The Scope Of 
The Choice Of Law Rule In Section 85 Would 
Lead To Uncertainty And Confusion In The 
Interstate Loan Market ... 


UNDER SETTLED RULES OF STATUTORY 
CONSTRUCTION, THE JUDGMENT OF THE 
CALIFORNIA SUPREME COURT SHOULD 
BE AFFIRMED 


A. 


Deference To The OCC’s Interpretation Of 
Section 85 Is Appropriate And Essential To 
Ensuring The Safety And Soundness Of 
Banks Within Our Borders . 


The State Court’s Construction Of Section 85 
Furthers Congress’ Purposes In adil The 
National Bank Act ......... ee 


’. The California Supreme Court’s Construction 


Of Section 85 Is Consistent With The Eco- 
nomics Of Credit Pricing And Thus Consti- 
tutes A Common Sense Approach To Apply- 
ing The Statute ............. = 


SECTION 85 PROMOTES BOTH THE INTER- 
ESTS OF CONSUMERS AND THE ABILITY 
OF EACH STATE TO PROTECT ITS RESI- 
DENTS AS IT SEES FIT 


CONCLUSION 


l 


on 


ul 


10 


14 


20 


23 


29 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Page 


American Timber & Trading Co. v. First Nat'l 
Bank, 690 F.2d 781 (9th Cir. 1982) ...................... 17 

Babcock Vv. Jackaom, \91 N.E.2d 279 (N.Y. 1963) .... 12 

Cades Vv. H & R Stlovk, Inc., 48 F.3d 869 (4th Cir. 


1994), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 2247 (1995) —....... 17 
Chevron U.S.A. Ine. Vv. Natural Resources Defense 

Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 887 (1984) 16 
Choate, Hall & Stewart v. SCA Servs., Inc., 392 

N.E.2d 1045 (Mass. 1979) ........................--...-..-. 12 
Cippollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504 

Se as 10 
Collins Radio Co. v. Bell, 623 P.2d 1089 (Okla. Ct. 

Bat TER cccnntimmantimintnigtiie 13 
Commercial Credit Equip. Corp. v. West, 677 

S.W.2d 669 (Tex. Ct. App. 1984) .................... 13 
Commercial Credit Plan, Inc. Vv. Parker, 263 S.E.2d 

QU, IEEE SE 18, 27 
Connecticut Nat'l Bank v. Kommit, 577 N.E.2d 639 

FD yyy 13 
D.P. Technology Corp. Vv. Sherwood Tool, Inc., 751 

F. Supp. 1088 (D. Conn. 1990) ......................... 13 
Dassault Falcon Jet Corp. Vv. Oberflez, Inc., 909 

F. Supp. 345 (M.D.N.C. 1996)................................ 18 
Duncan Vv. Cesena Aircraft Co., 665 S.W.2d 414 

. oo a 12 
Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1988) ............ 14 
Finance Am. Corp. Vv. Moyler, 494 A.2d 926 (D.C. 

ee ee ee 13 
First Nat'l Bank Vv. Nowlin, 509 F.2d 872 (8th Cir. 

ee a ee 22 
Fisher Vv. First Nat'l Bank, 548 F.2d 255 (8th Cir 

| 17 


Gibbons Vv. Ogden, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 1 (1824)... 9 
Greenwood Trust Co. V. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 
818 (ist Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1052 


> _ se eee poe 17 
Gregory V. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991) 10 
Lilienthal Vv. Kaufman, 395 P.2d 543 (Or. 1964) ...... 12 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
Marquette Nat'l Bank v. First of Omaha Serv. 
Corp., 489 U.S. 299 (1978) ccc. passim 
Maryland Vv. Louisiana, 451 U.S. 725 (1981)... 9 
McBride Vv. Minstar, Inc., 662 A.2d 592 (N.J. 
Super. Ct.), aff'd sub nom. McBride v. Raichle 
Molitor, USA, 662 A.2d 567 (N.J. Super. Ct. 


SO Pe 13, 27 
Nationsbank of North Carolina, N.A. Vv. Variable 

Annuity Life Ins. Co., 115 8. Ct. 810 (1995) 16 
Northway Lanes Vv. Hackley Union Nat'l Bank & 

Trust Co., 464 F.2d 855 (6th Cir. 1972)... 17 
OFS Equities, Inc. v. Conde, 421 So. 2d 651 (Fila. 

§ eS Fee a a 13 
Reich v. Purcell, 482 P.2d 727 (Cal. 1967)... 12 
TVA V. Hill, 487 U.S. 158 (1978) ... 29 
Train V. Natural Resources Defense Council, Ine., 

— 8 8 Se es ee 19 
Walker Vv. Associates Fin. Serve. Corp., 588 S.W.2d 

EE ee 13, 27 
Zenith Radio Corp. Vv. United States, 487 U.S. 443 

(1978) .......... SE Se ae ee 19 

Constitutional and Statutory Provisions 
U.S. Const. art. IV, § 1... ical head ecem 7 13 
REE a 16 
eee ee 16 
REE eee eae eae 16 
ee 8,9 
EE See ee eee ee 9 
ee passim 
EE ee 8 
EE one ~ 
§ 481... - - = 16 
OC a 5 
Ee 5 


Depository Institutions Deveguiaticn and Mone- 
tary Control Act of 1980 (“DIDA”), 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1831d asthacietianinemtiiiees: 5 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


The Federal Truth In Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. 

I A OO. sacnstitiniincnashinatemtinttnaldtnelaitidiining 
Cal. Fin. Code § 4001 (a) (1) (C) 0... 
Colo. Rev. Stat. § G-B-B0G .n..............--nceeeccevesceesceeceeess 
ei cirentatitiitenectininnentiitigiies 
Kan. Stat. Ann. § 16a-2-502(2) ......... oe 
Me. Rev. Stat. tit. 9-A, § 2-501(1) (G) —.............. 
Mass. Gen. L. ch. 140, § 114B ..0 
EE EE 
N.J. Stat. Ann. § 17:16C-42(a) ._... pnpepletngiatamaiiiretiinis 
N.Y. Banking Law § 108(5) (e) —........ sedinnaitintartiiitad ies 
N.Y. Pers. Prop. Law § 413(5) (b) ............................. 
Ohio Rev. Code § 1107.262(A) en 
Okla. Stat. tit. 14A, § 3-208 (5) 
Pa. Stat. Ann. tit. 7, § 8322(d) (v) ........................... 
A ID dilittnrecrittinitenennitien 
RE en 
Utah Code § TO0C-2-102 (1) 2... -ccnncnencecceeeceneeeeeee 
Va. Code Ann. § 6.1-830.78.A.1 —...........-.---------------- 
Wis. Stat. § 422.202(2m) (a) ................ eciteninnatiiiei 


Regulatory Authorities 

61 Fed. Reg. 4849 (Feb. 9, 1996) (to be codified 
A EE 17 

Letter of Harry Quillian, Acting General Counsel, 
FHLBB (June 27, 1986), attached to Letter of 
Karen Solomon, Deputy Chief Counsel, Office of 
Thrift Supervision (Sept. 29, 1994) in Current 
Developments, Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) 
.  f  ¢ | Fees cece 17 

Advisory Op. No. FDIC-92-47, [1992-98 Transfer 
Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) % 81,534 
gg SD: ES a 17 

Letter of William P. Bowden, Jr., OCC Chief Coun- 
sel, 1992 WL 136390 (OCC) (Feb. 4, 1992) ....... 17 

OCC Interpretive Ltr. No. 452, [1988-89 Transfer 
Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) cna 
A S( yy 17 


TTTITTICTTITT TTT Trt . 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
Letter from Richard V. Fitzgerald, Director, OCC 
Legal Advisory Services Division (Nov. 24, 
RS dn ee Re a a Sa 17 


Other Authorities 


William F. Baxter, Section 85 of the National 
Bank Act and Consumer Welfare, 1995 Utah L. 
EE a Se passim 

Christopher C. DeMuth, The Case Against Credit 
Card Interest Regulation, 3 Yale J. on Reg. 201 


CE Se passim 
William C. Dunkeleberg, Litigation Concerning 

Late Charges is Major Threat to Credit Card 

Business, Banking Pol’y Rep. (Prentice Hall), 

RE ES LE 20, 25 
David S. Evans & Richard L. Schmalensee, The 

Economics of the Payment Card Industry 


i Re a A I 23, 25, 29 
John Jay Knox, A History of Banking in the United 

States (1908, 1969 reprint) — 7 
Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws §§ 188, 

RE ER aS ERE aS 6 
Emmanuel N. Roussakis, Commercial Banking in 

an Era of Deregulation (2d ed. 1989) . 5 
Eugene F. Scoles & Peter Hay, Conflict of Laws 

Ee 12 
Kenneth E. Scott, The Dual Banking System, 30 

Stan. L. Rev. 1 (1977) .. 5 
2B Norman J. Singer, Sutherland on Statutes and 

Statutory Construction § 49.07 (5th ed. 1992). 19 
Cass R. Sunstein, Law and Administration After 

Chevron, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2071 (1990) ........... 16 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 


Amici curiae, the States of Colorado, Delaware, Georgia, 
Illinois, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New York, Ohio, 
South Dakota, and Utah, and the Commonwealths of 
Pennsylvania and Virginia, through their respective At- 
torneys General, the Arizona State Banking Department, 
through its Superintendent, and the State of Louisiana 
Office of Financial Institutions, through its Commis- 
sioner (the “States”), support the position of respond- 
ent Citibank (South Dakota), N.A. (“Citibank”) in urg- 
ing aflirmance of the judgment of the California Supreme 
Court.’ The States believe that the California Supreme 
Court correctly held that the term “interest” in section 85 
of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. § 85, includes late 
payment fees charged by national banks on credit card 
balances and other loans. The decision in this case will 
necessarily address at least two interests of great impor- 
tance to the States and our residents: consumer welfare 
and the safety and soundness of banks. 


The States have an important interest in promoting 
consumer welfare. Our consumers depend on credit 
cards every day, and they benefit from policies that pro- 
mote broad access to credit, low credit card costs, and 
the ability to choose freely from the broadest possible 
range of different packages of rates and charges that are 
offered by credit card issuers. 


The States also have an important interest in promot- 
ing the safety and soundness of banks located within our 
borders, and in ensuring predictability in the banking 
industry. Events of recent years have demonstrated that 
when banks sustain large and unexpected losses (such as 
those that they potentially face in this lawsuit and similar 
suits across the country), the well-being of the general 


! Pursuant to Court Rule 37.3, this brief is filed with the consent 
of the parties. Letters of consent have been filed with the Clerk's 
Office. 


2 


economy may suffer, to the detriment of all of our 
residents. 


Affirmance of the judgment of the California Supreme 
Court would further the interests of our consumers and 
would also protect the safety and soundness of banks 
in our States. Reversal, however, would have precisely 
the opposite, profound effects. Consumers in our States 
and elsewhere would be significantly injured by decreased 
access to credit, higher costs of credit, and fewer options 
in the credit card market. In addition, banks in our 
States and throughout the country would be exposed to 
the potential of staggering damage awards that could 
threaten the safety and soundness of the banking system 
and, with it, the health of the entire economy. Reversal 
would also upset the settled expectations that support 
the smooth functioning of the national banking system 
that has served the country well for decades. 


The States endorse the arguments made by respondent 
Citibank. Those arguments will not be repeated here. 
Rather, this brief focuses. on the practical significance of 
this case to the States, to our consumers, and to the banks 
iocated within our borders. The States believe that our 
distinct perspective on the issues presented will materially 
assist the Court in resolving this case properly. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


This is not, as petitioner and her amici suggest, a con- 
ventional preemption case. Section 85 effectively oper- 
ates in the context of this case as a choice of law rule. 
In interstate credit card transactions, there is always an 
inherent conflict of laws problem. The home state of the 
bank, the state of the borrower’s residence, and even the 
state in which the purchase or cash advance is made, each 
has a connection with, and potentially an interest in, the 
proper lega! standards that govern the transaction. Sec- 
tion 85 resolves one source of conflict by providing, as 
a matter of federal law, a clear and uniform rule that the 


3 


propriety of the “interest” charged by a bank is deter- 
mined by the substantive law of the bank’s home state. 


Consequently, although this case has enormous prac- 
tical significance to all segments of the economy of our 
States, at bottom it presents nothing more than a straight- 
forward quesion of statutory interpretation of the meaning 
of the term “interest” in section 85 of the National Bank 
Act. Based upon the widespread use of that term in 
nineteenth century judicial opinions and today, it is clear 
that “interest,” as used by Congress in 1864, includes 
late charges. However, even assuming for the sake of 
argument that the term, at least viewed in isolation, were 
potentially ambiguous, the construction of section 85 
reached by the California Supreme Court (and the vast 
majority of other courts) should nonetheless be affirmed. 
Under settled rules of statutory construction, this Court 
should look to whether the Office of the Comptroller of 
the Currency (“OCC”)—the federal agency charged with 
administering the National Bank Act—has issued an 
authoritative interpretation of the meaning of this lan- 
guage. For years, the OCC has in letter rulings expressed 
the view that the term “interest” in section 85 includes 
late fees. More recently, the OCC promulgated a final 
rule, following a notice and comment period, formalizing 
its interpretation of section 85. The Court should defer 
to this reasonable and long-standing construction of the 
relevant language in section 85. 


There are particularly strong reasons for according def- 
erence to the OCC’s interpretation of the term “interest” 
in section 85. Bank regulators in our States rely upon 
and obtain substantial guidance from the interpretations of 
the National Bank Act and other federal banking laws 
issued by the OCC, the FDIC, and other federal regula- 
tory agencies. Moreover, in reliance upon the OCC’s 
publicly stated position, banks in our States have loaned 
literally hundreds of billions of dollars to consumers across 
the country. In interpreting a potentially ambiguous stat- 


4 


ute, great weight should be accorded to those reliance 
interests. Given the amounts at stake in this case, accept- 
ing petitioner's argument would have a potentially de- 
vastating effect on banks in our States. That harm to the 
banking industry could, in turn, have a profoundly harm- 
ful effect on the entire economy of each of our States, 
on our businesses, aud on our consumers. 


In addition, construing “interest” in section 85 to in- 
clude late fees promotes consumer welfare. Consumers 
benefit from broad access to credit, lower credit costs, and 
above all the ability to choose from the broadest possible 
range of competing credit cards in the marketplace. The 
conclusion reached by the California Supreme Court fur- 
thers those interests. Affirmance would enable consumers 
in our States to continue to choose from a broad array 
of credit cards, some of which will be offered by banks 
in states with little regulation and others of which will 
be offered by banks in states with greater regulation. 
The Federal Truth In Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1601 
et seq., aS well as state disclosure laws and antifraud 
protections, ensure that consumers throughout the country 
will have access to the competitive information necessary 
for them to make informed choices as to what type of 
credit arrangement best suits their needs. 


Finally, affirmance of the judgment of the California 
Supreme Court would protect the traditional prerogative 
of the States to set the terms upon which banks located 
within our borders may lend money. In stark contrast, 
our States have comparatively little interest in regulating 
the terms of a transaction in which our residents vol- 
untarily have made the choice to borrow money from 
a national bank in another state, leaving behind the rate 
limitations of our States. Because section 85 as inter- 
preted by the OCC and the California Supreme Court 
implements this basic balancing of the relevant interests 
of the States, the judgment of the California Supreme 
Court should be affirmed. 


5 


ARGUMENT 


I. SECTION 85 RECOGNIZES THE CENTRALITY OF 
STATE LAW IN BANKING REGULATION. 


In our country’s dual system of banking, banks have 
historically been regulated by their chartering authority— 
national banks by the federal government, and state banks 
by the state governments that charter them. See Em- 
manuel N. Roussakis, Commercial Banking in an Era 
of Deregulation 60 (2d ed. 1989); Kenneth E. Scott, 
The Dual Banking System, 30 Stan. L. Rev. 1, 5 (1977). 
This structure of regulation and oversight has applied 
generally to banks regardless of whether the banks are 
engaged in intrastate or interstate transactions. 


Section 85 of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. § 85, 
provides that national banks may charge “interest at the 
rate allowed by the laws of the State . . . where the bank 
is located” (emphasis added). Thus, when a national 
bank makes a loan (intrastate or interstate), the interest 
charges that it may assess are determined by the law of 
the bank’s home state. The location of the borrower’s 
residence—whether next-door to the bank, in the same 
state as the bank, in a different state, or even in a differ- 
ent country—is irrelevant. All customers who borrow 
from a particular national bank, therefore, are treated 
the same, regardless of their state of residence.’ 


2 Section 85 of the National Bank Act applies to national banks, 
such as respondent Citibank. In addition, virtually all state- 
chartered banks are federally insured, and federally insured state 
banks are subject to section 521 of the Depository Institutions 
Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980 (“DIDA”), 12 
U.S.C. 8 1831d, which was modeled on 12 U.S.C. $85. See 12 
U.S.C. §183ld(a) (stating, in pertinent part, that a federally 
insured state bank may charge interest “at the rate allowed by the 
laws of the State, territory, or district where the bank is located”’). 
Similar statutory provisions apply to all federally chartered and 
federally insured state-chartered saving associations, 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1463(g)(1), and all federally chartered and federally insured 
state-chartered credit unions, 12 U.S.C. § 1785(g) (1). As a result, 


6 


A. Section 85 Provides A Uniform National Choice Of 
Law Rule For Interstate Loans. 


This is not, as petitioner and her amici contend, a 
conventional preemption case. The effect of section 85 
in this case is not to displace substantive state law with 
substantive federal law. Rather, section 85 operates in 
this context as a choice of law statute. Section 85, in 
effect, provides a uniform national choice of law rule 
for interstate loans. Thus, rather than arrogating power 
to the federal government to impose special federal rules, 
section 85 takes a different approach that acknowledges 
the centrality of state concerns and state law, and resolves 
what might otherwise be complex questions as to which 
State’s law is applicable to a particular interstate loan. 


In interstate bank loans (including credit card loans), 
there are always at least two states potentially interested 
in the transaction, namely the bank’s home state and the 
borrower’s home state.* In the absence of section 85, the 
roles of the law of the bank’s home state and the bor- 
rower’s home state would have to be resolved according 
to general choice of law principles. See, e.g., Restatement 
(Second) of Conflict of Laws §§ 188, 195 (1971). 
Because the application of conflict of laws principles all 
too often varies with the eye of the beholder, reliance 
upon those principles would ensure disuniformity in the 


the Court’s construction of section 85 in this case will directly 
affect almost all financia) institutions in the country. 


* A third state, the state in which the credit card purchase or 
cash advance is made, may also have an interest in the transaction. 
See William F. Baxter, Section 85 of the National Bank Act and 
Consumer Welfare, 1995 Utah L. Rev. 1009, 1024 & n.50 (1995). 
As a result, even a relatively simple series of transactions—in 
which, for example, a California resident makes two telephone 
calls from home and, with a credit card issued by a bank in Ohio, 
purchases an airline ticket (on a carrier with its main office in 
Texas) and makes a reservation in a hotel (in a chain with its 
main office in Illinois) for a ski holiday in Utah—has the potential 
for raising difficult and complex conflict of laws issues. 


7 


law. In such a situation, the courts would routinely be 
called upon to resolve those conflicts. 


Section 85 resolves that problem for loans made by 
national banks. Section 85 states, in plain terms, that a 
national bank may charge on its loans “interest at the 
rate allowed by the laws of the State . . . where the bank 
is located” (emphasis added). Thus, section 85 effectively 
provides a uniform national choice of law rule. As a 
matter of federal law, the law of the bank’s home state 
determines the interest charges that a national bank may 
assess on all of its loans, both intrastate and interstate.* 


In enacting section 85, Congress sought to preserve the 
already established prerogatives of the states to determine 
the interest that banks located within their borders could 
charge. Section 85 recognizes the historic importance of 
substantive state law in determining permissible interest 
charges. Ascertaining which lending charges constitute 
“interest” under section 85 is a matter of federal law. 
Once that determination is made, however, the substan- 
tive law of the bank’s home state determines whether the 
bank’s “interest” charges are permissible. 

Of course, Congress was not required to preserve the 
historic prerogatives of the states. In the exercise of its 
plenary authority over interstate commerce, Congress 
could have enacted a standard preemption statute that 
imposed a single, uniform limit on lending rates for na- 
tional banks across the country and displaced all state 
law. Indeed, the House of Representatives originally ap- 
proved such a preemption provision, imposing a uniform 
maximum interest rate of seven percent for all loans 
(intrastate or interstate) made by national banks. See 


*The States recognize that section 85 has a number of other 
purposes, provisions, and effects that have different federalism 
implications. Those other aspects of section 85 are not implicated 
in this case, and are therefore not addressed in this brief. Rather, 
the States address in this brief only the provision of section 85 
that is pertinent to the facts of this case. 


Marquette Nat'l Bank vy. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 
U.S. 299, 318 n.31 (1978) (citing Cong. Globe, 38th 
Cong., Ist Sess. 1866 (1864) ). 


In the Senate, however, the bill was amended, and the 
current language of section 85 was added. See John Jay 
Knox, A History of Banking in the United States 255- 
56 (1903, 1969 reprint); Citibank Br. at 33-35. That 
decision was critically important. Mindful of basic 
principles of federalism, Congress rejected a rigid pre- 
emption approach to the regulation of national banks 
that would have trampled upon the traditional preroga- 
tives of all of the states. Instead, Congress reserved to 
each state the power to make its own policy judgment on 
the interest limitations that would best serve the objec- 
tives of that state. Congress decided that, as a matter 
of federal law, the law of the bank’s home state would 
determine the interest that a national bank may charge, 
even when the borrower resides in a different state.’ 


Thus, in the context of this case, section 85 does not 
operate at all like a conventional preemption statute. In a 
conventional preemption case, there is a conflict between 


* Congress has also recognized the importance of state banking 
law in provisions subsequently added to the National Bank Act. 
See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. §36(c) (providing that a national bank may 
“within the approval of the Comptroller of the Currency, establish 
and operate new branches” within geographical limits “if such 
establishment and operation are at the time expressly authorized 
to State banks by the law of the State in question”); 12 U.S.C. 
§ 90 (upon deposit of funds by a state or state government agency, 
a national bank may “give security for the safekeeping and prompt 
payment of the funds so deposited to the same extent and of the 
same kind as is authorized by the law of the State in which [the 
national bank] is located in the case of other banking institutions 
in the State”) ; 12 U.S.C. § 92a (Comptroller of the Currency may 
grant a national! bank the power “to act as trustee, executor, admin- 
istrator, .. . or in any other fiduciary capacity in which State 
banks, trust companies, or other corporations which come into com- 
petition with national banks are permitted to act under the laws 
of the State in which the national bank is located’’). 


9 


substantive federal and substantive state law. Under the 
Supremacy Clause, U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2, the federal 
law displaces the state law, and the state law is rendered 
entirely void and “without effect.” Maryland v. Louisiana, 
451 U.S. 725, 746 (1981); Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 USS. 
(9 Wheat.) 1, 211 (1824). 


In this case, however, the effect of section 85 is not 
to displace substantive state law with substantive federal 
law. Rather, as described above, section 85 serves to de- 
termine which state’s law determines the permissible inter- 
est on an interstate loan transaction. 


Moreover, Section 85 does not render the substantive 
law of California or any other state null and void. To the 
contrary, section 85 effectively preserves state law. Under 
section 85, the law of California determines the interest 
charges that a national bank located in that state may 
assess——whether its loans are made to residents of Cali- 
fornia or elsewhere.* 


To be sure, section 85 does cause some displacement of 
state law: in an interstate loan, the law of the borrower's 
home state is displaced by the law of the bank’s home 
state. But that displacement, alone, does not transform 
section 85 from a choice of law statute into a preemption 
statute. Rather, the displacement of the law of one state 
by the law of another is inherent in any conflict of laws 
determination. In any conflict of laws case, the law of one 
state “wins” and the law of another state “loses.” That 

®* This Court recognized in Marquette National Bank that a con- 
sumer who borrows money from an out-of-state bank is deemed 
to have travelled to the bank to obtain the loan. 439 U.S. at 311. 
That is consistent with the structure of the National Bank Act, 
which prohibits a national bank from making loans at any location 
other than its home office or its branches. 12 U.S.C. §§ 36(j), 81 
It is therefore unremarkable that Congress would determine in 
section 85 that the loan transaction should be governed by the 
law of the state in which the lender resides and in which the 
transaction occurs. 


10 


occurs without impairing state sovereignty or implicating 
conventional preemption concerns.” 

Accordingly, conventional preemption concerns are sim- 
ply not present in this case. This is not a case in which 
“the historic police powers of the States [are being] super- 
seded by [a] Federal Act.” Cippollone v. Liggett Group, 
Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 516 (1992) (quoting Rice v. Santa 
Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230 (1947)). Nor is 
this a case in which the historic prerogatives of the states 
are in need of “protection . . . against intrusive exercises 
of Congress’ Commerce Clause powers.” Gregory v. Ash- 
croft, 501 U.S. 452, 464 (1991). If it were, our States 
would not be before this Court urging affirmance of the 
decision of the California Supreme Court. 


In adopting section 85, Congress chose to preserve the 
historic prerogatives of the states in determining the in- 
terest charges that banks located within their borders could 
assess. Congress did not enact a uniform set of national 
standards for the lending practices of national banks de- 
signed to preempt all contrary state law. Rather, Congress 
decided (as a matter of federal law) to incorporate the 
law of the bank’s home state on this subject, thereby pre- 
serving to a great extent the traditional role of the states 
in bank regulation. 


B. Petitioner's Construction Of The Scope Of The 
Choice Of Law Rule In Section 85 Would Lead To 
Uncertainty And Confusion In The Interstate Loan 
Market. 


This Court has previously had an opportunity to review 
the meaning and scope of section 85. In the landmark de- 
cision in Marquette National Bank, supra, the respondent, 


7 For this reason, petitioner's argument that section 85 is an 
unconstitutional delegation of legislative power is incorrect. Any 
time a resident of California enters into a transaction with the 
resident of another state, there is the possibility—under standard 
conflict of laws rules—that the law of California may be displaced 
by the law of another state. 


law, but violated Minnesota law. 439 U.S. at 302. In a 
unanimous opinion, the Court upheld the bank’s loan 
charges. The Court cited the plein language of section 85 
and held that the statute permits a national bank to charge 
all of its borrowers the APR permitted by the law of the 
bank’s home state, even if that APR violates the law of 
the borrower’s home state. /d. at 313. 


made in the home state of the 


Mi 


country. As the Court obecrved, “cities of one State” 


ceive credit at foreign interest rates.” Jd. at 318.* 


In Marquette National Bank, the loan charge at issue 
was the APR. Here, the question is whether section 85 
also applies to late fees. 


The California Supreme Court held that the term “in- 
terest” in section 85 includes late fees, and therefore that 
the rule in section 85 applies to those late fees. The state 
court’s holding regarding the scope of section 85 is cor- 
rect and benefits both borrowers and banks by providing 
certainty and predictability to interstate loan transactions. 


* The holding of Marquette National Bank is sometimes described 
as the “exportation” of the law of the bank’s home state to the 
borrower's home state. That is not, however, quite accurate. Be- 
cause the loan is actually made at the bank, the application of the 
law of the bank’s home state does not require the “exportation” of 
any law. To the contrary, exportation would have occurred in fact 
only if Marquette National Bank had held that the law of the 
borrower's state governed a transaction in the bank’s home state. 


States are always involved in interstate loans, a difficult 
choice of law issue would arise that would need to be re- 
solved through litigation in each of the 50 states, with 
each state applying its own conflict of laws rules. Until 
that issue were conclusively resolved in each of the 50 
states, a virtual impossibility,’ banks and card holders 
would not know whether the law of the bank’s home state 
or the state of the card holder’s residence—or potentially 
even the law of the state in which the purchase or cash 
advance was made—would apply. 


Almost certainly, in the absence of the uniform choice 
of law rule provided by section 85, the states would reach 


* The conflict of laws issue will never be truly “conclusively 
resolved,” as states’ approaches to conflicts of law questions may 
change over time. See, e.g., Eugene F. Scoles & Peter Hay, Conflict 
of Laws 11-44 (2d ed. 1992) (describing evolution of general 
choice of law standards in the United States); Duncan v. Cessna 
Aircraft Co., 665 S.W.2d 414, 421 (Tex. 1984) (rejecting tradi- 
tional contract law rule of le# loci contractus, which applied the 
law of the state in which the contract was made, in favor of a rule 
applying the law of the state with the “most significant relation- 
ship” to the transaction); Choate, Hall & Stewart v. SCA Servs., 
Inc., 392 N.E.2d 1045, 1048-49 (Mass. 1979) (also rejecting lez 
loci contractus rule); Lilienthal v. Kaufman, 395 P.2d 543, 545-47 
(Or. 1964) (same); Babcock v. Jackson, 191 N.E.2d 279, 283-84 
(N.Y. 1968) (rejecting traditional tort law rule of lez loci delicti 
commissi, which applied the law of the state in which the tort was 
committed, in favor of an approach comparing the interests of the 
competing states); Reich v. Purcell, 4832 P.2d 727, 729-31 (Cal. 
1967) (also rejecting lex loci delicti commissi rule). 


13 


different results through their choice of laws analysis. Some 
States, depending on their views of interests of the 
competing states in governing the transaction and the 
lending charge at issue, would likely apply the law of the 
state of the borrower’s residence to late charges."” Others 


1° See, e.g., Commercial Credit Equip. Corp. v. West, 677 S.W.2d 
669, 674 (Tex. Ct. App. 1984) (applying law of consumer's state 
in case involving purchase financing) ; Dassault Falcon Jet Corp. V. 
Oberflez, Inc., 909 F. Supp. 345, 353 (M.D.N.C, 1995) (applying 
law of consumer’s state in case involving sale of goods); D.P. 
Technology Corp. Vv. Sherwood Tool, Inc., 751 F. Supp. 1088, 1040 
(D. Conn. 1990) (applying law of commercial purchaser’s state) ; 
Collins Radio Co. Vv. Bell, 623 P.2d 1039, 1045-48 (Okla. Ct. App. 
1980) (same). 


1! See, e.g., Connecticut Nat’l Bank vy. Kommit, 577 N.E.2d 639, 
640-41 (Mass. App. Ct. 1991) (enforcing choice of law clause in 
credit card agreement providing that law of bank’s home state 
governs transaction); Finance Am. Corp. v. Moyler, 494 A.2d 
926, 928-30 (D.C. 1985) (applying law of finance company’s home 
state in consumer loan case); OFS Equities, Inc. v. Conde, 421 
So, 2d 651, 653 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1982) (applying law of lender's 
home state under “validation principle”) ; Commercial Credit Plan, 
Inc. V. Parker, 263 S.E.2d 220, 222 (Ga. Ct. App. 1979) (applying 
law of finance company’s home state in consumer loan case) ; Walker 
v. Associates Fin. Servs. Corp., 588 $.W.2d 416, 417-18 (Tex. Ct. 
App. 1979) (same); cf. McBride v. Minstar, Inc., 662 A.2d 592, 
598-99 (N.J. Super. Ct.) (holding that Massachusetts law governs 
both contract and tort claims of New Jersey resident who pur- 
chased ski equipment from retailer in Massachusetts), aff'd sub 
nom. McBride Vv. Raichle Molitor, USA, 662 A.2d 567 (N.J. Super. 
Ct. App. Div. 1995). 


‘2 1f, for example, a court of Illinois determined, applying its 
conflict of laws rules, that Illinois law applies when a resident of 
Illinois borrows money from a bank in Ohio, courts in Ohio would 
of course be required to give full faith and credit to the final judg- 
ment of the Illinois court. U.S. Const. art. IV, §1. In a case in- 
volving the same issues but different parties, however, the courts 
of Ohio would be free to reach a different result. 


14 


The inevitable result would be forum shopping with its 
devastatingly harmful effects on the administration of 
justice. See, e.g., Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 US. 64, 
74-77 (1938) (condemning forum shopping). This struc- 
tural (and perpetual) uncertainty would impose unneces- 
sary costs on both banks and card holders and would 
further no one’s legitimate interests. 

Regardless of how the individual states were to resolve 
these difficult choice of law issues, the result of petitioner's 
construction of section 85 would be to balkanize the regu- 
lation of banks. The States would lose our historic pre- 
rogative to set the terms upon which the banks located 
within our borders may lend money. Instead, the interest 
charges on loans made by banks located within our bor- 
ders would be regulated in part by our States and in part 
by the law of each state in which the credit card holder 
resides or the credit card purchase is made. This is an 
intolerable situation that could only be justified by the 
clearest evidence of congressional intent. 


Il. UNDER SETTLED RULES OF STATUTORY CON- 
STRUCTION, THE JUDGMENT OF THE CALIFOR- 
NIA SUPREME COURT SHOULD BE AFFIRMED. 


This case presents a straightforward question of statu- 
tory construction. As explained above, section 85 oper- 
ates here in effect as a choice of law rule, not as a 
statute preempting substantive state law, and does not 
raise the states’ rights or federalism concerns normally 
associated with conventional preemption statutes. Ac- 
cordingly, this case should not be governed by the prin- 
ciples of statutory interpretation that apply in the context 
of preemption. See, e.g., Pet. Br. at 12-18. Rather, the 
standard and settled rules of statutory construction should 
apply. The judgment of the California Supreme Court 
should be affirmed because its interpretation of section 85 
is consistent with (1) the language of the statute as inter- 


15 


preted in the formally adopted rule of the OCC, the 
federal agency charged with administering the National 
Bank Act, (2) the policies and purposes of Congress in 
enacting the National Bank Act, and (3) economic reality 
and this Court’s prior rulings. 

A. Deference To The OCC’s Interpretation Of Section 


85 Is Appropriate And Essential To Ensuring The 
Safety And Soundness Of Banks Within Our 
Borders. 


Numerous nineteenth century statutes and cases define 
or use the word “interest” in a broad sense, to include all 
payments for the use of funds, including damages for 
the detention of funds past the maturity date of the loan. 
See Citibank Br. at 16-21, 25-30. Thus, the plain meaning 
of the statute in 1864 and today is a sufficient basis in 
itself to affirm the decision below. 


In arguing for a different interpretation of section 85, 
petitioner is unable to demonstrate that the language of 
the statute compels the conclusion that late charges must 
be excluded from its sweep. In her opening brief, peti- 
tioner concedes as much, acknowledging that “interest” 
in section 85 is not limited to the APR, but may also in- 
clude other fees in certain circumstances. See, e.g., Pet. 
Br. at 30-31 & n.14. At bottom, all that petitioner at- 
tempts to show is that the term “interest” in section 85, 
read in isolation, is potentially ambiguous. 


The proper resolution of this case, however, is the 
same whether the statutory language is deemed to be plain 
or ambiguous. That is because when a statute is ambig- 
uous, the first rule of federal statutory interpretation di- 
rects courts to determine whether the federal agency 
charged with administering the statute has issued an 
authoritative interpretation of the relevant language. As 
the Court has explained: 


When a court reviews an agency's construction of the 
Statute which it administers, it is confronted with 


16 


two questions. First, alway, is the question whether 
Congress has directly spoken to the precise question 
at issue. If the intent of Congress is clear, that is 
the end of the matter... . If, however, .. . the 


statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the 
specific issue, the question for the court is whether 


the agency’s answer is based on a permissible con- 

struction of the statute. 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Coun- 
cil, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984); see also, e.g., Na- 
tionsbank of North Carolina, N.A. Vv. Variable Annuity 
Life Ins. Co., 115 S. Ct. 810, 813 (1995) (“It is well 
settled that courts should give great weight to any reason- 
able construction of a regulatory statute adopted by the 
agency charged with the enforcement of that statute.”). 


The OCC is charged with administering the National 
Bank Act. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1, 26-27, 481; Nationsbank, 115 
S. Ct. at 813. The OCC’s interpretation of any ambiguity 
in the National Bank Act is therefore entitled to deference 
by the courts, and any reasonable interpretation of the 
Act by the OCC is conclusive of the issue. /d. This def- 
erence is based, in part, on the fact that Congress has 
delegated this policy-laden task to an administrative 
agency and, in part, on the recognition that administrative 
agencies develop a high level of expertise in their com- 
plex regulatory fields. See, e.g., Chevron, 467 U.S. at 
864-66; Cass R. Sunstein, Law and Administration After 
Chevron, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2071, 2086-90 (1990). It 
is neither institutionally appropriate nor wise policy for 
federal courts to interfere with the judgments made by 
the OCC, 


The OCC recently promulgated a final rule expressly 
interpreting the word “interest” in section 85. The OCC’s 


rule states: 


The term “interest” as used in 12 U.S.C. § 85 in- 


cludes any payment compensating a creditor or pros- 
pective creditor for an extension of credit, making 


17 


available of a line of credit, or any default or breach 
by a borrower of a condition upon which credit was 
extended. /t includes, among other things, . . . late 
a 


61 Fed. Reg. 4849, 4869 (Feb. 9, 1996) (emphasis 
added) (to be codified at 12 C.F.R. § 7.4001(a)). This 
rule is consistent with opinion letters issued by the OCC 
in 1980, 1988 and 1992," with statements issued by 
other federal banking agencies,"* and with the overwhelm- 
ing majority of lower court cases holding that the term 
“interest” in section 85 and in section 521 of the DIDA 
includes late fees and other charges incident to the exten- 
sion of credit.” 


As respondent ably demonstrates, the conditions for 
deference to the OCC are met in this case. Citibank Br. 


18 Letter of William P. Bowden, Jr., OCC Chief Counsel, 1992 
WL 136390 (OCC) (Feb. 4, 1992) ; OCC Interpretive Ltr. No. 452, 
[1988-89 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 85,676 
(Aug. 11, 1988); Letter from Richard V. Fitzgerald, Director, 
OCC Legal Advisory Services Division (Nov. 24, 1980). 


™ Letter of Harry Quillian, Acting General Counsel, FHLBB 
(June 27, 1986), attached to Letter of Karen Solomon, Deputy Chief 
Counsel, Office of Thrift Supervision (Sept. 29, 1994), in Current 
Developments, Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) {82,852 (Dec. 16, 
1994); Advisory Op. No. FDIC-92-47, [1992-93 Transfer Binder) 
Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 81,534 (July 8, 1992). 


 B.g., Cades vV. H & kh Block, Inc., 43 F.3d 869 (4th Cir. 1994) 
(flat $29 charge for tax refund anticipation loans), cert. denied, 
115 S. Ct. 2247 (1995); Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 
971 F.2d 818, 829 (1st Cir. 1992) (noting that courts construing 
section 85 “have had little trouble in construing the term ‘interest’ 
to encompass a variety of lender-imposed fees and financial require- 
ments which are independent of a numerical percentage rate’), 
cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1052 (1993); American Timber & Trading 
Co. Vv. First Nat'l Bank, 690 F.2d 781 (9th Cir. 1982) (charges in- 
curred under compensating balance requirements) ; Fisher v. First 
Nat'l Bank, 548 F.2d 255 (8th Cir. 1977) (credit card cash fees) ; 
Northway Lanes v. Hackley Union Nat'l Bank & Trust Co., 464 
F.2d 855 (6th Cir. 1972) (closing costs). 


18 


at 35-41. Accordingly, under the principles of Chev- 
ron and its progeny, the Court should defer to the author- 
itative interpretation of the National Bank Act promul- 
gated by the OCC. 


In addition, there are particularly compelling reasons 
here for according deference to the OCC’s interpretation of 
the National Bank Act. First, banking officials in our 
States are involved on a daily basis in the supervision, ex- 
amination, and regulation of state-chartered banks. State 
banking officials rely as a matter of course upon the of- 
ficial pronouncements of the OCC, the FDIC, and other 
federal bank regulatory agencies in interpreting the myriad 
federal statutes that apply to state banks. That ‘Teliance 
promotes certainty and efficiency in bank regulation, and 
accords proper respect to the role assigned by Congress to 
the expertise developed by the federal agencies in this 
field. 


Specifically in this case, bank regulators in our States 
relied upon the OCC’s interpretation of the National Bank 
Act to ensure that banks subject to our regulatory jurisdic- 
tion were in full compliance with applicable laws. If the 
OCC or FDIC had taken a different position regarding the 
meaning of section 85, our bank regulators would have 
reexamined the issue to ensure that the state-chartered 
banks located in our States were complying with the law. 


Reversing the OCC’s interpretation of the National 
Bank Act, however, would upset the settled and reason- 
able expectations regarding the meaning of section 85 in 
the industry and would undermine the certainty and ef- 
ficiency interests set forth above. If the OCC’s interpre- 
tation of section 85 were discarded, then the ability of 
state regulators to assume the validity of stated interpre- 
tations of federal banking statutes issued by federal bank- 
ing agencies would be severely diminished, if not elimi- 
nated altogether. 


Second, the banks within our borders also rely upon the 
statements of federal banking agencies in ensuring that 


- 19 


their practices are in accordance with the law. In re- 
liance upon the OCC’s interpretation of the National Bank 
Act, banks in our States have loaned literally hundreds 
of billions of dollars to consumers across the country. 
Given the amount of money at stake in “his case, accepting 
petitioner’s interpretation of the National Bank Act would 
have a seriously harmful effect on banks in our States. 
Individual banks would suddenly and unexpectedly be 
exposed to significant damage claims. Collectively these 
claims could readily exceed billions of dollars. 


Moreover, the harm would not be limited to the bank- 
ing industry. Rather, the potentially massive liability of 
banks could have an adverse effect on the entire economy 
of most, if not all, of the States. The ultimate impact 
could be loss of jobs, loss of tax revenues, and an overall 
tightening of credit. As a result, businesses, consumers, 
and all residents in this nation would suffer. 


In interpreting section 85, great weight should be ac- 
corded to justifiable reliance interests. The substantial 
history of reliance, and the potential widespread harm 
that would result from undermining the reliance interests, 
counsel strongly against the adoption of a new, unsup- 
ported interpretation of the National Bank Act. See, e.g., 
Zenith Radio Corp. v. United States, 437 U.S. 443, 457- 
58 (1978) (“In light of these substantial reliance in- 
terests, the longstanding administrative construction of 
the statute should ‘not be disturbed except for cogent 
reasons.’”); Train v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Inc., 421 U.S. 60, 87 (1975) (deferring to EPA’s interpre- 
tation of Clean Air Act in part because “there has undoubt- 
edly been reliance upon [the EPA’s] interpretation by 
the States and other parties affected by the Act”); 2B 
Norman J. Singer, Sutherland on Statutes and Statutory 
Construction § 49.07, at 62 (Sth ed. 1992) (one reason 
for sustaining a long-standing statutory interpretation “is 
the fact that the public has relied on the interpretation”). 


20 


B. The State Court’s Construction Of Section 85 Fur- 
thers Congress’ Purposes In Enacting The National 
Bank Aet. 


Interstate lending was a well-established practice in this 
country long before the National Bank Act was adopted. 
Marquette Nat'l Bank, 439 U.S. at 317. Through the 
National Bank Act, “Congress intended to facilitate ...a 
‘national banking system,’” id. at 314-15, to create “a 
banking system of great regional interdependence,” id. 
at 316, and to promote interstate lending generally, id. 
at 314-18. The California Supreme Court's construction 
of the National Bank Act furthers the Act’s manifest 


purposes. 


First, the state court’s ruling provides certainty and 
predictability to interstate lending. Banks may lend money 
to borrowers in other states knowing with certainty that 
only the law of the bank’s home state, not the law of any 
other state, will govern the transaction. 


Acceptin titioner’s interpretation of the National 
Re om A nearer would, as already demonstrated 
(supra, pp. 12-14), have precisely the opposite effect, caus- 
ing substantial uncertainty. In the face of that uncer- 
tainty, banks would be likely to adopt conservative lend- 
ing practices that would increase the cost of credit and 
would restrict access to credit. Moreover, banks that con- 
tinued to make interstate loans and to issue credit cards 
to out-of-state customers would risk incurring enormous 
liability in class actions, such as this one, if they were to 
predict wrongly which state’s law applied to certain loan 
charges. See William C. Dunkelberg, Litigation Concern- 
ing Late Charges is Major Threat to Credit Card Busi- 
ness, Banking Pol’y Rep. (Prentice Hall), Apr. 6, 1992, 
at 1, 15-16. No prudent lender will take that risk. 


Second, the California Supreme Court’s construction of 
the National Bank Act promotes efficiency and reduces 
costs in interstate lending. Under the state court’s ruling, 
banks need to monitor statutory, regulatory, and judicial 


21 


developments in banking law in only one state—the 
bank’s home state. The cost of administering interstate 
loans and credit card accounts remains low, because all 
loans and accounts are governed by one set of laws. 


Petitioner’s interpretation of the statute, however, would 
impose substantial administrative burdens on banks. To 
engage in interstate lending, banks would be required to 
design and maintain a system that would incorporete all 
Statutory, regulatory, and judicial law relating to loan 
charges in all 50 states—and to monitor the statutory, 
regulatory, and judicial changes in the law in each state 
—in order to ensure that each borrower was being as- 
sessed the correct charges for each loan. See William F. 
Baxter, Section 85 of the National Bank Act and Con- 
sumer Welfare, 1995 Utah L. Rev. 1009, 1024 
(1995). Requiring banks to comply with myriad, conflict- 
ing laws in each jurisdiction where their credit card hold- 
ers and other borrowers reside would undermine certainty 
and predictability in interstate lending, and could, as this 
Court has stated, “throw into confusion the complex sys- 
tem of modern interstate banking.” Marquette Nat'l Bank, 
439 U.S. at 312. At the very least, accepting petitioner’s 
argument would cause an increase in the cost of inter- 
state lending and a reduction in the amount of interstate 


lending—precisely the opposite of what Congress intended 
when it adopted the Act. 


C. The California Supreme Court’s Construction Of 
Section 85 Is Consistent With The Economics Of 
Credit Pricing And Thus Constitutes A Common 
Sense Approach To Applying The Statute. 


Banks typically charge a number of closely related fees 
for credit cards. The most prominent of these fees is the 
APR. Other fees include the late charges at issue in this 
case, as well as annual fees, over-the-limit fees, and fees 
for returned checks used to pay off a credit card balance. 
All of these fees, in the aggregate, constitute the “price” 
of the credit card to the consumer. 


22 


The application of section 85 to one of these fees—the 
APR—was settled by this Court in Marquette National 
Bank. As noted above, the Court held that section 85 
allows a national bank to charge the APR permitted by 
the law of its home state, even if that APR violates the 
law of the borrower’s home state. 439 U.S. at 313. 


The instant case involves late fees, and not the APR. 
But late fees and APR are simply two components of 
the price of credit to the card holder. There is no basis 
in logic or economics to treat the loan differently, or to 
apply a different choice of law rule, simply because a late 
fee, rather than the APR, is at issue. Indeed, one court 
has aptly stated that the definition of “interest” in section 
85 should be governed by “{w]hat affects the borrower's 
pocketbook . . . , not semantics.” First Nat'l Bank v. 
Nowlin, 509 F.2d 872, 878 (8th Cir. 1975). 


Moreover, as noted above, Congress’ intent in enacting 
the National Bank Act was to promote interstate banking 
while at the same time preserving the states’ historic pre- 
rogatives with regard to bank regulation. The intent that 
petitioner imputes to Congress, however, is wholly im- 
plausible. According to petitioner, Congress actually in- 
tended in 1864 to preserve the states’ traditional role in 
controlling certain loan charges, but at the same time in- 
tended to deprive the states of that role with regard to 
other, closely related loan charges.”* There is no evidence 
and no reason to assume that Congress intended to create 
such an illogical and unworkable regulatory scheme. 


16 As respondent shows, in the context of intrastate loans by a 
national bank, the term “interest” must include late charges. 
Because there is no reason to believe that the term should have a 
different meaning for interstate loans, “interest’”’ must also include 
late charges on interstate loans. Citibank Br. at 35. 


23 


III. SECTION 8 PROMOTES BOTH THE INTERESTS 
OF CONSUMERS AND THE ABILITY OF EACH 
STATE TO PROTECT ITS RESIDENTS AS IT SEES 
FIT. 


Consumers in our States and across the country benefit 
from broad access to credit, low credit card costs, and 
the ability to choose from the broadest possible range of 
competing credit cards, offering the broadest possible 
range of packages of rates and charges, in the market- 
place. The Truth In Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1601 
et seq., state disclosure laws, and state anti-fraud protec- 
tions ensure that credit card issuers must disclose all ma- 
terial terms so that consumers are able to make informed 
choices among competing credit card products. Any state 
that is dissatisfied with existing protections can enhance 
its own disclosure and anti-fraud laws. It is no solution 
to make a substantive shambles of the interstate banking 
system, which has served the nation well for decades. 


With the broadest possible range of choices in the mar- 
ket and the extensive disclosures required by the Truth 
In Lending Act, consumers are able to obtain credit cards 
that fit their individual usage and payment preferences. 
For example, consumers who pay the outstanding balance 
in full each month are likely to choose a credit card that 
does not charge an annual fee and that offers perquisites 
such as airline frequent flier miles or no-cost insurance 
on rental cars, even if the card also charges a relatively 
high APR and imposes late fees. In contrast, consumers 
who plan to use a card for easy access to unsecured credit 
are likely to choose a card that offers a low APR and no 
late charges, even if the card also charges an annual fee 
and offers no “perks.” See David S. Evans & Richard 
L. Schmalensee, The Economics of the Payment Card 
Industry 51, 58-60 (1993); Christopher C. DeMuth, The 
Case Against Credit Card Interest Regulation, 3 Yale 
J. on Reg. 201, 236, 238-39 (1986). 


The California Supreme Court’s construction of section 
85 promotes broad competition in the interstate credit 


. a to 
sumers across the country with the certainty that the 


but also late charges. As a result, consumers in 
will be able to choose from a broad array of competing 
credit cards, some of which will be offered by banks 
states which restrict some loan charges and others of 
which will be offered by banks in states with no such 
restrictions. 


For example, Minnesota law severely limits the ability 
of banks to charge late fees, Minn. Stat. § 48.185(4), but 
banks in Ohio are permitted to offer cards that do charge 
late fees, Ohio Rev. Code § 1107.262(A). When com- 
peting for customers against Minnesota card issuers— 
whether in Ohio, Minnesota, or somewhere else—the 
Ohio banks must offer other, more favorable terms (for 
example, a low APR or no annual fee) in order to com- 
pete with cards from the Minnesota banks that do not 
charge late fees. Thus, consumers in every state will be 
able to choose between (1) cards from banks in Minne- 
sota, which do not assess late charges and (2) cards 
from banks in Ohio, which do assess late charges but in 
return offer a low APR or no annual fee. Under petition- 
er’s construction of section 85, in contrast, consumers 
would have fewer choices and would therefore be worse 
off. See Baxter, at 1020-21; DeMuth, at 231, 239." 


By permitting each state to set its own policy concern- 
ing credit card fees and charges that governs its home 


17 Contrary to the suggestion of one of petitioner’s amici, nothing 
in the California Supreme Court's interpretation of section 85 
would give out-of-state national banks a competitive advantage 
over local banks, even if by law they are permitted to charge more 
than local banks. In the example above, if the Ohio bank charges 
late fees without offering a low APR or no annual fee to its Min- 
nesota customers, it will be at a competitive disadvantage compared 
to Minnesota banks. Consumers in Minnesota will choose to obtain 
credit cards from Minnesota banks, which will be offering a lower 
overall price for credit cards. 


25 


banks’ practices, the California Supreme Court's interpre- 
tation of section 85 benefits consumers in our States and 
throughout the country. It permits banks to offer con- 
sumers a wide variety of credit card products in an in- 
dustry that is characterized by intense competition. Evans 
& Schmalensee, at 68-71; Baxter, at 1013-19; DeMuth, 
at 222-26. Armed with a variety of choices offered by 
banks and other credit card issuers, and with full disclo- 
sure of credit terms, including late fees, mandated by 
federal law, consumers will continue to have the credit 
card product that best suits their particular needs. 


In an attempt to argue that the California Supreme 
Court’s interpretation of section 85 will harm consumers, 
petitioner and her amici make the broad argument that 
late charges are inherently unjust or unfair. But this 
argument cannot dictate the proper construction of sec- 
tion 85."° Whether banks should be allowed to impose 
late charges is a question of policy, better suited for Con- 
gress and the state legislatures than for this Court. Some 
States choose to prohibit late fees. Other states choose 
to permit them. Either choice is rational and within the 
traditional prerogative of the states to regulate the lending 
practices of banks located within their borders.” 


"8 Moreover, petitioner and her amici are simply wrong that late 
fees are flatly unjust. States that permit late fees have recognized 
that there is no social utility in late payments, that late payments 
impose substantial costs on lenders, and that it is therefore “just” 
to permit card issuers to require the defaulting cardholders to pay 
for the consequences of their actions. If credit card issuers were 
not permitted to charge late fees, then those costs would have to be 
borne by all card holders—in the form of higher APR’s, higher 
annual fees, or fewer perks. See Dunkelberg, at 16. Prohibiting 
late fees thus has the unfortunate effect of requiring the vast 
majority of cardholders who make their monthly payments on time 
each month to subsidize the few who pay late. Jd.; Raxter, at 1025. 
Permitting banks to charge late fees, in contrast, compensates the 
banks for the costs of late payments (including increased credit 
risk) and deters borrowers from making late payments. 


Since 1990, the Legislatures of at least 16 states (including 
several states that have joined the amicus brief in support of peti- 


26 

Petitioner’s amici also claim that, under the California 
Supreme Court's construction of section 85, “consumers 
subjected to unfair or illegal credit and collection prac- 
tices by an out-of-state national bank will have no re- 
course to their state consumer protection authorities.” 
Amici Brief of Mass., et al., at 9. But that is not what 
section 85, or this case, is about. Consumer protection 
laws (such as the Truth In Lending Act) protect con- 
sumers from fraud and deception. Nothing in section 85 
interferes in any way with the ability of the Attorneys 
General and the various consumer protection agencies of 
our States from taking strong and immediate action 
against any card issuer that engages in fraudulent or de- 
ceptive credit or collection practices. 

Moreover, under the California Supreme Court’s con- 
struction of section 85, residents of a state are guaranteed 


titioner) have recognized that late charges are not inimical to 
consumer interests, and have passed new laws either authorizing 
credit card late charges or increasing the amount of the late fees 
that may be assessed. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 44-1205.C.4 (allowing 
late charge in any amount agreed to with borrower) ; Cal. Fin. Code 
§ 4001(a)(1)(C) (allowing late charge up to $15) ; Colo. Rev. Stat. 
§ 5-8-2038 (allowing late charge up to $15); Ind. Code § 24-4.5-3- 
203.5(4), as amended by rule, 3 Consumer Cred. Guide (CCH) Ind. 
6531 (allowing late charge up to $14.50) ; Iowa Code § 537.2502.8 
(allowing late charge of $10); Kan. Stat. Ann. § 16a-2-502(2) (al- 
lowing late charge up to $10) ; Me. Rev. Stat. tit. 9-A, § 2-501(1) (G) 
(allowing late charge of lesser of $10 or 5 percent of unpaid 
balance); Mass. Gen. L. ch. 140, §114B (allowing late charge of 
lesser of $10 or 10 percent of unpaid balance); N.J. Stat. Ann. 
§ 17:16C-42(a) (allowing late charge up to $10); N.Y. Banking 
Law § 108(5)(e); N.Y. Pers. Prop. Law §413(5)(b) (allowing 
late charge in any amount agreed to with borrower); Okla. Stat. 
tit. 14A, § 3-203(5), as modified by rule, 4 Consumer Cred, Guide 
(CCH) Okla. 16901 (allowing late charge up to $15); Pa. Stat. 
Ann. tit. 7, §322(d) (v) (allowing late charge of greater of $20 or 
10 percent of unpaid balance); S.C. Code §§ 37-3-203, 37-1-109 
(allowing late charge of lesser of $12 or 5 percent of unpaid bal- 
ance) ; Utah Code § 70C-2-102(1) (allowing late charge of greater of 
$20 or 5 percent of unpaid balance) ; Va. Code Ann. § 6.1-330,78.A.1 
(allowing late charge in any amount agreed to with borrower) ; 
Wis. Stat. § 422.202(2m) (a) (allowing late charge up to $10). 


F 
é 
| 
: 
j 


dent’s home state. See, e.g., McBride v. Minstar, Inc., 
662 A.2d 592, 598-99 (N.J. Super. Ct.) (holding under 
New Jersey’s choice of law rules that the claims of a 
New Jersey resident who purchased allegedly defective ski 
equipment from a retailer in Massachusetts are governed 
by Massachusetts law) aff'd sub nom. McBride v. Raichle 
Molitor, USA, 662 A.2d 567 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. 
Div. 1995). Likewise, a state has little interest in reg- 
ulating the terms of a transaction when its resident has 
made the choice to travel to another state to obtain a 
loan from a bank there, leaving behind the interest rate 
ceilings of the resident’s home state. See, e.g., Commer- 
cial Credit Plan, Inc., v. Parker, 263 S.E.2d 220, 222 
(Ga. Ct. App. 1979) (applying South Carolina law to 
loan from South Carolina finance company to Georgia 
borrower, under terms that were prohibited by Georgia 
law, because borrower had travelled to South Carolina to 
obtain the loan and “the public policy of [Georgia] . . . 
does not extend to the enforcement of valid contracts 
made in other states”); Walker v. Associates Fin. Servs. 
Corp., 588 S.W.2d 416, 417-18 (Tex. Ct. App. 1979) 
(applying Indiana law to loan obtained by Texas resi- 
dent by mail from Indiana finance company).” 


In addition, as this Court recognized in Marquette National 
Bank some “impairment” of the ability of the states to enforce laws 
limiting loan charges “has always been implicit in the structure of 
the National Bank Act, since citizens of one State were free to visit 


28 


Another amicus contends that consumers, when choos- 
ing from among various credit card options, do not con- 
sider components of the price other than APR. This con- 
tention defies both common sense and elementary eco- 
nomic theory. Moreover, it is contrary to the actual ex- 
perience of the credit card industry. In the years after 
the Court’s decision in Marquette National Bank, credit 
cards issued by banks in heavily regulated states have 
been in direct competition with credit cards issued by 
banks in less regulated or deregulated states. DeMuth, 
at 231. Although banks in regulated states generally offer 
a lower APR than banks in deregulated states, the num- 
ber of credit cards and amount of credit extended by 
banks in deregulated states has grown at a much faster 
rate than that of banks in regulated states. /d. at 232- 
36. The explanation is not that consumers prefer to pay 
a higher APR; rather, the experience of the credit card 
industry demonstrates that consumers are willing to pay 
a higher APR in order to obtain credit cards that are of 
greater value to the consumers because the cards offer 
better service, additional features or “perks,” and broader 
access to credit. Id. at 236-37. 


At bottom, then, petitioner and her amici are not seek- 
ing to give effect to the intent of Congress, or to protect 
the historic prerogatives of the states, or even to promote 
consumer welfare. Rather, petitioner and her amici seek 
the assistance of this Court in supporting a category of 
products—credit cards offered by banks in highly regu- 
lated states—that is losing the battle of competition in 
the credit card market. That case should be presented 
to Congress, not this Court. 


The ultimate effect of accepting petitioner’s interpreta- 
tion of section 85 is clear. The cost of credit for con- 


a neighboring State to receive credit.” 439 U.S. at 318. As was 
true in Marquette National Bank, the plea of petitioner here to 
“alter” section 85 in order to enable the states to apply their lending 
regulations to interstate Joans is “an issue of legislative policy” 
that “is better addressed to the wisdom of Congress than to the 
judgment of this Court.” Jd. at 319. 


wt 239-41 & n.102. To be sure, Congress would have the 
power to adopt such a “silly” law, but it did not do so 
in section 85. Cf. TVA vy. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 194- 
95 (1978). 


At the end of the day, section 85 (and its analog, 
section 521 of the DIDA), as interpreted by the California 
Supreme Court, ensures that states retain the ability to 
set the terms upon which banks located within our borders 
may lend money. In contrast, petitioner’s interpretation of 
section 85 interferes with this historic right and would 
permit other states to govern the lending activities of banks 
within our borders. Our States urge this Court to reject 
this intrusion into our legitimate prerogatives. 


30 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the Court should affirm the 
judgment of the California Supreme Court. 


CARTER G. PHILLIPS 
SIDLEY & AUSTIN 

1722 Eye Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 736-8000 


JAMES M. HARRIS 
STEVEN A. ELLIS 

SIDLEY & AUSTIN 

555 West Fifth Street 
Los Angeles, CA 90013 
(213) 896-6000 

Counsel for Amici Curiae 


March 29, 1996 


Respectfully submitted, 


Betty D. MONTGOMERY 

Ohio Attorney General 
JEFFREY S. SUTTON * 

State Solicitor 
DIANE R. RICHARDS 

Chief, Chief Counsel Section 
State Office Tower 
30 East Broad Street 
Columbus, OH 43215-3428 
(614) 466-8980 


* Counsel of Record 


