iis ae : bik ». ey f % ; , ; 7) 4 i iki os tha’ ee — 
. ‘ 7 - 4 . 


eee a ity 


hs 


ep iW 


iam id 
ed 7 te 


i ‘ Cirisank (SoutH Dakota), N.A. 
a f. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
California Supreme Court 


, FOO ee 
+ 
i 
~~ 
* 


d ~ ~s 
— 
< » 


fe 
? 


- ~ 


BRIEF roe AMICI CURIAE AFFINITY 
GROUP MARKETING AND CREDIT 

‘" UNION NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, INC. 
:! IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


TaEopore W. KHEEL 
BATTLE Fow.zr, LLP 
‘ . 7% East 55th Street 
| New York, NY 10017 
My ; (212) 866-7000 
wea Counsel for Amici Curiae 
i | Credit Union National 
“ei B's od Yah Association, Inc. 


Nols iy uy 


yy. ae, 


ce a 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ..u..............:.c-0:secssssssssssseserees 
I 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT. .0000........ccccccocmeceesceeenees is 
ON ET TT eee 

I. “INTEREST” INCLUDES THE ENTIRE 


Il. 


ITI. 


PACKAGE OF LENDING CHARGES 
AGREED TO BY LENDERS AND BOR- 


LATE CHARGES ARE A FAIR AND EFFI- 
CIENT WAY TO ALLOCATE THE COSTS 
OF DELINQUENCY TO CARDHOLDERS 
Cf! gf ee ee eee 


IT IS IMPORTANT THAT FINANCIAL IN- 
STITUTIONS BE ALLOWED TO CONTRACT 
FOR FEES ON A UNIFORM BASIS NA- 


FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS HAVE JUSTI- 
FIABLY RELIED ON THE LONGSTANDING 
OPINIONS OF THEIR REGULATORS ............. 


IIT csriuisiniicnitnanncanstgmemmmentgearammeniaebeennass 


11 
13 


ii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES Page 


Brown v. Hiatts, 82 U.S. (15 Wall.) 177 (1878)... 4,6 
Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachusetts, 971 F.2d 
818 (1st Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 606 U.S. 1062 


)) | nine ne ETRE Pee 3 
Harper v. Virginia Department of Taxation, 118 

S. Ct. 2510 (1998) .......... ateceoenaiiianinnsidiianeaiie 18 
Marquette National Bank v. First of Omaha Serv- 

ice Corp., 489 U.S. 209 (1978) ...................... 5, 6,9, 11 


Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U.S. 282 (1898).. 6 
Zenith Radio Corp. v. United States, 437 U.S. 448 


(RODD anecneersesxesxrevecomsecinsiaiiscataassaeeae 18 
STATUTES 
Lh) re passim 
TT Tey Po 7 PRN 3 
TET VY To? MEETS 3 
RULES & REGULATIONS 
61 Fed. Reg. 4849 (1996) .........ccccccscccsssnensrssvsveeesnneen 12 


BOOKS, TREATISES & ARTICLES 


William F. Baxter, The Economic Benefits of Fed- 
eral Preemption and Deregulation of the Credit 
Card Industry, 1995 Utah L. Rev. 1009 (forth- 
| nnn FT 8 


William C. Dunkelberg, Litigation Concerning Late 
Charges Is Major Threat To Credit Card Busi- 


ness, Banking Pol’y Rep., Apr. 6, 1992, at 1........ 7 
Robert E. Litan, The Economics of Credit Cards 
CRBBB) cacenesinseniescamnissinticseseicssmeasiadsaaee 8 


INTERPRETIVE LETTERS 


Letter from L.A. Jennings, Deputy Comptroller of 
the Currency (Feb. 24, 1955) -....2.....c0..cceccccneee 12 
Letter from Douglas H. Jones, FDIC Deputy 
General Counsel (July 8, 1992), reprinted in 
[1992-1998 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. 
Rep. (CCH) { 81,584 8,12 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Letter from Douglas H. Jones, FDIC Deputy 
General Counsel (July 12, 1993), reprinted in 
[1993-1994 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. 
I 

Letter from Harry W. Quillian, FHLBB Acting 
General Counsel (June 27, 1986), reprinted in 
[1994-1995 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. 
EN 

Letter from Richard S. Schulman, NCUA Acting 
Associate General Counsel (Apr. 11, 1994), 
reprinted in 62 Banking Rep. (BNA) 766 (Apr. 
EEE 

Letter from Karen Solomon, OTS Deputy Chief 
Counsel (Sept. 29, 1994), reprinted in [1994- 
1995 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. 
8 

Letter from Julie L. Williams, OCC Chief Counsel 
(Feb. 17, 1995), reprinted in [1994-1995 Trans- 
fer Binder} Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) 
CT 


Page 


12 


3, 12 


12 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-860 


BARBARA SMILEY, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


CiT1BANK (SouTH Dakota), N.A., 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
California Supreme Court 


BRIEF FOR AMICI CURIAE AFFINITY 
GROUP MARKETING AND CREDIT 
UNION NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, INC. 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


« 


INTEREST OF AMICI' 


Affinity Group Marketing (“AGM”) is a closely-held 
corporation in the business of developing and marketing 
affinity credit card programs. AGM is the developer of 
an affinity card program for the American Federation of 
Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (“AFL-CIO”), 

1 Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 37.3, copies of letters from 


Counsel for Petitioner and Counsel for Respondent consenting to 
the filing of this brief have been filed separately. 


2 


generally referred to as the Union MasterCard Program. 
The Union MasterCard is a joint program of 
AGM, The Bank of New York (Delaware), and Union 
Privilege, AFL-CIO (a subsidiary of the AFL-CIO that 
provides benefit programs for members of AFL-CIO af- 
filiated labor unions). 


The credit cards issued under the Union MasterCard 
Program are available to members of AFL-CIO affiliated 
labor unions and their families. Approximately 3,300,000 
union members and their families throughout the nation 
have credit cards issued under this program, with more 
than $3.5 billion in currently outstanding balances. The 
Union MasterCard is offered on terms that are specially 
designed and negotiated for members of AFL-CIO affili- 
ated labor unions. For example, the variable finance 
charge rate is low, and members are allowed to skip a 
specified number of monthly payments during a union- 
sanctioned strike and/or for certain fixed months during 
the year. The Union MasterCard terms include a late 
charge of $15. 


Credit Union National Association, Inc. (“CUNA”) is 
the principal national trade association for credit unions 
in the United States. It consists of 51 credit union 
leagues covering the fifty states and the District of Colum- 
bia. About 90 percent of the approximately 12,350 
federal and state-chartered credit unions in the United 
States are members of these CUNA leagues. CUNA rep- 
resents the interests of these credit unions in legislative 
and regulatory matters. CUNA and its affiliates also pro- 
vide a wide range of support services to credit unions, 
including credit card processing and support for approxi- 
mately 2,300 credit unions with almost five million credit 
cardholders. Credit unions affiliated with CUNA are 
owned by their member-customers, whose elected repre- 
sentatives set the credit unions’ rates of charge for credit 
cards and other services. 


3 


Amici have a substantial interest in the issue to be 
decided in this case. Union MasterCard’s credit card 
terms include late which are authorized under 


Amici believe that Petitioner, who has admittedly paid 
late in violation of her credit card agreement, and who 
seeks to represent the small minority of other credit card- 
holders who pay late, does not accurately reflect the 
interests of consumers generally. Amici, who represent 
large and diverse membership groups, believe that their 
policies reflect a fair view of the interests of the vast 
majority of credit cardholders. They believe that lenders 
whose home state laws permit late charges should con- 
tinue to be able to offer cardholders the choice of credit 
cards with low finance charges coupled with late fees, 


thereby allocating costs of delinquency more appropriately 
to those borrowers whose conduct imposes higher costs 


on the system. Amici believe that the applicable federal 


2 The Bank of New York's charges are governed by 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1831d, which was modeled on, and is nearly identical to, 12 U.S.C. 
§ 85 (“Section 85"). See, e.4., Greenwood Trust Co. v. Massachu- 
setts, 971 F.2d 818, 826-27 (ist Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 
1052 (1993): Letter from Douglas H. Jones, FDIC Deputy Gen- 
eral Counsel (July 12, 1993), reprinted in [1993-1994 Transfer 
Binder| Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) * 81,635 (Opinion No. 93- 
27); Letter from Douglas H. Jones, FDIC Deputy Genera! Coun- 
sel (July 8, 1992), reprinted in [1992-1998 Transfer Binder! Fed. 
Banking L. Rep. (CCH) © 81,534 (Opinion No. 92-47). 

* The loan charges of state-chartered, federally-insured credit 
unions, which constitute about half of CUNA'’s members, are gov- 
erned by 12 U.S.C. § 1785(g¢), which is also nearly identical to 12 
U.S.C. § 85. Letter from Richard S. Schulman, NCUA Acting 
Associate General Counsel (Apr. 11, 1994), reprinted in 62 Bank- 
ing Rep. (BNA) 766 (Apr. 25, 1994). 


4 


laws do not allow such lenders to be subjected to regula- 
tory limits on such charges imposed by other states where 
borrowers may live or use their cards. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Card issuers such as Amici Issuers* should be free to 
offer their cardholders or members credit cards with a 
package of pricing terms that minimizes the costs to 
those borrowers who meet their payment obligations on 
time. They should be free to impose the additional 
costs associated with delinquencies on those customers 
responsible for the costs associated with late payment, 
especially since the erratic payment histories of those 
cardholders who fail to meet agreed-upon payment dead- 
lines indicate that they pose a greater risk of nonpayment. 
As long as the laws of their home states permit such 
pricing packages, Amici Issuers should not be forced to 
modify their otherwise uniform, nationwide credit plans 
to accommodate the varying laws of states where their 
borrowers live or shop. 


The term “interest” in the applicable federal laws en- 
compasses all the terms of credit card pricing packages 
that constitute “compensation allowed by law, or fixed 
by the parties, for the use or forbearance of money, or 
as damages for its detention.” Brown v. Hiatts, 82 U.S. 
(15 Wall.) 177, 185 (1873). Late payment fees meet 
this definition, and should be treated as “interest” under 
federal law, thus permitting lenders like Amici Issuers in 
states whose laws allow such charges to impose them in 
order to reduce the cost of credit to borrowers who pay 
on time. 


An artificially narrow interpretation of “interest” that 
excluded late charges would undermine the national lend- 


* As noted above, AGM is associated with the Union MasterCard 
Program, which The Bank of New York issues from Delaware. 
CUNA-affiliated credit unions issue credit cards from all fifty 
states. For purposes of simplicity, we refer herein to the issuers 
of all of these various credit card programs as “Amici Issuers.” 


5 


ing market that Congress sought to foster when it en- 
acted 12 U.S.C. §85. See Marquette Nat'l Bank v. 
First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978). 
For the national financial market to prosper, it is 
crucial to financial institutions like Amici Issuers that 
the “exportation” principle described by the Court in 
Marquette apply to all lending charges, not just the 
periodic percentage rate. The Union MasterCard Pro- 
gram and many CUNA.-affiliated credit unions have estab- 
lished credit card programs specifically designed to pro- 
vide members with uniform, non-discriminatory terms 
nationwide. Many of the smaller institutions, which have 
credit card programs serving people spread over a large 
number of states, could not continue to operate if they 
had to conform their charges to the requirements of every 
state. 


In establishing their card programs and pricing pack- 
ages, Amici Issuers have relied on the guidance of their 
regulators, who have advised the industry for years that 
the term “interest” in the statutes they administer in- 
cludes late charges and other similar elements of credit 
card pricing packages. This administrative guidance, and 
reliance on it, is entitled to substantial weight in inter- 
preting the banking statutes. 


ARGUMENT 


I. “INTEREST” INCLUDES THE ENTIRE PACKAGE 
OF LENDING CHARGES AGREED TO BY LEND- 
ERS AND BORROWERS. 


Like Citibank, AGM’s Union MasterCard Program and 
CUNA-affiliated credit unions collect different kinds of 
charges under their credit card programs that, together, 
form a package that compensates them for the use, for- 
bearance, or detention of their money. For example, 
AGM’s Union MasterCard Program is able to offer card- 
holders a low periodic finance charge and the right to 
defer payments under certain circumstances, in part 
because it recoups costs associated with delinquency 


6 


through a late charge levied on cardholders who do not 
make payments on the dates when they are required. 
The various credit union affiliates of CUNA offer a 
variety of lending packages similarly tailored to their 
particular needs and those of their members, many includ- 
ing late fees. In Marquette, this Court recognized the 
existence of these packages and the tradeoffs they involve 
for both the lender and the borrower. 439 U.S. at 302- 
03. 


The late charges in these packages are not, of course, 
designed to collect from each delinquent borrower the 
precise share of cost he or she imposes on the system; 
that would be wholly impractical. But they are designed 
to reflect these costs in packages that will be attractive 
to the members of these groups. 


There is no reason to distinguish, for purposes of regu- 
latory jurisdiction, among the lending charges in these 
packages, with the consequence that some of the lending 
charges are governed by one set of laws (federal and 
the financial institution’s home state) and others are 
governed by various other sets of laws (including all the 
states in which borrowers reside or shop). All of the 
charges in these packages constitute “interest” as that 
term is generally understood in the law. Indeed, the classic 
definition of “interest,” expressed by this Court more than 
a century ago, is all “compensation allowed by law, or 
fixed by the parties, for the use or forbearance of money, 
or as damages for its detention.” ° 


Moreover, aS an economic matter, there is no reason 
to distinguish among various loan charges, which are dif- 
ferent parts of the total compensation the lender receives 


‘Brown v. Hiatts, 82 U.S. (15 Wall.) 177, 185 (1873); see also 
Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U.S. 282, 321 (1898) (“Interest 
accrues either by agreement of the debtor to allow it for the use 
of money, or, in the nature of damages, by reason of the failure 
of the debtor to pay the principal when due.”). 


7 


for making loans. If financial institutions are unable to 
recover their costs and earn a profit through certain kinds 
of charges, they must increase other charges in order to 
achieve the same level of compensation. The same body 
of law should govern all of these mechanisms by which 
financial institutions are compensated for their loans, in- 
cluding late charges. 


Il. LATE CHARGES ARE A FAIR AND EFFICIENT 
WAY TO ALLOCATE THE COSTS OF DELIN- 
QUENCY TO CARDHOLDERS WHO PAY LATE. 


The late charges at issue here are appropriate ways 
to allocate certain costs of credit to those customers who 
impose the costs on the card system. Petitioner and other 
members of the purported class failed to make minimum 
payments by the days specified in contractual agreements 
they entered into. Although Petitioner and her lawyers 
paint themselves as representatives of all cardholders and 
argue that late charges are contrary to the interests of all 
of them, this is not correct. As one distinguished econo- 
mist has put it: 


Prohibitions on late charges fail to protect con- 
sumers. Instead, they “protect” people who pay 
late by making such behavior costless. Indeed, more 
people will pay late if there is no cost to them 
personally. However, there is a cost associated with 
late payments, and this is borne by the credit card 
users who honor their agreements. What these pro- 
hibitions do, then, is to subsidize those who pay late 
at the expense of those who pay on time. ... That 
is not a desirable outcome if “the greater good” is 
what we hope to achieve. 

William C. Dunkelberg, Litigation Concerning Late 
Charges Is Major Threat To Credit Card Business, Bank- 
ing Pol'y Rep., Apr. 6, 1992, at 1, 16 (available on 
LEXIS). 


Failures to make payments by their agreed due dates 
impose several different ccsts on the lender. First, the 


delinquency lengthens the loan, and longer-term money 
generally costs more than short-term money. Robert E. 
Litan, The Economics of Credit Cards 7 (1993). Second, 
delinquency imposes increased costs of loan administra- 
tion and tracking. /d. Third, the lender has costs for 
collection machinery. Finally, delinquent borrowers are 
more likely to become defaulting borrowers: 


When a customer is late in making his or her 
required minimum payment, that action is a signal to 
the issuer that the customer is much more likely to 
default on the entire balance than customers who 
pay on time. . . . [DJata show that the chargeoff 
rate of customers who at one point have been assessed 
a late fee has been between four to six times higher 
than the credit losses on all accounts generally. 


Id. (emphasis omitted); accord William F. Baxter, The 
Economic Benefits of Federal Preemption and Deregula- 
tion of the Credit Card Industry, 1995 Utah L. Rev. 1009, 
1025 (forthcoming). To compensate for these increased 
risks and costs, a financial institution must either charge 
late fees of some sort or raise some other charge, such as 
the monthly finance charge on all balances. The vast ma- 
jority of Amici Issuers’ cardholders (for example, 97.62% 
in the Union MasterCard Program) either do not incur 
late charges end similar charges or do so only rarely, and 
it is unfair that they should pay higher monthly finance 
charges in order to subsidize those members whose pay- 
ment patterns make them subject to late charges. See 
Robert E. Litan, supra, at 8 (“It is also fair and efficient 
to charge a fee to cover the increased risk of nonpayment. 
To do otherwise—that is, to spread the costs of collecting 
on their late accounts among all card users—would be 
to penalize the timely-paying customers.” ). 


It is also appropriate and practical to state late 
charges as flat amounts rather than percentages. Flat 
amounts are often clearer and more easily understood 
by customers. Moreover, the extra costs that delinquent 


9 


borrowers impose are nof proportional to the amount 
that is late, and because of the small size of many credit 
card delinquencies, a percentage that is sufficient for a 
small delinquency would be too high for a larger amount. 


For these reasons, early in the development of the 
Union MasterCard Program, the AFL-CIO decided that 
flat late charges would be part of the program’s credit 
card terms, in order to keep the monthly finance charge 
for on-time members as low as possible. Similarly, many 
credit unions—nonprofit organizations that are owned by 
their customers and set their prices to meet member needs 
—include late charges in their price terms in order to keep 


the ordinary monthly finance charges down and allocate 
costs fairly. 


MI. IT IS IMPORTANT THAT FINANCIAL INSTITU- 
TIONS BE ALLOWED TO CONTRACT FOR FEES 
ON A UNIFORM BASIS NATIONWIDE. 


Section 85 authorizes the “exportation” of “interest” 
rates. That is, a bank may properly charge the rates al- 
lowed by its home state to everyone who chooses to do 
business with it, even if the cardholder resides in a juris- 
diction that imposes a lower ceiling or different restrictions 
on lenders within its jurisdiction. Contrary state law 
“must, of course, give way.” See Marquette, 439 U.S. at 
318 n.31. This principle applies to all aspects of the 
mes institution’s “interest” charges, including late 
ees. 


It is critical to nationwide credit card programs, such 
as the Union MasterCard Program and the programs of 
many of the CUNA-affiliated credit unions, that they not 
be required to discriminate against some cardholders by 
offering them different terms because of where they happen 
to live or shop. For example, the Union MasterCard 
Program was developed and negotiated based upon the 
strength of the over 13% million members of the AFL- 
CIO affiliated unions taken as a group. Because the 


10 


finance charge, late charge, and other charges are inter- 
related, if different late charge restrictions were applied 
in different states, members in one state might well end 
up subsidizing members in another state. A cardinal rule 
of labor relations is the equal treatment of people, and it 
would break a bond of fellowship among union members 
if the members in different states had to be charged dif- 
ferent rates for money that comes from the same source. 
It would likewise be inappropriate for a credit union to 
be required to discriminate in its pricing terms between 
members, who all have the same ownership and voting 
rights in the institution, merely because some of them live 


in a different state. 


Requiring these credit card issuers to differentiate 
among cardmembers based on where they reside would 
seriously undermine their national credit card programs 
for an additional reason. The membership bases of many 
of these institutions are widely dispersed across the United 
States and the world, and they are highly mobile. If 
the institutions were required to conform their late charges 
and other charges to the rates specified by the local laws 
of each jurisdiction where customers reside or shop, and 
to adjust those terms when customers change residences 
or shop in a different state, the administrative costs (in- 
cluding. legal costs, computer costs, accounting costs, mar- 
keting costs, costs of maintaining many different sets of 
standard cortracts, and training costs for account service 
personnel) would be very substantial. These costs would 
be particularly onerous for a small credit union, which 
does not have a large membership base over which to 
spread the costs. 


This Court made clear in Marquette that the purpose 
of 12 U.S.C. § 85 was to create a “national” financial 
market for financial institutions and their customers. If 
a customer is unable to obtain credit on the most favorable 
terms from lenders in his or her own jurisdiction, Con- 
gress intended not only that the customer could borrow 


1! 


from a financial institution in a different jurisdiction, but 
also that he or she could borrow on the terms allowed by 
the law of the financial insitution’s state. Marquette, 439 
U.S. at 314-19. This Congressional design fosters inter- 
State competition among financial institutions and in- 
creases the variety of options available to customers. A 
customer is always free to deal with a local institution at 
rates set by local law, but the intent of the federal bank- 
ing laws is to allow borrowers the alternative of dealing 
with lenders governed by other states’ rate restrictions 
instead. 


Excluding late charges from the scope of the term “in- 
terest” in 12 U.S.C. § 85 would undermine the practical 
effect of the decision in Marquette even as to a financial 
institution’s monthly finance charge (“APR”). As noted 
above, late charges are a material financial term on a 
credit card account and can have a significant impact on 
the level at which the APR is set. Thus, for example, a 
low-APR lender would need to consider adjusting its APR 
in some or all jurisdictions in response to any limits on 
its late charges. Such state-by-state adjustments would not 
serve the interests of the financial institution or its non- 
delinquent cardholders, and they would run counter to 
the principles underlying Marquette. Therefore all aspects 
of the price that cardholders pay for credit—whether it 
is the monthly finance charge, late charge, or other charges 
—must be recognized as part of the “interest” package 
that the financial institution is authorized to charge. 


IV. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS HAVE JUSTIFIABLY 
RELIED ON THE LONGSTANDING OPINIONS OF 
THEIR REGULATORS. 


The terms of the Union MasterCard credit card pro- 
gram, and those of CUNA’s affiliates and other financial 
institutions, have been established in reliance on long- 
standing regulatory interpretations of the federal banking 
laws issued by the federal bank regulatory agencies. As 


12 


Respondent describes in its brief, those legal interpre- 
tations are entitled to substantial judicial deference. 


Late charges for delinquent payers are not a recent 
innovation. The Office of the Comptroller of the Cur- 
rency (“OCC”) opined as early as 1955 that late charges 
on consumer accounts are governed as “interest” by 12 
U.S.C. § 85 (Letter from L.A. Jennings, Deputy Comp- 
troller of the Currency (Feb. 24, 1955)), and it re- 
iterated the point again last year (Letter from Julie L. 
Williams, OCC Chief Counsel (Feb. 17, 1995), reprinted 
in [1994-1995 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. 
(CCH) 483,618 (Interpretive Letter 670)). Most re- 
cently, the OCC issued a regulation, after notice and 
comment, codifying the principle. 61 Fed. Reg. 4849 
(1996) (to be codified at 12 C.F.R. pts. 7 and 31). The 
other federal banking agencies, construing almost identical 
statutes governing other types of financial institutions, 
have over many years consistently reached the same 
conclusion.° 


Here is an important instance in which federal law has 
been very clearly and explicitly spelled out by the appro- 
priate agencies for the guidance of an industry and or- 
ganizations such as Amici Issuers. Their programs have 
been established in reasonable reliance on those agency 
interpretations, and the specific terms of their accounts 


® See, e.g., Letter from Karen Solomon, OTS Deputy Chief Coun- 
sel (Sept. 29, 1994), reprinted in [1994-1995 Transfer Binder] 
Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 82,852 (Opinion No, 94/CC-18) 
(thrifts); Letter from Douglas H. Jones, FDIC Deputy General 
Counsel (July 8, 1992), reprinted in (1992-1998 Transfer Binder] 
Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CCH) { 81,5384 (Opinion No, 92-47) (feder- 
ally insured state-chartered banks); Letter from Harry W. Quil- 
lian, FHLBB Acting General Counsel (June 27, 1986), reprinted in 
[1994-1995 Transfer Binder] Fed, Banking L. Rep. (CCH) {| 82,852, 
at 62,408 (thrifts); Letter from Richard S. Schulman, NCUA 
Acting Associate General Counsel (Apr. 11, 1994), reprinted in 
62 Banking Rep. (BNA) 766 (Apr. 25, 1994) (credit unions). 


13 


are clearly stated in the agreements given to each card- 
holder with his or her credit card. Much has been staked 
on this guidance. These legitimate reliance interests in 
financial affairs should be given substantial consideration. 

e.g., Zenith Radio Corp. v. United States, 437 U.S. 
443, 457-58 (1978) (“In light of these substantial reli- 
interests, the longstanding administrative construc- 
of the statute should ‘not be disturbed except for 
cogent reasons.’ ” (citations omitted ) )." 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Cali- 
fornia Supreme Court should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


THEODORE W. KHEEL 

BATTLE Fow.Ler, LLP 

75 East 55th Street 

New York, NY 10017 

(212) 856-7000 

Counsel for Amici Curiae 
Affinity Group Marketing and 
Credit Union National 
Association, Inc. 


7 Petitioner’s reliance on Harper v. Virginia Department of Taz- 


ation, 113 8. Ct. 2510, 2516 n.9 (1993) (Pet. Br. at 48), is mis- 


placed. The issue that the Court addressed in the footnote Peti- 
tioner cites involved the retroactive application of “‘a new prin- 
ciple of [constitutional] law,’” id. at 2616 (citation omitted), not 


the deference owed to an agency interpretation on which an in- 
dustry has relied for many years. 


