12 U.S.C. §1818 — SELECTED COMPLETE SUBSECTIONS, 1994 Edition
Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-1994-title12/html/USCODE-1994-title12-chap16-sec1818.htm
Selection: complete subsections (b), (c), (d), (h), (i), and (n), followed by selected official reference/effective-date notes.
The other statutory subsections and unrelated editorial notes are omitted; omission is not repeal or a claim they have no application. All text within the selected subsections is preserved, with HTML stripped and whitespace normalized. Bracketed Code citations and footnote numbering are from the official source.

(b) Cease-and-desist proceedings
(1) If, in the opinion of the appropriate Federal banking agency, any insured depository institution, depository institution which has insured deposits, or any institution-affiliated party is engaging or has engaged, or the agency has reasonable cause to believe that the depository institution or any institution-affiliated party is about to engage, in an unsafe or unsound practice in conducting the business of such depository institution, or is violating or has violated, or the agency has reasonable cause to believe that the depository institution or any institution-affiliated party is about to violate, a law, rule, or regulation, or any condition imposed in writing by the agency in connection with the granting of any application or other request by the depository institution or any written agreement entered into with the agency, the agency may issue and serve upon the depository institution or such party a notice of charges in respect thereof. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation or violations or the unsafe or unsound practice or practices, and shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held to determine whether an order to cease and desist therefrom should issue against the depository institution or the institution-affiliated party. Such hearing shall be fixed for a date not earlier than thirty days nor later than sixty days after service of such notice unless an earlier or a later date is set by the agency at the request of any party so served. Unless the party or parties so served shall appear at the hearing personally or by a duly authorized representative, they shall be deemed to have consented to the issuance of the cease-and-desist order. In the event of such consent, or if upon the record made at any such hearing, the agency shall find that any violation or unsafe or unsound practice specified in the notice of charges has been established, the agency may issue and serve upon the depository institution or the institution-affiliated party an order to cease and desist from any such violation or practice. Such order may, by provisions which may be mandatory or otherwise, require the depository institution or its institution-affiliated parties to cease and desist from the same, and, further, to take affirmative action to correct the conditions resulting from any such violation or practice.
(2) A cease-and-desist order shall become effective at the expiration of thirty days after the service of such order upon the depository institution or other person concerned (except in the case of a cease-and-desist order issued upon consent, which shall become effective at the time specified therein), and shall remain effective and enforceable as provided therein, except to such extent as it is stayed, modified, terminated, or set aside by action of the agency or a reviewing court.
(3) This subsection and subsections (c) through (s) and subsection (u) of this section shall apply to any bank holding company, and to any subsidiary (other than a bank) of a bank holding company, as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 [12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.], and to any organization organized and operated under section 25(a) 2 of the Federal Reserve Act [12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.] or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act [12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.], in the same manner as they apply to a State member insured bank. Nothing in this subsection or in subsection (c) of this section shall authorize any Federal banking agency, other than the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, to issue a notice of charges or cease-and-desist order against a bank holding company or any subsidiary thereof (other than a bank or subsidiary of that bank).
(4) This subsection and subsections (c) through (s) and subsection (u) of this section shall apply to any foreign bank or company to which subsection (a) of section 3106 of this title applies and to any subsidiary (other than a bank) of any such foreign bank or company in the same manner as they apply to a bank holding company and any subsidiary thereof (other than a bank) under paragraph (3) of this subsection. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term “subsidiary” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 [12 U.S.C. 1841].
(5) This section shall apply, in the same manner as it applies to any insured depository institution for which the appropriate Federal banking agency is the Comptroller of the Currency, to any national banking association chartered by the Comptroller of the Currency, including an uninsured association.
(6) Affirmative action to correct conditions resulting from violations or practices.—The authority to issue an order under this subsection and subsection (c) of this section which requires an insured depository institution or any institution-affiliated party to take affirmative action to correct or remedy any conditions resulting from any violation or practice with respect to which such order is issued includes the authority to require such depository institution or such party to—
(A) make restitution or provide reimbursement, indemnification, or guarantee against loss if—
(i) such depository institution or such party was unjustly enriched in connection with such violation or practice; or
(ii) the violation or practice involved a reckless disregard for the law or any applicable regulations or prior order of the appropriate Federal banking agency;

  (B) restrict the growth of the institution;
(C) dispose of any loan or asset involved;
(D) rescind agreements or contracts; and
(E) employ qualified officers or employees (who may be subject to approval by the appropriate Federal banking agency at the direction of such agency); and
(F) take such other action as the banking agency determines to be appropriate.

  (7) Authority to limit activities.—The authority to issue an order under this subsection or subsection (c) of this section includes the authority to place limitations on the activities or functions of an insured depository institution or any institution-affiliated party.
(8) Unsatisfactory asset quality, management, earnings, or liquidity as unsafe or unsound practice.—If an insured depository institution receives, in its most recent report of examination, a less-than-satisfactory rating for asset quality, management, earnings, or liquidity, the appropriate Federal banking agency may (if the deficiency is not corrected) deem the institution to be engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice for purposes of this subsection.
(9) Expansion of authority to savings and loan affiliates and entities.—Subsections (a) through (s) of this section and subsection (u) of this section shall apply to any savings and loan holding company and to any subsidiary (other than a bank or subsidiary of that bank) of a savings and loan holding company, to any service corporation of a savings association and to any subsidiary of such service corporation, whether wholly or partly owned, in the same manner as such subsections apply to a savings association.
(10) Standard for certain orders.—No authority under this subsection or subsection (c) of this section to prohibit any institution-affiliated party from withdrawing, transferring, removing, dissipating, or disposing of any funds, assets, or other property may be exercised unless the appropriate Federal banking agency meets the standards of Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, without regard to the requirement of such rule that the applicant show that the injury, loss, or damage is irreparable and immediate.
(c) Temporary cease-and-desist orders
(1) Whenever the appropriate Federal banking agency shall determine that the violation or threatened violation or the unsafe or unsound practice or practices, specified in the notice of charges served upon the depository institution or any institution-affiliated party pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of this section, or the continuation thereof, is likely to cause insolvency or significant dissipation of assets or earnings of the depository institution, or is likely to weaken the condition of the depository institution or otherwise prejudice the interests of its depositors prior to the completion of the proceedings conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of this section, the agency may issue a temporary order requiring the depository institution or such party to cease and desist from any such violation or practice and to take affirmative action to prevent or remedy such insolvency, dissipation, condition, or prejudice pending completion of such proceedings. Such order may include any requirement authorized under subsection (b)(6) of this section. Such order shall become effective upon service upon the depository institution or such institution-affiliated party and, unless set aside, limited, or suspended by a court in proceedings authorized by paragraph (2) of this subsection, shall remain effective and enforceable pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to such notice and until such time as the agency shall dismiss the charges specified in such notice, or if a cease-and-desist order is issued against the depository institution or such party, until the effective date of such order.
(2) Within ten days after the depository institution concerned or any institution-affiliated party has been served with a temporary cease-and-desist order, the depository institution or such party may apply to the United States district court for the judicial district in which the home office of the depository institution is located, or the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for an injunction setting aside, limiting, or suspending the enforcement, operation, or effectiveness of such order pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the notice of charges served upon the depository institution or such party under paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of this section, and such court shall have jurisdiction to issue such injunction.
(3) Incomplete or inaccurate records.—
(A) Temporary order.—If a notice of charges served under subsection (b)(1) of this section specifies, on the basis of particular facts and circumstances, that an insured depository institution's books and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the appropriate Federal banking agency is unable, through the normal supervisory process, to determine the financial condition of that depository institution or the details or purpose of any transaction or transactions that may have a material effect on the financial condition of that depository institution, the agency may issue a temporary order requiring—
(i) the cessation of any activity or practice which gave rise, whether in whole or in part, to the incomplete or inaccurate state of the books or records; or
(ii) affirmative action to restore such books or records to a complete and accurate state, until the completion of the proceedings under subsection (b)(1) of this section.

  (B) Effective period.—Any temporary order issued under subparagraph (A)—
(i) shall become effective upon service; and
(ii) unless set aside, limited, or suspended by a court in proceedings under paragraph (2), shall remain in effect and enforceable until the earlier of—
(I) the completion of the proceeding initiated under subsection (b)(1) of this section in connection with the notice of charges; or
(II) the date the appropriate Federal banking agency determines, by examination or otherwise, that the insured depository institution's books and records are accurate and reflect the financial condition of the depository institution.
(d) Temporary cease-and-desist orders; enforcement
In the case of violation or threatened violation of, or failure to obey, a temporary cease-and-desist order issued pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (c) of this section, the appropriate Federal banking agency may apply to the United States district court, or the United States court of any territory, within the jurisdiction of which the home office of the depository institution is located, for an injunction to enforce such order, and, if the court shall determine that there has been such violation or threatened violation or failure to obey, it shall be the duty of the court to issue such injunction.

[OMITTED SUBSECTIONS]

(h) Hearings and judicial review
(1) Any hearing provided for in this section (other than the hearing provided for in subsection (g)(3) of this section) shall be held in the Federal judicial district or in the territory in which the home office of the depository institution is located unless the party afforded the hearing consents to another place, and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 5 of title 5. After such hearing, and within ninety days after the appropriate Federal banking agency or Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System has notified the parties that the case has been submitted to it for final decision, it shall render its decision (which shall include findings of fact upon which its decision is predicated) and shall issue and serve upon each party to the proceeding an order or orders consistent with the provisions of this section. Judicial review of any such order shall be exclusively as provided in this subsection (h). Unless a petition for review is timely filed in a court of appeals of the United States, as hereinafter provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, and thereafter until the record in the proceeding has been filed as so provided, the issuing agency may at any time, upon such notice and in such manner as it shall deem proper, modify, terminate, or set aside any such order. Upon such filing of the record, the agency may modify, terminate, or set aside any such order with permission of the court.
(2) Any party to any proceeding under paragraph (1) may obtain a review of any order served pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection (other than an order issued with the consent of the depository institution or the institution-affiliated party concerned, or an order issued under paragraph (1) of subsection (g) of this section) by the filing in the court of appeals of the United States for the circuit in which the home office of the depository institution is located, or in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within thirty days after the date of service of such order, a written petition praying that the order of the agency be modified, terminated, or set aside. A copy of such petition shall be forthwith transmitted by the clerk of the court to the agency, and thereupon the agency shall file in the court the record in the proceeding, as provided in section 2112 of title 28. Upon the filing of such petition, such court shall have jurisdiction, which upon the filing of the record shall except as provided in the last sentence of said paragraph (1) be exclusive, to affirm, modify, terminate, or set aside, in whole or in part, the order of the agency. Review of such proceedings shall be had as provided in chapter 7 of title 5. The judgment and decree of the court shall be final, except that the same shall be subject to review by the Supreme Court upon certiorari, as provided in section 1254 of title 28.
(3) The commencement of proceedings for judicial review under paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court, operate as a stay of any order issued by the agency.
(i) Jurisdiction and enforcement; penalty
(1) The appropriate Federal banking agency may in its discretion apply to the United States district court, or the United States court of any territory, within the jurisdiction of which the home office of the depository institution is located, for the enforcement of any effective and outstanding notice or order issued under this section or under section 1831o or 1831p–1 of this title, and such courts shall have jurisdiction and power to order and require compliance herewith; but except as otherwise provided in this section or under section 1831o or 1831p–1 of this title no court shall have jurisdiction to affect by injunction or otherwise the issuance or enforcement of any notice or order under any such section, or to review, modify, suspend, terminate, or set aside any such notice or order.
(2) Civil money penalty.—
(A) First tier.—Any insured depository institution which, and any institution-affiliated party who—
(i) violates any law or regulation;
(ii) violates any final order or temporary order issued pursuant to subsection (b), (c), (e), (g), or (s) of this section or any final order under section 1831o or 1831p–1 of this title;
(iii) violates any condition imposed in writing by the appropriate Federal banking agency in connection with the grant of any application or other request by such depository institution; or
(iv) violates any written agreement between such depository institution and such agency,

  shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for each day during which such violation continues.
(B) Second tier.—Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), any insured depository institution which, and any institution-affiliated party who—
(i)(I) commits any violation described in any clause of subparagraph (A);
(II) recklessly engages in an unsafe or unsound practice in conducting the affairs of such insured depository institution; or
(III) breaches any fiduciary duty;
(ii) which violation, practice, or breach—
(I) is part of a pattern of misconduct;
(II) causes or is likely to cause more than a minimal loss to such depository institution; or
(III) results in pecuniary gain or other benefit to such party,

  shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day during which such violation, practice, or breach continues.
(C) Third tier.—Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), any insured depository institution which, and any institution-affiliated party who—
(i) knowingly—
(I) commits any violation described in any clause of subparagraph (A);
(II) engages in any unsafe or unsound practice in conducting the affairs of such depository institution; or
(III) breaches any fiduciary duty; and

  (ii) knowingly or recklessly causes a substantial loss to such depository institution or a substantial pecuniary gain or other benefit to such party by reason of such violation, practice, or breach,

  shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed the applicable maximum amount determined under subparagraph (D) for each day during which such violation, practice, or breach continues.
(D) Maximum amounts of penalties for any violation described in subparagraph (c).—The maximum daily amount of any civil penalty which may be assessed pursuant to subparagraph (C) for any violation, practice, or breach described in such subparagraph is—
(i) in the case of any person other than an insured depository institution, an amount to not exceed $1,000,000; and
(ii) in the case of any insured depository institution, an amount not to exceed the lesser of—
(I) $1,000,000; or
(II) 1 percent of the total assets of such institution.

  (E) Assessment.—
(i) Written notice.—Any penalty imposed under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) may be assessed and collected by the appropriate Federal banking agency by written notice.
(ii) Finality of assessment.—If, with respect to any assessment under clause (i), a hearing is not requested pursuant to subparagraph (H) within the period of time allowed under such subparagraph, the assessment shall constitute a final and unappealable order.

  (F) Authority to modify or remit penalty.—Any appropriate Federal banking agency may compromise, modify, or remit any penalty which such agency may assess or had already assessed under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).
(G) Mitigating factors.—In determining the amount of any penalty imposed under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C), the appropriate agency shall take into account the appropriateness of the penalty with respect to—
(i) the size of financial resources and good faith of the insured depository institution or other person charged;
(ii) the gravity of the violation;
(iii) the history of previous violations; and
(iv) such other matters as justice may require.

  (H) Hearing.—The insured depository institution or other person against whom any penalty is assessed under this paragraph shall be afforded an agency hearing if such institution or person submits a request for such hearing within 20 days after the issuance of the notice of assessment.
(I) Collection.—
(i) Referral.—If any insured depository institution or other person fails to pay an assessment after any penalty assessed under this paragraph has become final, the agency that imposed the penalty shall recover the amount assessed by action in the appropriate United States district court.
(ii) Appropriateness of penalty not reviewable.—In any civil action under clause (i), the validity and appropriateness of the penalty shall not be subject to review.

  (J) Disbursement.—All penalties collected under authority of this paragraph shall be deposited into the Treasury.
(K) Regulations.—Each appropriate Federal banking agency shall prescribe regulations establishing such procedures as may be necessary to carry out this paragraph.

  (3) Notice under this section after separation from service.—The resignation, termination of employment or participation, or separation of a institution-affiliated party (including a separation caused by the closing of an insured depository institution) shall not affect the jurisdiction and authority of the appropriate Federal banking agency to issue any notice and proceed under this section against any such party, if such notice is served before the end of the 6-year period beginning on the date such party ceased to be such a party with respect to such depository institution (whether such date occurs before, on, or after August 9, 1989).
(4) Prejudgment attachment.—
(A) In general.—In any action brought by an appropriate Federal banking agency (excluding the Corporation when acting in a manner described in section 1821(d)(18) of this title) pursuant to this section, or in actions brought in aid of, or to enforce an order in, any administrative or other civil action for money damages, restitution, or civil money penalties brought by such agency, the court may, upon application of the agency, issue a restraining order that—
(i) prohibits any person subject to the proceeding from withdrawing, transferring, removing, dissipating, or disposing of any funds, assets or other property; and
(ii) appoints a temporary receiver to administer the restraining order.

  (B) Standard.—
(i) Showing.—Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply with respect to any proceeding under subparagraph (A) without regard to the requirement of such rule that the applicant show that the injury, loss, or damage is irreparable and immediate.
(ii) State proceeding.—If, in the case of any proceeding in a State court, the court determines that rules of civil procedure available under the laws of such State provide substantially similar protections to a party's right to due process as Rule 65 (as modified with respect to such proceeding by clause (i)), the relief sought under subparagraph (A) may be requested under the laws of such State.

[OMITTED SUBSECTIONS]

(n) Ancillary provisions; subpena power, etc.
In the course of or in connection with any proceeding under this section, or in connection with any claim for insured deposits or any examination or investigation under section 1820(c) of this title, the agency conducting the proceeding, examination, or investigation or considering the claim for insured deposits, or any member or designated representative thereof, including any person designated to conduct any hearing under this section, shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations, to take or cause to be taken depositions, and to issue, revoke, quash, or modify subpenas and subpenas duces tecum; and such agency is empowered to make rules and regulations with respect to any such proceedings, claims, examinations, or investigations. The attendance of witnesses and the production of documents provided for in this subsection may be required from any place in any State or in any territory or other place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States at any designated place where such proceeding is being conducted. Any such agency or any party to proceedings under this section may apply to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, or the United States district court for the judicial district or the United States court in any territory in which such proceeding is being conducted, or where the witness resides or carries on business, for enforcement of any subpena or subpena duces tecum issued pursuant to this subsection, and such courts shall have jurisdiction and power to order and require compliance therewith. Witnesses subpenaed under this subsection shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the district courts of the United States. Any court having jurisdiction of any proceeding instituted under this section by an insured depository institution or a director or officer thereof, may allow to any such party such reasonable expenses and attorneys’ fees as it deems just and proper; and such expenses and fees shall be paid by the depository institution or from its assets. Any person who willfully shall fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, contracts, agreements, or other records, if in such person's power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the appropriate Federal banking agency, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than one year or both.

[SELECTED OFFICIAL REFERENCE NOTES]

The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, referred to in subsec. (b)(3), is act May 9, 1956, ch. 240, 70 Stat. 133, as amended, which is classified principally to chapter 17 (§1841 et seq.) of this title. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out under section 1841 of this title and Tables.
Section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, referred to in subsec. (b)(3), which is classified to subchapter II (§611 et seq.) of chapter 6 of this title, was renumbered section 25A of that Act by Pub. L. 102–242, title I, §142(e)(2), Dec. 19, 1991, 105 Stat. 2281. Section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act is classified to subchapter I (§601 et seq.) of chapter 6 of this title.
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, referred to in subsecs. (b)(10) and (i)(4)(B), are set out in the Appendix to Title 28, Judiciary and Judicial Procedure.

Footnote 2 in subsection (b)(3): See References in Text note below.

[OFFICIAL EFFECTIVE-DATE NOTES]

Effective Date of 1992 Amendments
Amendment by section 303(b)(6)(A) of Pub. L. 102–558 deemed to have become effective Mar. 1, 1992, see section 304 of Pub. L. 102–558, set out as a note under section 2062 of Title 50, Appendix, War and National Defense.
Amendment by sections 1603(d)(2)–(4) and 1605(a)(5)(A), (11) of Pub. L. 102–550 effective as if included in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, Pub. L. 102–242, as of Dec. 19, 1991, except that where amendment is to any provision of law added or amended by Pub. L. 102–242 effective after Dec. 19, 1992, then amendment by Pub. L. 102–550 effective on effective date of amendment by Pub. L. 102–242, see section 1609 of Pub. L. 102–550, set out as a note under section 191 of this title.
Effective Date of 1991 Amendment
Amendment by section 131(c)(1), (2) of Pub. L. 102–242 effective 1 year after Dec. 19, 1991, see section 131(f) of Pub. L. 102–242, set out as a note under section 1464 of this title.
Amendment by section 302(e)(4) of Pub. L. 102–242 effective on earlier of 180 days after date on which final regulations promulgated in accordance with section 302(c) of Pub. L. 102–242, set out as a note under section 1817 of this title, become effective or Jan. 1, 1994, see section 302(g) of Pub. L. 102–242, set out as a note under section 1817 of this title.
Effective Date of 1990 Amendment
Section 2547(a)(3) of Pub. L. 101–647 provided that: “The amendment made by paragraph (1) [amending this section] shall apply with respect to all written agreements which are entered into and all written statements which become effective after the date of the enactment of this Act [Nov. 29, 1990].”
Effective Date of 1989 Amendment
Amendment by section 903(a) of Pub. L. 101–73 applicable with respect to violations committed and activities engaged in after Aug. 9, 1989, see section 903(e) of Pub. L. 101–73, set out as a note under section 1786 of this title.
Amendment by section 907(a) of Pub. L. 101–73 applicable to conduct engaged in after Aug. 9, 1989, except that increased maximum penalties of $5,000 and $25,000 may apply to conduct engaged in before such date if such conduct is not already subject to a notice issued by the appropriate agency and occurred after completion of the last report of the examination of the institution by the appropriate agency occurring before Aug. 9, 1989, see section 907(l) of Pub. L. 101–73, set out as a note under section 93 of this title.


Effective Date of Regulations Prescribed Under 1986 Amendment
The regulations required to be prescribed under amendment by Pub. L. 99–570 effective at end of 3-month period beginning on Oct. 27, 1986, see section 1364(e) of Pub. L. 99–570, set out as a note under section 1464 of this title.


Effective Date of 1978 Amendment
Amendment by Pub. L. 95–630, except for amendment by section 107(e)(1), effective upon expiration of 120 days after Nov. 10, 1978, see section 2101 of Pub. L. 95–630, set out as an Effective Date note under section 375b of this title.
Amendment by section 107(e)(1) of Pub. L. 95–630, relating to imposition of civil penalties, applicable to violations occurring or continuing after Nov. 10, 1978, see section 109 of Pub. L. 95–630, set out as a note under section 93 of this title.
