No. 94-167 


~ “4 
i... r + 
: ee ee ae ee e. a 
SE Sy } 
> : ae © ’ 
wer er Me 


oo 


In the Supreme Court of the Hnitee States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


KATIA GUTIERREZ DE MARTINEZ, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. 


Dirk A. LAMAGNO, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


a 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Page 
Abbott Laboratories vy. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136 (1967) ....... 2 
Block vy. Community Nutrition Institute, 467 U.S. 340 

GENTE <esecsensiteeitibteteimtatstiniaieticineaaiii aati 6 
Bowen v. Michigan Academy of Family Physicians, 

pai lpg ce lh FO a eee eT 2,6 
Flechsig v. United States, 991 F.2d 300 (6th Cir. 1993) . 4 
Mesa v. California, 489 U.S. 121 (1989) coe... 11, 12 
Robbins v. United States, 722 F.2d 387 (8th Cir. 1984) .. 4 
Schrob v. Catterson, 967 F.2d 929 (3d Cir. 1992) ............. 4 
United Mine Workers v. Gibbs, 383 U.S. 715 (1966) ......... 11-12 
United States v. Smith, 499 U.S. 160 (1991) ................... 7 
Verlinden B.V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 480 

SEREED <cessisucsnisaiitainietisdiidadiiiaiaaiatittiat niet ene 10 
Wade v. United States, 112 S. Ct. 1840 (1992) ................. 2 
Williams v. United States, 350 U.S. 857 ES 4 

Constitution, statutes and rule: 

a i 10, 11 
Federal Drivers Act, Pub. L. No. 87-258, 75 Stat. 539 ..... 4 
ZB U.S.C. 2679 (1982) 00.........cececceseecessecsesereeseseeees...,. 4 
28 U.S.C. 2679(d) (1982) oooecccccccceseccseseseseeeseeeeeses.., 5 


BD UBC. BETBBME) ...20.000ccecsecceccerceccosseaceoseseesse... 8 
BD WIL, BOTIIEIY)  oacccsccccccsccccecevsocesesseseceesesess..... 1,4 
28 U.S.C. 2679(d)(2) ......... nidenohineiibintattnasaits 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12 
ZB UB.C. 26THANB) 00.......ceccecececsereseesoreccereseeeese..,, 5, 12 
Federal Tort Claims Act: 
I ic 3, 4 
I 7 
SS. | _ {a 7 
endl. h..... . ———— rs 2 
I a 12 
Sentencing Guidelines § SKU .o.....ccccccccccccececeososeeees....... 2 


(III) 


IV 


Miscellaneous: 


Page 
H.R. Rep. No. 700, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. (1988) .............. 4,8 
Legislation to Amend the Federal Tort Claims Act: 
Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Administrative 
Law and Governmental Relations of the House Comm. 
on the Judiciary, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. ae 8-9 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-167 
KATIA GUTIERREZ DE MARTINEZ, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. 


Dirk A. LAMAGNO, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


1. Respondent and amicus Kellogg place principal 
reliance on the Westfall Act’s provision that upon the 
Attorney General’s issuance of a scope certification, a 
civil suit against a federal employee “shall be deemed an 
action against the United States” under the Federal 
Tort Claims Act (FTCA), “and the United States shall 
be substituted as the party defendant.” 28 U.S.C. 
2679(d)(1). See Resp. Br. 7-12; Kellogg Amicus Br. 8-15. 
Respondent and his amicus rely heavily on the Act’s use 
of the term “shall” as precluding judicial review. See, 
e.g., Amicus Br. 4, 8-9. The pivotal issue here, however, 
is under what conditions the action “shall” be deemed an 
“action against the United States.” The amicus 
contends that the only predicate for substitution is the 


(1) 


2 


act of certification itself, without regard to whether the 
certification is properly grounded in law and fact. Id. at 
10. That contention is inconsistent with the “strong 
presumption” that courts are entitled to examine the 
basis for executive action. See, e.g., Bowen v. Michigan 
Academy of Family Physicians, 476 U.S. 667, 670-673 
(1986); Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 140 
(1967).' 

Respondent and his amicus, moreover, fail adequately 
to address the implications of 28 U.S.C. 2679 d)(2), which 
applies to tort suits brought in state court against 
federal employees. Section 2679(d)(2) provides that upon 


' In Wade v. United States, 112 S. Ct. 1840 (1992), this Court 
considered statutory and Sentencing Guidelines provisions that 
authorize a federal court to impose a criminal sentence below the 
Statutory minimum, and below the Guideline range, “[u]pon motion 
of the government stating that the defendant has provided 
substantial assistance in the investigation or prosecution of another 
person who has committed an offense.” Sentencing Guidelines 
§ 5K1.1; see also 18 U.S.C. 3553(e). Although both the statute and 
the Guidelines require a “motion of the government” as a 
condition precedent to downward departure, and although neither 
provides expressly for judicial review of the government's refusal 
to file such a motion, this Court unanimously held that “federal 
district courts have authority to review a prosecutor’s refusal to 
file a substantial-assistance motion.” 112 S. Ct. at 1843-1844. The 
scope of judicial review in that context was restricted to 
constitutional claims, see id. at 1844, a limitation grounded in the 
Court’s recognition that under the statute and Guidelines the 
prosecutor retains the discretion to decline to file a motion even 
where the defendant has rendered substantial assistance, id. at 
1843. Here, by contrast, the Attorney General can issue a certi- 
fication only if she determines that the defendant acted within the 
scope of his or her employment—a determination based upon an 
established body of law that courts are well equipped to apply. 


SN | 


cr 


3 


certification, such a suit “shall be removed” to the 
appropriate federal district court; that the suit “shall be 
deemed to be an action or proceeding brought against the 
United States” under the FTCA; and that “the United 
States shall be substituted as the party defendant.” 
Section 2679(d)(2) then states that “[t}his certification of 
the Attorney General shall conclusively establish scope 
of office or employment for purposes of removal” 
(emphasis added). That language strongly implies that 
the certification is not conclusive with respect to the 
substitution of the United States as party defendant. 
Amicus Kellogg contends that the final sentence of 
Section 2679(d)(2) was included out of an abundance of 
caution, on the theory that courts would be likely to 
scrutinize with particular care the basis for their own 
jurisdiction. See Amicus Br. 14 (“Removal—because it 
concerns the jurisdiction of the court—is most likely to 
spark de novo judicial review.”), However, in cases in 
which the Attorney General’s scope certification is 
sustained—which, in the view of the amicus, must be 
every case where a certification is issued—the suit 
before the district court will be one against the United 
States under the FTCA. It is altogether implausible to 
suppose that a federal district court would doubt the 
basis for its jurisdiction over such a suit. See 28 U.S.C. 
1346(b). Any uncertainty as to the propriety of federal 
jurisdiction—and any consequent need to clarify that the 
Scope certification conclusively establishes scope of 
employment for purposes of removal—could arise only in 
cases in which the individual defendant is resubstituted 
for the United States after judicial review of the 
certification. Yet under the construction of the statute 


4 


proffered by respondent and his amicus, no such cases 
can arise.” 

2. As we noted in our opening brief (Br. 19-20), the 
authority of federal district courts to review the 
Attorney General's scope certification under the Federal 
Drivers Act, Pub. L. No. 87-258, 75 Stat. 539 (codified at 
28 U.S.C. 2679 (1982)), was well established. Amicus 
Kellogg correctly observes (Amicus Br. 16-17) that the 
Drivers Act directed the district court to remand a case 
removed from state court if it determined that the case 


2 This is not a case in which judicial review will interfere with 
the exercise of Executive Branch discretion or involve the courts 
in questions that they are ill suited to resolve. The Westfall Act 
does not empower the Attorney General to develop her own 
criteria for determining whether an individual employee should be 
subject to suit in a particular instance. Rather, substitution of the 
United States pursuant to the certification procedure must be 
based on the Attorney General’s determination that “the defendant 
employee was acting within the scope of his office or employment 
at the time of the incident out of which the claim arose.” 
28 U.S.C. 2679(d)(1) and (d)(2). The scope of employment deter- 
mination, moreover, is to be based on “the law of the place where 
the act or omission occurred.” 28 U.S.C. 1346(b); see, ¢.g., 
Williams v. United States, 350 U.S. 857 (1955); Flechsig v. United 
States, 991 F.2d 300, 302 (6th Cir. 1993); Schrob v. Catterson, 967 
F.2d 929, 934 (3d Cir. 1992); Robbins v. United States, 722 F.2d 
387, 388 (8th Cir. 1984); H.R. Rep. No. 700, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 5 
(1988). Because the certification process primarily involves the 
application of an established body of law, rather than the exercise 
of discretion or policy judgment, judicial review of the Attorney 
General’s decision creates no undue risk of interference with 
Executive Branch prerogatives. The question whether particular 
conduct falls within the scope of an individual’s employment is also 
well suited for judicial resolution, since it is routinely addressed by 
courts in their adjudication of private civil actions. 


xe 


5 


was “one in which a remedy by suit within the meaning 
of subsection (b) of this section is not available against 
the United States.” 28 U.S.C. 2679(d) (1982). Although 
the Drivers Act did not expressly authorize the district 
court to review the scope certification, the court’s power 
of review was surely implicit in its authority to remand. 
We do not agree, however, with the amicus’s contention 
(Amicus Br. 17) that the absence of such a provision in 
the Westfall Act suggests that review of the certi- 
fication is unavailable. To the contrary, the statute’s 
provision that the scope certification “shall conclusively 
establish scope of office or employment for purposes of 
removal,” 28 U.S.C. 2679(d)(2), strongly implies that 
review of certification is available insofar as the 
substitution of the United States is concerned. Thus, 
the Westfall Act retains the Drivers Act’s implicit 
premise that the Attorney General’s scope certification 
is subject to judicial review, while altering the 
jurisdictional consequence of a successful judicial 
challenge. Under the Drivers Act, resubstitution of the 
individual defendant required that a case previously 
removed from state court be remanded to that court. 
Under the Westfall Act, the district court is directed to 
retain jurisdiction over the suit even if the Attorney 
General’s scope certification is overturned. See pp. 10- 
12, infra. 

3. The Westfall Act provides that “{iJn the event that 
the Attorney General has refused to certify scope of 
office or employment under this section, the employee 
may at any time before trial petition the court to find and 
certify that the employee was acting within the scope of 
his office or employment.” 28 U.S.C. 2679(d)(3). Re- 
spondent and his amicus argue that Section 2679(d)(3), by 


6 


expressly authorizing the court to resolve the scope of 
employment question (at the behest of the individual 
defendant) where the Attorney General has declined to 
issue a scope certification, impliedly precludes judicial 
review in cases where the Attorney General does certify. 
However, “(t]he mere fact that some acts are made 
reviewable should not suffice to support an implication of 
exclusion as to others. The right to review is too 
important to be excluded on such slender and in- 
determinate evidence of legislative intent.” Bowen v. 
Michigan Academy of Family Physicians, 476 U.S. at 
674 (internal quotation marks omitted). 

Respondent and his amicus rely (Resp. Br. 16-17; 
Amicus Br. 12) on this Court’s admonition that “when a 
statute provides a detailed mechanism for judicial con- 
sideration of particular issues at the behest of particular 
persons, judicial review of those issues at the behest of 
other persons may be found to be impliedly precluded.” 
Block v. Community Nutrition Institute, 467 U.S. 340, 
349 (1984). That decision is inapposite to the present 
case. The Court emphasized in Block that the same 
agency orders that plaintiffs (milk consumers) sought to 
challenge would be subject to judicial review at the 
behest of other parties (milk handlers) with similar 
interests in contesting any unlawful agency action. 467 
U.S. at 352; see also id. at 349 (where particular persons 
are authorized to seek judicial review of particular 
issues, “judicial review of those issues at the behest of 
other persons may be found to be impliedly precluded”) 
(emphasis added). Here, by contrast, respondent does not 
contend that someone other than a tort plaintiff is 
authorized to seek judicial review of the Attorney 


ee 


7 


General’s determination that a federal employee has 
acted within the scope of his employment. 

4. Amicus Kellogg contends that “letting a district 
court determine scope of employment even when the 
Attorney General does certify would render the certi- 

i fication process of (d)(1) and (d)(2) largely superfluous.” 
\ Amicus Br. 13. That is not correct. The Westfall Act’s 
certification process facilitates the conduct of litigation 
by providing for a prompt substitution of parties. In 
cases where no FTCA exception bars suit against the 
United States, the Attorney General’s scope certi- 
fication is unlikely to be challenged in court: Many tort 
plaintiffs will prefer to have the United States sub- 
stituted as defendant so as to ensure that any judgment 
will be collectible.” In such cases the certification 


* Other features of the statutory scheme, such as the 
unavailability of punitive damages in FTCA suits, see 28 U.S.C. 
2674, may occasionally bear on the plaintiff's decision whether to 
seek redress from the United States or the individual employee. 
As a general matter, however, a plaintiff will have little incentive 
to contest the scope certification in cases where no FTCA 
exception applies, even if he harbors serious doubts as to the cor- 
rectness of the Attorney General’s decision. Cases in which plain- 
tiffs have challenged the Attorney General’s scope certification 
have typically involved situations in which an FTCA exception 
appeared likely to bar suit against the United States. 


Under the Westfall Act, federal employees are immune from 
tort liability for acts committed within the scope of their 
employment even where an exception to the FTCA, see 28 U.S.C. 
f 2680, precludes a damages action against the United States. See 

United States v. Smith, 499 U.S. 160 (1991). We do not agree with 
the contention of amicus Kellogg (see Amicus Br. 24) that judicial 
review of the certification decision will undermine this Court’s 
holding in Smith. It is entirely clear that the Westfall Act 4oes not 


8 


process provides an expeditious means of resolving the 
scope of employment issue in a manner that serves the 
interests of both the plaintiff and the individual 
employee; it thereby conserves judicial resources by 
eliminating the need for a trial court to make its own 
scope determination. Permitting judicial review in cases 
(such as this one) where the applicability of an FTCA 
exception appears likely to bar a suit against the United 
States will in no way undermine the usefulness of the 
certification process in the bulk of cases where a 
certification is issued.‘ 


confer immunity for torts committed outside the scope of 
employment. See 28 U.S.C. 2679(b)(1) (FTCA provides exclusive 
remedy for losses incurred due to “the negligent or wrongful act 
or omission of any employee of the Government while acting 
within the scope of his office or employment”); H.R. Rep. No. 700, 
100th Cong., 2d Sess. 5 (1988) (Westfall Act “provides that the 
United States will incur vicarious liability only for the common law 
torts of its employees which are committed within the ‘scope of 
their employment.’ If an employee is accused of egregious mis- 
conduct, rather than mere negligence or poor judgment, then the 
United States may not be substituted as the defendant, and the 
individual employee remains liable.”). Resubstitution of an 
individual employee based on the reviewing court’s conclusion that 
the defendant did not act within the scope of his employment is 
fully consistent with the text, history, and purpose of the Westfall 
Act, and with this Court’s decision in Smith. 


* As we noted in our opening brief (U.S. Br. 21 n.6), both the 
Westfall Act’s co-sponsor and the Department of Justice repre- 
sentative who testified in support of the proposed legislation 
expressed the view that the Attorney General’s scope certification 
would be subject to judicial review at the behest of the plaintiff. 
See Legislation to Amend the Federal Tort Claims Act: Hearing 
Before the Subcomm. on Administrative Law and Governmental 
Relations of the House Comm. on the Judiciary, 100th Cong., 2d 


9 


®. Amicus Kellogg also contends that to permit judi- 
cial review of the Attorney General’s scope certification 
would contravene established principles of agency law, 
noting that “[uJnder the common law of agency, an 
employer can become liable for the acts of an employee by 
conceding that those acts are within the scope of 
employment.” Amicus Br. 20. The amicus contends. that 
judicial “review refuses to give the admission of the 
employer as to scope of employment its usual force and 
effect.” Id. at 24. That argument is without basis. 

The “usual force and effect” of an employer’s admis- 
sion regarding scope of employment is that the employer 
may be precluded from disavowing the admission at a 
later stage of the litigation. The issue here, however, is 
not whether the Attorney General’s scope certification 
will bind the United States if the certification is un- 


Sess. 128, 133, 197 (1988) (House Hearing). Amicus Kellogg points 
out (Amicus Br. 19) that one witness who testified at the House 
hearing expressed the view that the Attorney General’s decision 
regarding scope certification would not be judicially reviewable. 
See House Hearing at 184. As the representative of the National 
Treasury Employees Union, that witness’s principal concern was 
for the availability of judicial review at the behest of the defendant 
employee where certification was denied. See id. at 185. We be- 
lieve that the view of that witness is entitled to insubstantial 
weight in comparison to the construction of the bill espoused at the 
hearing by its co-sponsor and the Department of Justice. 


Contrary to amicus Kellogg’s suggestion (Amicus Br. 19-20), 
Representative Frank (the bill’s co-sponsor) did not simply express 
a preference for legislation that would preserve a plaintiffs right 
to obtain judicial review of a scope certification. Rather, he took 
the position that the bill as written would accomplish that result, 
see House Hearing at 128, 197—an understanding that the Depart- 
ment of Justice shared. Jd. at 128, 133. 


10 


challenged and the suit proceeds under the FTCA. The 
question instead is whether the Attorney Generai’s 
“concession” can bind the plaintiff in a suit against the 
individual employee. Nothing in the common law of 
agency supports such a result. Nor are we aware of any 
other instance in which the admission of one party can 
bind another, at least absent some form of privity 
between the two litigants. 

6. Although the Attorney General’s scope certifi- 
cation is subject to challenge insofar as it bears on the 
substitution of the United States as defendant, the 
Westfall Act provides that the certification, in cases filed 
in state court and subsequently removed to the federal 
forum, “shall conclusively establish scope of office or 
employment for purposes of removal.” 28 U.S.C. 
2679(d)(2). In our view this language requires that if the 
Scope certification is overturned, the suit against the 
individual federal employee must go forward in federal 
district court and is not subject to remand. Amicus 
Kellogg contends that “[t]he Article III basis for 
granting such jurisdiction * * * js questionable.” 
Amicus Br. 29. In fact, however, no Article III problem 
exists. The Westfall Act’s immunity from suit for torts 
committed within the scope of employment is a right 
conferred upon federal employees by federal law. 
Congress’s conferral of federal rights under the Act 
provides a constitutionally sufficient basis for federal 
jurisdiction, even where the plaintiff's claim arises 
under state law. See generally Verlinden B.V. vy. 
Central Bank of Nigeria, 461 U:S. 480, 491-497 (1983) 
(presence of foreign sovereign immunity issue furnishes 
constitutional basis for federal jurisdiction). 


11 


The amicus’s argument rests on the mistaken 
assumption that “in those cases removed from state 
court in which the district court rejects the Attorney 
General’s certification, the underlying case or con- 
troversy will not * * * call for any application of federal 
law.” Amicus Br. 31. In fact, a district court’s rejection 
of the scope certification at a preliminary stage of the 
litigation often will not definitively resolve the 
defendant’s claim to federal immunity. The court might 
initially conclude that the defendant was not acting 
within the scope of his employment, and might overturn 
the scope certification on that basis. That determination 
would not, however, foreclose the possibility that 
evidence subsequently obtained through discovery or 
presented at trial would show that the defendant’s 
conduct, while tortious, fell within the scope of his 
employment. The district court’s initial rejection of the 
Scope certification therefore does not eliminate the 
possibility that the district court will reconsider the 
certification question on the basis of the evidence and 
that the defendant will ultimately prevail on the basis of 
a federal immunity.° 


® Even in cases where the district court’s rejection of the 
Attorney General’s scope certification definitively resolves the 
scope of employment issue, retention of the case by the district 
court does not contravene Article III. The court’s review of the 
immunity question clearly provides a sufficient basis for the initial 
removal of the case to the federal forum. See Mesa v. California, 
489 U.S. 121, 133, 136 (1989) (federal immunity defense is a 
constitutionally sufficient basis for federal jurisdiction). Consistent 
with Article III, Congress may direct the district court to retain 
jurisdiction over the case even after its resolution of the scope of 
employment question. Cf. United Mine Workers v. Gibbs, 383 U.S. 


12 


In Mesa vy. California, 489 U.S. 12] (1989), this Court 
noted that the federal statute allowing removal of suits 
against federal officers acting “under color of such 
office” (28 U.S.C, 1442(a)(1)) envisions removal only 
when the defendant officer asserts a colorable federal 
defense. 489 U.S. at 135. The Court suggested that a 
statute permitting removal of any lawsuit filed against a 
federal employee could raise serious constitutional 
difficulties. Jd. at 136-139. The Westfall Act does not 
pose that potential problem. The Attorney General’s 
Scope certification under Section 2679(d)(2) reflects a 
determination that the federal employee in question has 
a legitimate federal defense under the Westfall Act. 
Even where the district court overturns the certi- 
fication and resubstitutes the individual defendant, the 
certification establishes that the defense is at least 
“colorable.” By contrast, Congress has expressly pro- 
vided for a remand in cases where both the Attorney 
General and the district court have determined that the 
individual defendant was not acting within the scope of 
his employment. 28 U.S.C. 2679(d)(3). 


715, 725 (1966) (so long as “[t}he federal claim [has] substance 
sufficient to confer subject matter jurisdiction on the court,” 
district court may exercise pendent jurisdiction over pendent state 
law claims). 


i 


13 
*_* *& * & 


For the reasons stated herein, and in the 


for the United States, the judgment of the court of 
appeals should be reversed, and the case should be 
remanded for further proceedings. 

Respectfully submitted. 


opening brief 


DREW'S. Days III 
Solicitor General 


MARCH 1995 


