la 


APPENDIX 


75 Stat 539 
PUBLIC LAW 87-258-SEPT. 21, 1961 


Public Law 87-258 
AN ACT 


To amend title 28, entitled “Judiciary and Judicial Proce- 
dure”, of the United States Code to provide for the 
defense of suits against Federal employees arising out 
of their operation of motor vehicles in the scope of their 
employment, and for other purposes. 


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- 
tives of the United States of America in Congress assem- 
bled, That section 2679 of title 28, United States Code, 
is amended (1) by inserting the subsection symbol “(a)” 
at the beginning thereof and (2) by adding immediately 
following such subsection (a) as hereby so designated, 
four new subsections as follows: 


“(b) The remedy by suit against the United States as 
provided by section 1346(b) of this title for damage to 
property or for personal injury, including death resulting 
from the operation by any employee of the Government 
of any motor vehicle while acting within the scope of his 
office or employment, shall hereafter be exclusive of any 
other civil action or proceeding by reason of the same sub- 
ject matter against the employee or his estate whose act 
or Omission gave rise to the claim. 


“(c) The Attorney General shall defend any civil action 
or proceeding brought in any court against any employee 
of the Government or his estate for any such damage or 
injury. The employee against whom such civil action or 
proceeding is brought shall deliver within such time after 
date of service or knowledge of service as determined by 
the Attorney General, all process served upon him or an 
attested true copy thereof to his immediate superior or to 


2a 


whomever was designated by the head of his department 
to receive such papers and such person shall promptly fur- 
nish copies of the pleadings and process therein to the 
United States attorney for the district embracing the place 
wherein the proceeding is brought, to the Attorney Gen- 
eral, and to the head of his employing Federal agency. 


“(d) Upon a certification by the Attorney General that 
the defendant employee was acting within the scope of 
his employment at the time of the incident out of which 
the suit arose, any such civil action or proceeding com- 
menced in a State court shall be removed without bond 
at any time before trial by the Attorney General to the 
district court of the United States for the district and divi- 
sion embracing the place wherein it is pending and the 
proceedings deemed a tort action brought against the 
United States under the provisions of this title and all 
references thereto. Should a United States district court 
determine on a hearing on a motion to remand held 
before a trial on the merits that the case so removed is 
one in which a remedy by suit within the meaning of 
subsection (b) of this section is not available against the 
United States, the case shall be remanded to the State 
court. 


“(¢) The Attorney General may compromise or settle 
any claim asserted in such civil action or proceeding in 
the manner provided in section 2677, and with the same 
effect.” 


Sec. 2. The amendments made by this Act shall be 
deemed to be in effect six months after the enactment 
hereof but any rights or liabilities then existing shall not 
be affected. 


Approved September 21, 1961. 


