107 STAT. 2044   PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993

                 Public Law 103-180
                 103d Congress

                                     An Act

   Dec. 3, 1993  To amend title 49, United States Code, relating to procedures for resolving claims
      [S. 412]         involving unfiled, negotiated transportation rates, and for other purposes.

Negotiated            Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
Rates Act of     the United States of America in Congress assembled,
1993
49 u s e 10101   SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
note.
                      This Act may be cited as the "Negotiated Rates Act of 1993".

                 SEC. 2. PROCEDURES FOR RESOLVING CLAIMS INVOLVING UNFILED,

                               NEGOTIATED TRANSPORTATION RATES.

                      (a) I N GENERAL.--Section 10701 of title 49, United States Code,
                 is amended by adding at the end the following:

                       "(f) PROCEDURES FOR RESOLVING CLAIMS INVOLVING UNFILED,

                 NEGOTIATED TRANSPORTATION RATES.--

                            "(1) IN GENERAL.--When a claim is made by a motor carrier
                      of property (other than a household goods carrier) providing
                      transportation subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission
                      under subchapter II of chapter 105 of this title, by a freight
                      forwarder (other than a household goods freight forwarder),
                      or by a party representing such a carrier or freight forwarder
                      regarding the collection of rates or charges for such transpor-
                      tation in addition to those originally billed and collected by
                      the carrier or freight forwarder for such transportation, the
                      person against whom the claim is made may elect to satisfy
                      the claim under the provisions of paragraph (2), (3), or (4)
                      of this subsection, upon showing that--

                                  "(A) the carrier or freight forwarder i s . no longer
                            transporting property or is transporting property for the
                            purpose of avoiding the application of tms subsection; and

                                  "(B) with respect to the claim--
                                       "(i) the person was offered a transportation rate

                                  by the carrier or freight forwarder other than that
                                  legally on file with the Commission for the transpor-
                                  tation service;

                                       "(ii) the person tendered freight to the carrier or
                                 freight forwarder in reasonable reliance upon the
                                  offered transportation rate;

                                       "(iii) the carrier or freight forwarder did not prop-
                                  erly or timely file with the Commission a tariff provid-
                                 ing for such transportation rate or failed to enter into
                                 an agi eement for contract carriage;

                                        (iv) such transportation rate was billed and col-
                                 lected by the carrier or freight forwarder; and
PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993                     107 STAT. 2045

"(v) the carrier or freight forwarder demands addi-

tional pa3mient of a higher rate filed in a tariff.

If there is a dispute as to the showing under subparagraph

(A), such dispute shall be resolved by the court in which the

claim is brought. If there is a dispute as to the showing under

subparagraph (B), such dispute shall be resolved by the

Commission. Pending the resolution of any such dispute, the

person shall not have to pay any additional compensation to          \

the carrier or freight forwarder. Satisfaction of the claim under
paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of this subsection shall be binding
on the parties, and the parties shall not be subject to chapter
119 of this title.

      "(2) CLAIMS INVOLVING SHIPMENTS WEIGHING IO,OOO POUNDS

OR LESS.--^A person from whom the additional legally applicable
and effective tariff' rate or charges are sought may elect to
satisfy the claim if the shipments each weighed 10,000 pounds
or less, by payment of 20 percent of the difference between
the carrier's applicable and effective tariff rate and the rate
originally billed and paid. In the event that a dispute arises
as to the rate that was legally applicable to the shipment,
such dispute shall be resolved by the Commission.

       "(3) CLAIMS INVOLVING SHIPMENTS WEIGHING MORE THAN

10,000 POUNDS.--^A person from whom the additional legally
applicable and effective tariff rate or charges are sought may
elect to satisfy the claim if the shipments each weighed more
than 10,000 pounds, by payment of 15 percent of the difference
between the carrier's applicable and effective tariff rate and
the rate originally billed and paid. In the event that a dispute
arises as to the rate that was legally applicable to the shipment,
such dispute shall be resolved by the Cfommission.

       "(4) CLAIMS IN^WLVING PUBLIC WAREHOUSEMEN.--Notwith-

standing paragraphs (2) and (3), a person from whom the
additional legally applicable and effective tariff rate or charges
are sought may elect to satisfy the claim by pa3anent of 5
percent of the difference between the carrier's applicable and
effective tariff rate and the rate originally billed and paid
if such person is a public warehouseman. In the event that
a dispute arises as to the rate that was legally applicable
to the shipment, such dispute shall be resolved by the Cfommis-
sion.

     "(5) EFFECTS OF ELECTION.--^When a person from whom
additional legally applicable freight rates or charges are sought
does not elect to use the provisions of paragraph (2), (3), or
(4), the person may pursue all rights and remedies existing
under this title.

       "(6) STAY OF ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION.--When a person

proceeds under this section to challenge the reasonableness
of the legally applicable freight rate or charges being claimed
by a carrier or freight forwarder described in paragraph (1)
in addition to those already billed and collected, the person
shall not have to pay any additional compensation to the carrier
or freight forwarder until the Commission has made a deter-
mination as to the reasonableness of the challenged rate as
applied to the freight of the person against whom the claim
is made.

      "(7) LIMITATION ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION.--Except as

authorized in paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (9) of this subsection.
107 STAT. 2046  PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993

                nothing in this subsection shall relieve a motor common carrier

                of the duty to file and adhere to its rates, rules, and classifica-

                tions as required in sections 10761 and 10762 of this title.

                "(8) NOTIFICATION OF ELECTION.--

                "(A) GENERAL RULE.--^A person must notify the carrier

                or freight forwarder as to its election to proceed under

                paragraph (2), (3), or (4). Except as provided in subpara-

                graphs (B), (C), and (D), such election may be made at

                any time.

                "(B) DEMANDS FOR PAYMENT INITIALLY MADE AFTER

                DATE OF ENACTMENT.--If the carrier or freight forwarder

                or party representing such carrier or freight forwarder

                initially demands the pa3maent of additional freight charges

                after the date of the enactment of this subsection and

                notifies the person from whom additional freight charges

                are sought of the provisions of paragraphs (1) through

                (7) at the time of the making of such initial demand,

                the election must be made not later than the later of--

                "(i) the 60th day following the filing of an answer

                to a suit for the collection of such additional legally

                applicable freight rate or charges, or

                "(ii) the 90th day following the date of the enact-

                ment of this subsection.

                "(C) PENDING SUITS FOR COLLECTION MADE BEFORE OR

                ON DATE OF ENACTMENT.--If the carrier or freight forwarder

                or party representing such carrier or freight forwarder

                has filed, before or on the date of the enactment of this

                subsection, a suit for the collection of additional freight

                charges and notifies the person from whom additional

                freight charges are sought of the provisions of paragraphs

                (1) through (7), the election must be made not later than

                the 90th day following the date on which such notification

                is received.

\               "(D) DEMANDS FOR PAYMENT MADE BEFORE OR ON DATE

                OF ENACTMENT.--If the carrier or freight forwarder or party

                representing such carrier or freight forwarder has

                demanded the payment of additional freight charges, and

                has not filed a suit for the collection of such additional

                freight charges, before or on the date of the enactment

                of this subsection and notifies the person from whom addi-

                tional freight charges are sought of the provisions of para-

                graphs (1) througn (7), the election must be made not

                later than the later of--

                "(i) the 60th day following the filing of an answer

                to a suit for the collection of such additional legally

                appUcable freight rate or charges, or

                "(ii) the 90th day following the date of the enact-

                ment of this subsection.

                "(9) CLAIMS INVOLVING SMALL-BUSINESS CONCERNS, CHARI-

                , TABLE ORGANIZATIONS, AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.--Notwith-

                standing paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), a person from whom

                the additional legally applicable and effective tariff rate or

                charges are sought shall not be liable for the difference between

                the carrier's applicable and effective tariff rate and the rate

                originally billed and psdd--

                "(A) if such person qualifies as a small-business concern

                under the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.),
PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993  107 STAT. 2047 /

                 "(B) if such person is an organization which is described  49 u s e 10701.
           in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986        49 u s e 10701
           and exempt from tax under section .501(a) of such Code,          note.
           or
                                                                            49 u s e 10701
                 "(C) if the cargo involved in the claim is recyclable      note.
           materials, as defined in section 10733.".
      (b) CONFORMING J\MENDMENT.--Subsection (e) of such section            49 u s e 10701
is amended by striking "In" and inserting "Except as provided               note.
in subsection (f), in".
      (c) APPLICABILITY.--^The amendments made by subsections (a)
and (b) of this section shall apply to all claims pending as of
the date of the enactment of this Act and to all claims arising
from transportation shipments tendered on or before the last day
of the 24-month period beginning on such date'of enactment.

      (d) REPORT.--^Not later than 18 months after the date of the
enactment of this Act, the Interstate Commerce Commission shall
transmit to Congress a report regarding whether there exists a
justification for extending the applicability of amendments made
by subsections (a) and (b) of this section beyond the period specified
in subsection (c).

       (e) ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE FOR RESOLVING DISPUTES.--

           (1) GENERAL RULE.--^For purposes of section 10701 of title
      49, United States Code, it shall be an unreasonable practice
      for a motor carrier of property (other than a household goods
      carrier) providing transportation subject to the jurisdiction of
      the Commission under subchapter II of chapter 105 of such
      title, a freight forwarder (other than a household goods freight
      forwarder), or a party representing such a carrier or freight
      forwarder to attempt to charge or to charge for a transportation
      service provided before September 30, 1990, the difference
      between the applicable rate that is lawfully in effect pursuant
      to a tariff that is filed in accordance with chapter 107 of
      such title by the carrier or fi'eight forwarder applicable to
      such transportation service and the negotiated rate for such
      transportation service if the carrier or freight forwarder is
      no longer transporting property between places described in
      section 10521(a)(1) of such title or is transporting property
      between places described in section 10521(a)(1) of such title
      for the purpose of avoiding the application of this subsection.

           (2) JURISDICTION OF COMMISSION.--The Commission shall
      have jurisdiction to make a determination of whether or not
      attempting to charge or the charging of a rate by a motor
      carrier or freight forwarder or party representing a motor car-
      rier or freight forwarder is an unreasonable practice under
      paragraph (1). If the Commission determines that attempting
      to charge or the charging of the rate is an unreasonable practice
      under paragraph (1), the carrier, fi*eight forwarder, or party
      may not collect the difference described in paragraph (1)
      between the applicable rate and the negotiated rate for the
      transportation service. In meiking such determination, the
      Commission shall consider--

                 (A) whether the person was offered a transportation
           rate by the carrier or freight forwarder or party other
           than that legally on file with the Commission for the
           transportation service;
107 STAT. 2048  PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993

49 use 10701                   (B) whether the person tendered freight to the carrier
"°^-                      or freight forwarder in reasonable reUance upon the offered
                          transportation rate;

                               (C) whether the carrier or freight forwarder did not
                          properly or timely file with the Commission a tariff provid-
                          ing for such transportation rate or failed to enter into
                          an agreement for contract carriage;

                               (D) whether the transportation rate was billed and
                          collected by the carrier or freight forwarder; and

                               (E) whether the carrier or freight forwarder or party
                          demands additional payment of a higher rate filed in a
                          tariff".

                            (3) STAY OF ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION.--When a person

                    proceeds under this subsection to challenge the reasonableness
                    of the practice of a motor carrier, freight forwarder, or party
                    described in paragraph (1) to attempt to charge or to charge
                    the difference described in paragraph (1) between the applicable
                    rate and the negotiated rate for the transportation service
                    in addition to those charges already billed and collected for
                    the transportation service, the person shall not have to pay
                    any additional compensation to the carrier, freight forwarder,
                    or party until the Commission has made a determination as
                    to the reasonableness of the practice as appUed to the freight
                    of the person against whom the claim is made.

                         (4) TREATMENT.--Paragraph (1) of this subsection is
                    enacted as an exception, and shall be treated as an exception,
                    to the requirements of sections 10761(a) and 10762 of title
                    49, United States Code, relating to a filed tariff rate for a
                    transportation or service subject to the jurisdiction of the
                    Commission and other general tariff requirements.

                         (5) NONAPPLICABILITY OF NEGOTIATED RATE DISPUTE RESO-
                    LUTION PROCEDURE.--If a person elects to seek enforcement
                    of paragraph (1) with respect to a rate for a transportation
                   or service, section 10701(f) of title 49, United States Code,
                    as added by subsection (a) of this section, shall not apply
                   to such rate.

                         (6) DEFINITIONS.--^For purposes of this subsection, the fol-
                   lowing definitions apply:

                                   (A) COMMISSION, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, HOUSEHOLD

                         GOODS FREIGHT FORWARDER, AND MOTOR CARRIER.--^The

                         terms "Commission", "household goods", "household goods
                         freight forwarder", and "motor carrier" have the meaning
                         such terms have under section 10102 of title 49, United
                         States Code.

                               (B) NEGOTL\TED RATE.--The term "negotiated rate"
                         means a rate, charge, classification, or rule agreed upon
                         by a motor carrier or freight forwarder described in para-
                         graph (1) £uid a shipper through negotiations pursuant
                         to which no tariff was lawfiilly and timely filed with the
                         Commission and for which there is written evidence of
                         such agreement.
                   (f) PRIOR SETTLEMENTS AND ADJUDICATIONS.--Any claim that,
              but for this subsection, would be subject to any provision of this
              Act (including any amendment made by this Act) and that was
              settled by mutual agreement of the parties to such claim, or resolved
              by a final adjudication of a Federal or State court, before the
              date of the enactment of this Act shall be treated as binding.
PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993               107 STAT. 2049

enforceable, and not contrary to law, unless such settlement was

agreed to as a result of fraud or coercion.

(g) RATE REASONA]BLENESS.--Section 10701(e) of title 49, United

States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: "Any

complaint brought against a motor carrier (other than a carrier                         ^

described in subsection (f)(1)(A)) by a person (other than a motor

carrier) for unreasonably high rates for past or fiiture transportation

shall be determined under this subsection.**.

SEC. 3. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

     (a) MOTOR CARRIER CHARGES.--Section 11706(a) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended by striking the period at the
end and inserting the following: "; except tnat a motor carrier
(other than a motor carrier providing transportation of household
goods) or freight forwarder (other than a household goods freight
forwarder)--

           "(1) must begin such a civil action within 2 years after
     the claim accrues if the transportation or service is provided
     by the carrier in the 1-year period beginning on the date
     of the enactment of the Negotiated Rates Act of 1993; and

           "(2) must begin such a civil action within 18 months after
     the claim accrues if the transportation or service is provided
     by the carrier after the last day of such 1-year period.".

     (b) MOTOR CARRIER OVERCHARGES.--Section 11706(b) of title
49, United States Code, is amended by striking ". If that claim
is against a common carrier" and inserting the following: "; except
that a person must begin a civil action to recover overcharges
from a motor carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission
under subchapter II of chapter 105 of this title for transportation
or service--

           "(1) within 2 years after the claim accrues if such transpor-
     tation or service is provided in the 1-year period beginning
     on the date of the enactment of the Negotiated Rate Act of
      1993; and

           "(2) within 18 months after the claim accrues if such
     transportation or service is provided after the last day of such
      1-year period.
If the claim is against a common carrier".

     (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Section 11706(d) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended--

           (1) by striking "3-year period" each place it appears and
     inserting "limitation periods";

           (2) Dy striking "is extended" the first place it appears
     and inserting "are extended"; and

           (3) by striking "each".

SEC. 4. TARIFF RECONCILIATION RULES FOR MOTOR CARRIERS OF
              PROPERTY.

     (a) I N GENERAL.--Chapter 117 of title 49, United States Code,
is amended by adding at the end the following:

**§ 11712. Tariff r e c o n c i l i a t i o n r u l e s for m o t o r c o m m o n car-
                 riers of p r o p e r t y

     "(a) MUTUAL CONSENT.--Subject to Commission review and
approval, motor carriers subject to the jurisdiction of the Commis-
sion under subchapter II of chapter 105 of this title (other than
motor carriers providing transportation of household goods) and
shippers may resolve, by mutual consent, overcharge and under-
107 STAT. 2050  PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993

charge claims resulting from incorrect tariff provisions or billing
errors arising from the inadvertent failure to properly and timely
file and maintain agreed upon rates, rules, or classifications in
compliance with sections 10761 and 10762 of this title. Resolution
of such claims among the parties shall not subject any party to
the penalties of chapter 119 of this title.

       "(b) LIMITATION ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION.--Nothing in

this section shall relieve the motor carrier of the duty to file and
adhere to its rates, rules, and classifications as required in sections
10761 and 10762, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section.

      "(c) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING.--Not later than 90 days after
the date of the enactment of this section, the Commission shall
institute a proceeding to establish rules pursuant to which the
tariff requirements of sections 10761 and 10762 of this title shall
not apply under circumstances described in subsection (a) of this
section.".

       (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--The analysis for chapter 117

of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end
the following:

"11712. Tariff reconciliation rules for motor common carriers of property.".

SEC. 6. CUSTOMER ACCOUNT CODES AND RANGE TARIFFS.

      (a) CUSTOMER ACCOUNT CODES.--Section 10762 of title 49,
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

      "(h) CUSTOMER ACCOUNT CODES.--NO tariff filed by a motor
carrier of property with the Commission before, on, or after the
date of the enactment of this subsection may be held invalid solely
on the basis that a numerical or alpha account code is used in
such tariff to designate customers or to describe the applicability
of rates. For transportation performed on and after the 180th day
following such date of enactment, the name of the customer for
each account code must be set forth in the tariff (other than the
tariff of a motor carrier providing transportation of household
goods).".

     (b) RANGE TARIFFS.--Such section is further amended by adding
at the end the following:

     "(i) RANGE TARIFFS.--^No tariff filed by a motor carrier of prop-
erty with the Commission before, on, or after the date of the
enactment of this subsection may be held invalid solely on the
basis that the tariff does not show a specific rate or discount
for a specific shipment if the tariff is based on a range of rates
or discounts for specific classes of shipments. For transportetion
performed on or after the 180th day following such date of enact-
ment, such a range tariff must identify the specific rate or discount
from among the range of rates or discounts contained in such
range tariff which is applicable to each specific shipment or must
contain an objective means for determining the rate.".

SEC. 6. CONTRACTS OF MOTOR CONTRACT CARRIERS.

     (a) I N GENERAL.--Section 10702 of title 49, United States Code,
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:

      "(c) CONTRACTS O F CARRIAGE FOR MOTOR CONTRACT CAR-

RIERS.--

           "(1) GENERAL RULE.--^A motor contract carrier providing
  , transportetion subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission

     under subchapter II of chapter 105 of this title shall enter
     into a written agreement, separate from the bill of lading
           PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993                 107 STAT. 2051

    or receipt, for each contract for the provision of transportation

    subject to such jurisdiction which is entered into sifter the

    90th day following the date of the enactment of this subsection.

    "(2) MINIMUM CONTENT REQUIREMENTS.--The written

    agreement shall, at a minimum--

           "(A) identify the parties thereto;

           "(B) commit the shipper to tender and the carrier to

    transport a series of shipments;

           "(C) contain the contract rate or rates for the transpor-

    tation service to be or being provided; and

--         "(D)(i) state that it provides for the assignment of

    motor vehicles for a continuing period of time for the exclu-

    sive use of the shipper; or

           "(ii) state that it provides that the service is designed

    to meet the distinct needs of the shipper.

    "(3) RETENTION BY CARRIER.--All written agreements

    entered into by a motor contract carrier under paragraph (1)

    shall be retained by the carrier while in effect and for a mini-

    mum period of 3 years thereafter and shall be made available

    to the Commission upon request.

    "(4) RANDOM AUDITS BY COMMISSION.--The Commission

    shall conduct periodic random audits to ensure that motor

    contract carriers are complying with this subsection and are

    adhering to the rates set forth in their agreements.".

    (b) CIVIL PENALTY.--Section 11901(g) of such title is amended--        49 use ii90i.

    (1) by inserting "or enter into or retain a written agreement

    under section 10702(c) of this title" after "under this subtitle"

    the first place it appears; and

    (2) by striking "or (5)" and inserting "(5) does not comply

    with section 10702(c) of this title, or (6)".

    (c) CRIMINAL PENALTY.--Section 11909(b) of such title is

amended--

    (1) by inserting "or enter into or retain a written agreement

    under section 10702(c) of this title" after "under this subtitle"

    the first place it appears; and

    (2) in clause (1) by inserting after "make that report"

    the following: "or willfmly does not enter into or retain that

    agreement".

SEC. 7. BILLING AND COLLECTING PRACTICES.

     (a) I N GENERAL.--Subchapter IV of chapter 107 of title 49,
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

**§ 10767. Billing and collecting practices

      "(a) REGULATIONS LIMITING REDUCED RATES.--^Not later than
120 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Commis-
sion shall issue regulations that prohibit a motor carrier subject
to the jurisdiction of the Commission under subchapter II of chapter
105 of this title from providing a reduction in a rate set forth
in its tariff or contract for the provision of transportation of property
to any person other than (1) the person paying the motor carrier
directly for the transportation service according to the bill of lading,
receipt, or contract, or (2) an agent of the person paying for the
transportation.

       "(b) DISCLOSURE OF ACTUAL RATES, CHARGES, AND ALLOW-

ANCES.--^The regulations of the Commission issued pursuant to
this section shsill require a motor carrier to disclose, when a docu-
107 STAT. 2052  PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993

49 use 11901.  ment is presented or transmitted electronically for pa)mient to
               the person responsible directly to the motor carrier for payment
               or agent of such responsible person, the actual rates, charges,
               or allowances for the transportation service and shall prohibit any
               person from causing a motor carrier to present false or misleading
               information on a document about the actual rate, charge, or allow-
               ance to any party to the transaction. Where the actual rate, charge,
               or allowance is dependent upon the performance of a service oy
               a party to the transportation arrangement, such as tendering a
               volume of freight over a stated period of time, the motor carrier
               shall indicate in any document presented for payment to the person
               responsible directly to the motor carrier for the pajmaent that a
               reduction, allowance, or other adjustment may apply.

                      "(c) PAYMENTS OR ALLOWANCES FOR CERTAIN SERVICES.--The

               regulations issued by the Commission pursuant to this section
               shall not prohibit a motor carrier from making payments or allow-
               ances to a party to the transaction for services that would otherwise
               be performed by the motor carrier, such as a loading or unloading
               service, if the payments or allowances are reasonably related to
               the cost that such party knows or has reason to know would
               otherwise be incurred by the motor carrier.".

                     (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--The analysis for such sub-
               chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

               "10767. Billing and collecting practices.".

                      (c) VIOLATION.--

                          (1) IN GENERAL.--Section 11901 of such title is amended
                     by redesignating subsection (1) as subsection (m) and by insert-
                     ing after subsection (k) the following:

                      "(1) RATE DISCOUNTS.--^A person, or an officer, employee, or

               agent of that person, that knowingly pays, accepts, or solicits a
               reduced rate or rates in violation of the regulations issued under
               section 10767 of this title is liable to the United States for a
               civil penalty of not less than $5,000 and not more than $10,000
               plus 3 times the amount of damages which a party incurs because
               of such violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title,
               the express civil penalties and damages provided for in this sub-
               section are the exclusive legal sanctions to be imposed under this
               title for practices found to be in violation of the regulations issued
               under section 10767 and such violations do not render tariff or
               contract provisions void or unenforceable.".

                          (2) VENUE.--Section 11901(m)(2) of such title (as redesig-
                     nated by paragraph (1)) is amended by striking "or (k)" and
                     inserting "(k), or (1)".

               SEC. 8. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES RELATING TO CONTRACT OR COM-

                             MON CARRIER CAPACITIES.

                     Section 11101 of title 49, United States Code, is amended
               by adding at the end the following:

                      "(d) RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES RELATING TO CONTRACT OR COM-

               MON CARRIER CAPACITIES.--If a motor carrier (other than a motor
               carrier providing transportation of household goods) subject to the
               jurisdiction of the Commission under subchapter II of chapter 105
               of this title has authority to provide transportation as both a
               motor common carrier and a motor contract carrier and a dispute
               arises as to whether certain transportation is provided in its com-
               mon carrier or contract carrier capacity and the parties are not
PUBLIC LAW 103-180--DEC. 3, 1993  107 STAT. 2053

able to resolve the dispute consensually, the Commission shall                      49 USC 10701
have jurisdiction to, and shall, resolve the dispute.".

SEC. 9. LIMITATION ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION.

     Nothing in this Act (including any amendment made by this
Act) shall be construed as limiting or otherwise affecting application
of title 11, United States Code, relating to bankruptcy; title 28,
United States Code, relating to the jurisdiction of the courts of
the United States (including bankruptcy courts); or the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.

Approved December 3, 1993.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--S. 412 (H.R. 2121):

HOUSE REPORTS: No. 103-359 accompanying H.R. 2121 (Comm. on Public Works
                           and Transportation).

SENATE REPORTS: No. 103-79 ((]omm. on Commerce, Science, and Transportation).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 139 (1993):

        July 1, considered and passcad Senate.
        Nov. 15, H.R. 2121 considered and passed House; S. 412, amended, passed in

           lieu.
        Nov. 18, Senate concurred in House amendments.
