


 
  
  
  
	window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
	function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
	gtag('js', new Date());
  
	gtag('config', 'G-PDVVHXRDE6');
  

	
	
	
		window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
		function gtag() { dataLayer.push(arguments); }
		gtag('js', new Date());

		gtag('config', 'UA-1734385-15');
	
	
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Barnett Bank of Marion County, N. A. v. Nelson, Florida Ins. Comm'r, 517 U.S. 25 (1996)
 
 

    
    
	
		
			LII
			 
			Supreme Court		 
		
	


 


Barnett Bank of Marion County, N. A. v. Nelson, Florida Ins. Comm'r (94-1837), 517 U.S. 25 (1996)
Syllabus   Opinion  [ Breyer ]HTML versionWordPerfect versionHTML versionWordPerfect version

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
 as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
 is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
 but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
 of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
 U.S. 321, 337.
 
 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
 
 
Syllabus
BARNETT BANK OF MARION COUNTY,
 N. A. v. NELSON, FLORIDA INSURANCE COMMISSIONER,
 et al.
 
 
certiorari to the united states
 court of appeals for the eleventh circuit
 
 
No. 94-1837.
 Argued January 16, 1996 -- Decided
 March 26, 1996
 
 

 
 
A 1916 federal law (Federal Statute) permits national banks to sell
 insurance in small towns, but a Florida law (State Statute) prohibits such
 banks from selling most types of insurance. When petitioner Barnett Bank,
 a national bank doing business in a small Florida town, bought a state
 licensed insurance agency, respondent State Insurance Commissioner ordered
 the agency to stop selling the prohibited forms of insurance. In this action
 for declaratory and injunctive relief, the District Court held that the
 State Statute was not pre-empted, but only because of the McCarran Ferguson
 Act's special insurance related anti pre-emption rule. That rule provides
 that a federal law will not pre-empt a state law enacted "for the
 purpose of regulating the business of insurance"--unless the federal
 statute "specifically relates to the business of insurance." 15
 U.S.C. § 1012(b) (emphasis added). The Court of Appeals affirmed.
 
 
Held: The Federal Statute
 pre-empts the State Statute. Pp. 4-17.
 
 
(a) Under ordinary pre-emption
 principles, the State Statute would be pre-empted, for it is clear that
 Congress, in enacting the Federal Statute, intended to exercise its constitutionally
 delegated authority to override contrary state law. The Federal and State
 Statutes are in "irreconcilable conflict," Rice v. Norman Williams
 Co., 458
 U.S. 654, 659, since the Federal Statute authorizes national banks
 to engage in activities that the State Statute expressly forbids. Thus,
 the State's prohibition would seem to "stan[d] as an obstacle to the accomplishment"
 of one of the Federal Statute's purposes, Hines v. Davidowitz,
 312
 U.S. 52, 67, unless, as the State contends, Congress intended to limit
 federal permission to sell insurance to those circumstances permitted by
 state law. However, by providing, without relevant qualification, that
 national banks "may . . . act as the agent" for insurance sales, 12
 U.S.C. § 92 the Federal Statute's language suggests a broad, not
 a limited, permission. That this authority is granted in "addition to the
 powers now vested . . . in national [banks]," ibid. (emphasis
 added), is also significant. Legislative grants of both enumerated and
 incidental "powers" to national banks historically have been interpreted
 as grants of authority not normally limited by, but rather ordinarily pre-empting,
 contrary state law. See, e.g., First Nat. Bank of San Jose
 v. California, 262
 U.S. 366, 368-369. Where, as here, Congress has not expressly conditioned
 the grant of power upon a grant of state permission, this Court has ordinarily
 found that no such condition applies. See Franklin Nat. Bank v.
 New York, 347
 U.S. 373. The State's argument that special circumstances surrounding
 the Federal Statute's enactment demonstrate Congress' intent to grant only
 a limited permission is unpersuasive. Pp. 4-11.
 
 
(b) The McCarran Ferguson Act's anti pre-emption rule does not
 govern this case, because the Federal Statute "specifically relates to
 the business of insurance." This conclusion rests upon the Act's language
 and purposes, taken together. The word "relates" is highly general; and
 in ordinary English, the Federal Statute--which focuses directly upon industry
 specific selling practices and affects the relation of insured to insurer
 and the spreading of risk--"specifically" relates to the insurance business.
 The Act's mutually reinforcing purposes--that state regulation and taxation
 of the insurance business is in the public interest, and that Congress'
 "silence . . . shall not be construed to impose any barrier to [such]
 regulation or taxation," 15
 U.S.C. § 1011 (emphasis added)--also support this view. This phrase,
 especially the word "silence," indicates that the Act seeks to protect
 state regulation primarily against inadvertent federal intrusion, not to
 insulate state insurance regulation from the reach of all federal law.
 The circumstances surrounding the Act's enactment also suggest that the
 Act was passed to ensure that generally phrased congressional statutes,
 which do not mention insurance, are not applied to the issuance of insurance
 policies, thereby interfering with state regulation in unanticipated ways.
 The parties' remaining arguments to the contrary are unconvincing. Pp.
 11-17.
 
 
43 F. 3d 631,
 reversed.
 
 
Breyer, J., delivered the opinion
 for a unanimous Court.
 
 

 
 


 


