--- PDF page 1 ---
OCTOBER TERM, 1993
Syllabus
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
MILITARY APPEALS
No. 92-1482. Argued November 3, 1993-Decided January 19, 1994*
Mter courts-martial sentenced petitioners Weiss and Hernandez, United
States Marines, on their pleas of guilty to offenses under the Uniform
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), their convictions were affirmed by the
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Military Review in separate appeals. In
affirming Weiss' conviction, the Court of Military Appeals rejected his
contentions, first, that military trial and appellate judges have no au-
thority to convict because the method of their appointment by the vari-
ous Judge Advocates General under the UCMJ violates the Appoint-
ments Clause, U.S. Const., Art. II, § 2, cl. 2, and, second, that such
judges' lack of a fixed term of office violates the Fifth Amendment's Due
Process Clause. Based on this decision, the court summarily affirmed
Hernandez' conviction.
Held:
1. The current method of appointing military judges does not violate
the Appointments Clause, which, inter alia, requires the President to
appoint "Officers of the United States" with the advice and consent of
the Senate. All of the military judges involved in these cases were
already commissioned military officers when they were assigned to
serve as judges, and thus they had already been appointed pursuant to
the Clause. The position of military judge is not so different from other
positions to which an officer may be assigned that Congress has by im-
plication required a second appointment under the Clause before the
officer may discharge judicial duties. The fact that the UCMJ requires
military judges to possess certain qualifications, including membership
in a state or federal bar, does not in itself indicate a congressional intent
to create a separate office, since special qualifications are needed to fill a
host of military positions. Moreover, the UCMJ's explicit and exclusive
treatment of military judges as officers who must be "detailed" or "as-
signed" by a superior officer is quite different from Congress' treatment
of a number of top-level positions in the military hierarchy, such as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for which a second appointment
under the Clause is expressly required. Nor does the Clause by its own
*Together with Hernandez v. United States, also on certiorari to the
same court (see this Court's Rule 12.2).


--- PDF page 2 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
force require a second appointment. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, and
subsequent decisions simply do not speak to this question. The present
case is also distinguishable from Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U. S.
282. Even assuming, arguendo, that the "germaneness" principle set
forth in Shoemaker, id., at 300-301, applies to the present situation, no
second appointment is necessary because the role of military judge is"germane" to that of military officer: By contrast to civilian society, non-
judicial military officers play a significant part in the administration of
military justice; and, by the same token, the position of military judge
is less distinct from other military positions than the office of full-time
civilian judge is from other offices in civilian society. Pp. 169-176.
2. The lack of a fixed term of office for military judges does not violate
the Due Process Clause. Neither Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U. S. 319,
nor Medina v. California, 505 U. S. 437, provides a due process analysis
that is appropriate to the military context, in which judicial deference
to Congress' determinations is at its apogee. Rather, the appropriate
standard is that found in Middendorf v. Henry, 425 U. S. 25, 44: whether
the factors militating in favor of fixed terms are so extraordinarily
weighty as to overcome the balance struck by Congress. The historical
fact that military judges in the Anglo-American system have never had
tenure is a factor that must be weighed in this calculation. Moreover,
the applicable provisions of the UCMJ, and corresponding regulations,
sufficiently insulate military judges from the effects of command influ-
ence. Thus, since neither history nor current practice supports peti-
tioners' assumption that a military judge who does not have a fixed term
lacks the independence necessary to ensure impartiality, petitioners
have fallen far short of satisfying the applicable standard. Pp. 176-181.
36 M. J. 224 and 37 M. J. 252, affirmed.
REHNQUIST, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which BLACK-
MUN, STEVENS, O'CONNOR, KENNEDY, SOUTER, and GINSBURG, JJ., joined,
and in which SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined as to Parts I and II-A.
SOUTER, J., filed a concurring opinion, post, p. 182. GINSBURG, J., filed a
concurring opinion, post, p. 194. ScALu, J., filed an opinion concurring in
part and concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J., joined, post,
p. 195.
Alan B. Morrison argued the cause for petitioners. With
him on the briefs were Philip D. Cave, Dwight H. Sullivan,
Eugene R. Fidell, and Ronald W. Meister.
Solicitor General Days argued the cause for the United
States. With him on the brief were Acting Assistant At-


--- PDF page 3 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
torney General Keeney, Deputy Solicitor General Bryson,
Paul J Larkin, Jr., Thomas E. Booth, Theodore G. Hess, and
Albert Diaz. t
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the
Court.
We must decide in these cases whether the current method
of appointing military judges violates the Appointments
Clause of the Constitution, and whether the lack of a fixed
term of office for military judges violates the Fifth Amend-
ment's Due Process Clause. We conclude that neither con-
stitutional provision is violated.
Petitioner Weiss, a United States Marine, pleaded guilty
at a special court-martial to one count of larceny, in violation
of Article 121 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice
(UCMJ or Code), 10 U. S. C. § 921. He was sentenced to
three months of confinement, partial forfeiture of pay, and a
bad-conduct discharge. Petitioner Hernandez, also a Ma-
rine, pleaded guilty to the possession, importation, and dis-
tribution of cocaine, in violation of Article 112a, UCMJ, 10
U. S. C. § 912a, and conspiracy, in violation of Article 81,
UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 881. He was sentenced to 25 years of
confinement, forfeiture of all pay, a reduction in rank, and
a dishonorable discharge. The convening authority reduced
Hernandez' sentence to 20 years of confinement.
The Navy-Marine Corps Court of Military Review, in sep-
arate appeals, affirmed petitioners' convictions. The Court
of Military Appeals granted plenary review in petitioner
Weiss' case to address his contention that the judges in his
case had no authority to convict him because their appoint-
ments violated the Appointments Clause, and their lack of a
tBriefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for the American
Civil Liberties Union et al. by David B. Isbell, John Vanderstar, David
H. Resnicoff, Steven R. Shapiro, and Arthur B. Spitzer; and for the United
States Air Force Appellate Defense Division by Robert L Smith, Jay L.
Cohen, and Frank J Spinner.


--- PDF page 4 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
fixed term of office violated the Due Process Clause. Rely-
ing on its recent decision in United States v. Graf, 35 M. J.
450 (1992), cert. pending, No. 92-1102, in which the court
unanimously held that due process does not require military
judges to have a fixed term of office, the court rejected
Weiss' due process argument. 36 M. J. 224, 235, n. 1 (1992).
In a splintered decision, the court also rejected petitioner's
Appointments Clause challenge.
Two of the five judges concluded that the initial appoint-
ment of military trial and appellate judges as commissioned
officers is sufficient to satisfy the Appointments Clause. Id.,
at 225-234 (plurality opinion). A separate appointment be-
fore taking on the duties of a military judge is unnecessary,
according to the plurality, in part because the duties of
a judge in the military justice system are germane to the
duties that military officers already discharge. Ibid. One
judge concurred in the result only, concluding that the Ap-
pointments Clause does not apply to the military. Id., at
234-240 (opinion of Crawford, J.). The other two judges
dissented separately. Both stressed the significant changes
brought about by the Military Justice Act of 1968, particu-
larly the duties added to the newly created office of military
judge, and both concluded that the duties of a military judge
are sufficiently distinct from the other duties performed by
military officers to require a second appointment. See id.,
at 240-256 (Sullivan, C. J., dissenting), and id., at 256-263
(Wiss, J., dissenting).
The Court of Military Appeals accordingly affirmed peti-
tioner Weiss' conviction. Based on its decision in Weiss, the
court, in an unpublished opinion, also affirmed petitioner
Hernandez' conviction. Judgt. order reported at 37 M. J. 252
(1993). Weiss and Hernandez then jointly petitioned for our
review, and we granted certiorari. 508 U. S. 939 (1993).
It will help in understanding the issues involved to review
briefly the contours of the military justice system and the
role of military judges within that system. Pursuant to Ar-


--- PDF page 5 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
tidle I of the Constitution, Congress has established three
tiers of military courts. See U. S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 14.
At the trial level are the courts-martial, of which there are
three types: summary, special, and general. The summary
court-martial adjudicates only minor offenses, has jurisdic-
tion only over servicemembers, and can be conducted only
with their consent. It is presided over by a single commis-
sioned officer who can impose up to one month of confinement
and other relatively modest punishments. Arts. 16(3), 20,
UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. §§ 816(3), 820.
The special court-martial usually consists of a military
judge and three court-martial members,' although the Code
allows the members to sit without a judge, or the accused to
elect to be tried by the judge alone. Art. 16(2), UCMJ, 10
U. S. C. § 816(2). A special court-martial has jurisdiction
over most offenses under the UCMJ, but it may impose pun-
ishment no greater than six months of confinement, three
months of hard labor without confinement, a bad-conduct dis-
charge, partial and temporary forfeiture of pay, and a reduc-
tion in grade. Art. 19, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 819. The gen-
eral court-martial consists of either a military judge and at
least five members, or the judge alone if the accused so re-
quests. Art. 16(1), UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 816(1). A general
court-martial has jurisdiction over all offenses under the
UCMJ and may impose any lawful sentence, including death.
Art. 18, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 818.
The military judge, a position that has officially existed
only since passage of the Military Justice Act of 1968, acts
as presiding officer at a special or general court-martial.
Art. 26, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 826. The judge rules on all
legal questions, and instructs court-martial members regard-
ing the law and procedures to be followed. Art. 51, UCMJ,
1Court-martial members may be officers or enlisted personnel, depend-
ing on the military status of the accused; the members' responsibilities are
analogous to, but somewhat greater than, those of civilian jurors. See
Art. 25, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 825.


--- PDF page 6 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
10 U. S. C. § 851. The members decide guilt or innocence
and impose sentence unless, of course, the trial is before the
judge alone. Ibid. No sentence imposed becomes final
until it is approved by the officer who convened the court-
martial. Art. 60, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 860.
Military trial judges must be commissioned officers of the
Armed Forces 2 and members of the bar of a federal court or
a State's highest court. Art. 26, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 826.
The judges are selected and certified as qualified by the
Judge Advocate General of their branch of the Armed
Forces.' They do not serve for fixed terms and may per-
form judicial duties only when assigned to do so by the
appropriate Judge Advocate General. While serving as
judges, officers may also, with the approval of the Judge
Advocate General, perform other tasks unrelated to their
judicial duties. Ibid. There are approximately 74 judges
currently certified to preside at general and special courts-
martial. An additional 25 are certified to preside only over
special courts-martial.
At the next tier are the four Courts of Military Review,
one each for the Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, and Navy-
Marine Corps. These courts, which usually sit in three-
judge panels, review all cases in which the sentence imposed
is for one or more years of confinement, involves the dis-
missal of a commissioned officer, or involves the punitive dis-
charge of an enlisted servicemember. Art. 66, UCMJ, 10
U. S. C. § 866. The courts may review de novo both factual
and legal findings, and they may overturn convictions and
sentences. Ibid.
2 All commissioned officers are appointed by the President, with the
advice and consent of the Senate. 10 U. S. C. § 531.
3 The Judge Advocate General for each service is the principal legal offi-
cer for that service. See 10 U. S. C. § 3037 (Army), § 5148 (Navy-Marine
Corps), § 8037 (Air Force); Art. 1(1), UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 801(1) (Coast
Guard).


--- PDF page 7 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
Appellate judges may be commissioned officers or civil-
ians, but each must be a member of a bar of a federal court
or of a State's highest court. Ibid. The judges are selected
and assigned to serve by the appropriate Judge Advocate
General. Ibid. Like military trial judges, appellate judges
do not serve for a fixed term. There are presently 31 appel-
late military judges.
Atop the system is the Court of Military Appeals, which
consists of five civilian judges who are appointed by the
President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, for
fixed terms of 15 years. Arts. 67, 142, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C.
§§ 867, 942 (1988 ed., Supp. IV). The appointment and ten-
ure of these judges are not at issue here.
I
The Appointments Clause of Article II of the Constitution
reads as follows:
"[The President] shall nominate, and by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambas-
sadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the
supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United
States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise
provided for, and which shall be established by Law:
but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of
such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the Presi-
dent alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of
Departments." U.S. Const., Art. II, § 2, cl. 2.
We begin our analysis on common ground. The parties do
not dispute that military judges, because of the authority and
responsibilities they possess, act as "Officers" of the United
States. See Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868 (1991)
(concluding special trial judges of Tax Court are officers);
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 126 (1976) ("[A]ny appointee
exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the
United States is an 'Officer of the United States,' and must,


--- PDF page 8 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
therefore, be appointed in the manner prescribed by [the Ap-
pointments Clause]"). The parties are also in agreement,
and rightly so, that the Appointments Clause applies to mili-
tary officers. As we said in Buckley, "all officers of the
United States are to be appointed in accordance with the
Clause.... No class or type of officer is excluded because of
its special functions." Id., at 132 (emphasis in original).
It follows that those serving as military judges must be
appointed pursuant to the Appointments Clause. All of the
military judges involved in these cases, however, were al-
ready commissioned officers when they were assigned to
serve as judges,4 and thus they had already been appointed
by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.6
The question we must answer, therefore, is whether these
officers needed another appointment pursuant to the Ap-
pointments Clause before assuming their judicial duties.
Petitioners contend that the position of military judge is so
different from other positions to which an officer may be as-
signed that either Congress has, by implication, required a
second appointment, or the Appointments Clause, by consti-
tutional command, requires one. We reject both of these
arguments.
Petitioners' argument that Congress by implication has re-
quired a separate appointment is based in part on the fact
that military judges must possess certain qualifications, in-
4 The constitutionality of the provision allowing civilians to be assigned
to Courts of Military Review, without being appointed pursuant to the
Appointments Clause, obviously presents a quite different question. See
Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 866(a). It is not at issue here.
5 Although the record before us does not contain complete information
regarding the military careers of the judges involved in these cases, it is
quite possible that they had been appointed more than once before being
detailed or assigned to serve as military judges. This is because 10
U. S. C. § 624 requires a new appointment by the President, with the
advice and consent of the Senate, each time a commissioned officer is
promoted to a higher grade--e. g., if a captain is promoted to major, he
must receive another appointment.


--- PDF page 9 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
cluding membership in a state or federal bar. But such spe-
cial qualifications in themselves do not, we believe, indicate
a congressional intent to create a separate office. Special
qualifications are needed to perform a host of military du-
ties; yet no one could seriously contend that the positions
of military lawyer or pilot, for example, are distinct offices
because officers performing those duties must possess
additional qualifications.
Petitioners' argument also ignores the fact that Congress
has not hesitated to expressly require the separate appoint-
ment of military officers to certain positions. An additional
appointment by the President and confirmation by the Sen-
ate is required for a number of top-level positions in the mili-
tary hierarchy, including: the Chairman and Vice Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 10 U. S. C. §§ 152, 154; the Chief
and Vice Chief of Naval Operations, §8 5033, 5035; the Com-
mandant and Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps,
§§ 5043, 5044; the Surgeons General of the Army, Navy, and
Air Force, §§ 3036, 5137, 8036; the Chief of Naval Personnel,
§ 5141; the Chief of Chaplains, § 5142; and the Judge Advo-
cates General of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, H 3037,
5148, 8037.
With respect to other positions, however, Congress has
spoken quite differently. The Deputy and Assistant Chiefs
of Staff for the Army, for example, are "general officers de-
tailed to these positions." § 3035 (emphasis added). The
Chief of Staff of the Marine Corps and his assistants are
"detailed" to those positions by the Secretary of the Navy.
§ 5045. Commissioned officers "may be detailed for duty"
with the American Red Cross by the appropriate military
Secretary. § 711a. Secretaries of military departments"may assign or detail members of the armed forces" to be
inspectors of buildings owned or occupied abroad by the
United States. § 713. The Secretary of the Navy "may as-
sign" enlisted members of the Navy to serve as custodians
of foreign embassies and consulates. § 5983. And the Pres-


--- PDF page 10 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
ident may "detail" officers of the Navy to serve as superin-
tendents or instructors at nautical schools. This contrasting
treatment indicates rather clearly that Congress repeatedly
and consistently distinguished between an office that would
require a separate appointment and a position or duty to
which one could be "assigned" or "detailed" by a superior
officer.
The sections of the UCMJ relating to military judges
speak explicitly and exclusively in terms of "detail" or "as-
sign"; nowhere in these sections is mention made of a sepa-
rate appointment. Section 826(a) provides that a military
judge shall be "detail[ed]" to each general court-martial, and
may be "detail[ed]" to any special court-martial. The mili-
tary judge of a general court-martial must be designated by
the Judge Advocate General, or his designee, § 826(c), but the
appropriate Service Secretary prescribes by regulation the
manner in which military judges are detailed for special
courts-martial, and what persons are authorized to so detail
them. Section 866, in turn, provides that military appellate
judges shall be "assigned to a Court of Military Review."
The appropriate Judge Advocate General designates a chief
judge for each Court of Military Review, and the chief judge
determines "on which panels of the court the appellate
judges assigned to the court will serve and which military
judge assigned to the court will act as the senior judge on
each panel." Ibid. (emphasis added).
Congress' treatment of military judges is thus quite differ-
ent from its treatment of those offices, such as Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for which it wished to require a
second appointment before already-commissioned officers
could occupy them. This difference negates any permissible
inference that Congress intended that military judges should
receive a second appointment, but in a fit of absentminded-
ness forgot to say so.
Petitioners' alternative contention is that even if Congress
did not intend to require a separate appointment for a mili-


--- PDF page 11 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
tary judge, the Appointments Clause requires such an ap-
pointment by its own force. They urge upon us in support
of this contention our decisions in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S.
1 (1976), Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868 (1991), and
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654 (1988). These decisions
undoubtedly establish the analytical framework upon which
to base the conclusion that a military judge is an "officer of
the United States"-a proposition to which both parties
agree. But the decisions simply do not speak to the issue of
whether, and when, the Appointments Clause may require a
second appointment.
The lead and dissenting opinions in the Court of Military
Appeals devoted considerable attention to, and the parties
before us have extensively briefed, the significance of our
opinion in Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U. S. 282 (1893).
There Congress had enacted a statute establishing a commis-
sion to supervise the development of Rock Creek Park in the
District of Columbia. Three of the members were ap-
pointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
Senate, but the remaining two members were the Chief of
Engineers of the Army and the Engineer Commissioner of
the District of Columbia. Both of the latter were already
commissioned as military officers, but it was contended that
the Appointments Clause required that they again be ap-
pointed to their new positions. The Court rejected the
argument, saying:
"[T]he argument is, that while Congress may create an
office, it cannot appoint the officer; that the officer can
only be appointed by the President with the approval of
the Senate. . . . As, however, the two persons whose
eligibility is questioned were at the time of the passage
of the act.., officers of the United States who had been
theretofore appointed by the President and confirmed
by the Senate, we do not think that, because additional
duties, germane to the offices already held by them,
were devolved upon them by the act, it was necessary


--- PDF page 12 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
that they should be again appointed by the President
and confirmed by the Senate. It cannot be doubted, and
it has frequently been the case, that Congress may in-
crease the power and duties of an existing office without
thereby rendering it necessary that the incumbent
should be again nominated and appointed." Id., at
300-301.
The present cases before us differ from Shoemaker in sev-
eral respects, at least one of which is significant for purposes
of Appointments Clause analysis. In Shoemaker, Congress
assigned new duties to two existing offices, each of which
was held by a single officer. This no doubt prompted the
Court's description of the argument as being that "while
Congress may create an office, it cannot appoint the officer."
By looking to whether the additional duties assigned to the
offices were "germane," the Court sought to ensure that
Congress was not circumventing the Appointments Clause
by unilaterally appointing an incumbent to a new and dis-
tinct office. But here the statute authorized an indefinite
number of military judges, who could be designated from
among hundreds or perhaps thousands of qualified commis-
sioned officers. In short, there is no ground for suspicion
here that Congress was trying to both create an office and
also select a particular individual to fill the office. Nor has
Congress effected a "diffusion of the appointment power,"
about which this Court expressed concern in Freytag, supra,
at 878.
Even if we assume, arguendo, that the principle of "ger-
maneness" applies to the present situation, we think that
principle is satisfied here. By enacting the Uniform Code of
Military Justice in 1950, and through subsequent statutory
changes, Congress has gradually changed the system of mili-
tary justice so that it has come to more closely resemble the
civilian system. But the military in important respects re-
mains a "specialized society separate from civilian society,"
Parker v. Levy, 417 U. S. 733, 743 (1974). Although military


--- PDF page 13 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
judges obviously perform certain unique and important func-
tions, all military officers, consistent with a long tradition,
play a role. in the operation of the military justice system.
Commissioned officers, for example, have the power and
duty to "quell quarrels, frays, and disorders among persons
subject to [the UCMJ] and to apprehend persons subject to
[the UCMJ] who take part therein." Art. 7(c), UCMJ, 10
U. S. C. § 807(c). Commanding officers can impose nonjudi-
cial disciplinary punishment for minor offenses, without the
intervention of a court-martial-, which includes correctional
custody, forfeiture of pay, reduction in grade, extra duties,
restriction to certain limits, and detention of pay. Art. 15,
UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 815. A commissioned officer may serve
as a summary court-martial or a member of a special or
general court-martial. When acting as a summary court-
martial or as the president of a special court-martial without
a military judge, this officer conducts the proceedings and
resolves all issues that would be handled by the military
judge, except for challenge for cause against the president
of a special court-martial without a military judge. Art.
51, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 851. Convening authorities, finally,
have the authority to review and modify the sentence im-
posed by courts-martial. Art. 60, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 860.
Thus, by contrast to civilian society, nonjudicial military
officers play a significant part in the administration of
military justice,
By the same token, the position of military judge is less
distinct from other military positions than the office of full-
time civilian judge is from other offices in civilian society.
As the lead opinion in the Court of Military Appeals noted,
military judges do not have any "inherent judicial authority
separate from a court-martial to which they have been de-
tailed. When they act, they do so as a court-martial, not as
a military judge. Until detailed to a specific court-martial,
they have no more authority than any other military officer
of the same grade and rank." 36 M. J., at 228. Military


--- PDF page 14 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
appellate judges similarly exercise judicial functions only
when they are "assigned" to a Court of Military Review.
Neither military trial nor appellate judges, moreover, have
a fixed term of office. Commissioned officers are assigned
or detailed to the position of military judge by a Judge Advo-
cate General for a period of time he deems necessary or ap-
propriate, and then they may be reassigned to perform other
duties. Even while serving as military trial judges, officers
may perform, with the permission of the Judge Advocate
General, duties unrelated to their judicial responsibilities.
Art. 26(c), UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 826(c). Whatever might be
the case in civilian society, we think that the role of military
judge is "germane" to that of military officer.
In sum, we believe that the current scheme satisfies the
Appointments Clause. It is quite clear that Congress has
not required a separate appointment to the position of mili-
tary judge, and we believe it equally clear that the Appoint-
ments Clause by its own force does not require a second ap-
pointment before military officers may discharge the duties
of such a judge. II
Petitioners next contend that the Due Process Clause re-
quires that military judges must have a fixed term of office.
Petitioners recognize, as they must, that the Constitution
does not require life tenure for Article I judges, including
military judges. See United States ex rel. Toth v. Quarles,
350 U. S. 11, 17 (1955). Nor does the trial by an Article I
judge lacking life tenure violate an accused's due process
rights. See Palmore v. United States, 411 U. S. 389, 410
(1973). Petitioners thus confine their argument to the asser-
tion that due process requires military judges to serve for
some fixed length of time-however short.
Congress, of course, is subject to the requirements of the
Due Process Clause when legislating in the area of military
affairs, and that Clause provides some measure of protection
to defendants in military proceedings. See Rostker v. Gold-


--- PDF page 15 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
berg, 453 U. S. 57, 67 (1981); Middendorf v. Henry, 425 U. S.
25, 43 (1976). But in determining what process is due,
courts "must give particular deference to the determination
of Congress, made under its authority to regulate the land
and naval forces, U. S. Const., Art. I, § 8." Ibid. Petition-
ers urge that we apply the due process analysis established
in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U. S. 319, 334-335 (1976). The
Government contends that Medina v. California, 505 U. S.
437 (1992), supplies the appropriate analytical framework.
Neither Mathews nor Medina, however, arose in the mili-
tary context, and we have recognized in past cases that "the
tests and limitations [of due process] may differ because of
the military context." Rostker, supra, at 67. The differ-
ence arises from the fact that the Constitution contemplates
that Congress has "plenary control over rights, duties, and
responsibilities in the framework of the Military Establish-
ment, including regulations, procedures, and remedies re-
lated to military discipline." Chappell v. Wallace, 462 U. S.
296, 301 (1983). Judicial deference thus "is at its apogee"
when reviewing congressional decisionmaking in this area.
Rostker, supra, at 70. Our deference extends to rules relat-
ing to the rights of servicemembers: "Congress has primary
responsibility for the delicate task of balancing the rights of
servicemen against the needs of the military.... [W]e have
adhered to this principle of defeience in a variety of contexts
where, as here, the constitutional rights of servicemen were
implicated." Solorio v. United States, 483 U. S. 435, 447-
448 (1987).
We therefore believe that the appropriate standard to
apply in these cases is found in Middendorf, supra, where
we also faced a due process challenge to a facet of the mili-
tary justice system. In determining whether the Due Proc-
ess Clause requires that servicemembers appearing before
a summary court-martial be assisted by counsel, we asked
"whether the factors militating in favor of counsel at sum-
mary courts-martial are so extraordinarily weighty as to


--- PDF page 16 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
overcome the balance struck by Congress." 425 U. S., at 44.
We ask the same question here with respect to fixed terms
of office for military judges.
It is elementary that "a fair trial in a fair tribunal is a
basic requirement of due process." In re Murchison, 349
U. S. 133, 136 (1955). A necessary component of a fair trial
is an impartial judge. See ibid.; Tumey v. Ohio, 273 U. S.
510, 532 (1927). Petitioners, however, do not allege that the
judges in their cases were or appeared to be biased. In-
stead, they ask us to assume that a military judge who does
not have a fixed term of office lacks the independence neces-
sary to ensure impartiality. Neither history nor current
practice, however, supports such an assumption.
A
Although a fixed term of office is a traditional component
of the Anglo-American civilian judicial system, it has never
been a part of the military justice tradition. The early Eng-
lish military tribunals, which served as the model for our
own military justice system, were historically convened and
presided over by a military general. No tenured military
judge presided. See Schlueter, The Court-Martial: An His-
torical Survey, 87 Mil. L. Rev. 129, 135, 136-144 (1980).
In the United States, although Congress has on numerous
occasions during our history revised the procedures govern-
ing courts-martial, it has never required tenured judges to
preside over courts-martial or to hear immediate appeals
therefrom.6  See W. Winthrop, Military Law and Precedents
6 Congress did create a nine-member commission in 1983 to examine,
inter alia, the possibility of providing tenure for military judges. Mili-
tary Justice Act of 1983, Pub. L. 98-209, § 9(b), 97 Stat. 1393, 1404-1405
(1983). The commission published its report a year later, in which it rec-
ommended against providing a guaranteed term of office for military trial
and appellate judges. See D. Schlueter, Military Criminal Justice: Prac-
tice and Procedure 33-34, and nn. 86, 87 (3d ed. 1992) (listing members of
commission and describing report). Congress has taken no further action
on the subject.


--- PDF page 17 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
21-24, 953-1000 (2d ed. 1920) (describing and reprinting the
Articles of War, which governed court-martial proceedings
during the 17th and 18th centuries); F. Gilligan & F. Lederer,
1 Court-Martial Procedure 11-24 (1991) (describing 20th-
century revisions to Articles of War, and enactment of
and amendments to UCMJ). Indeed, as already mentioned,
Congress did not even create the position of military judge
until 1968. Courts-martial thus have been conducted in this
country for over 200 years without the presence of a tenured
judge, and for over 150 years without the presence of any
judge at all.
B
As the Court of Military Appeals observed in Graf, 35
M. J., at 462, the historical maintenance of the military jus-
tice system without tenured judges "suggests the absence of
a fundamental fairness problem." Petitioners in effect urge
us to disregard this history, but we are unwilling to do so.
We do not mean to say that any practice in military courts
which might have been accepted at some time in history au-
tomatically satisfies due process of law today. But as Con-
gress has taken affirmative steps to make the system of
military justice more like the American system of civilian
justice, it has nonetheless chosen not to give tenure to mili-
tary judges. The question under the Due Process Clause is
whether the existence of such tenure is such an extraordi-
narily weighty factor as to overcome the balance struck by
Congress. And the historical fact that military judges have
never had tenure is a factor that must be weighed in this
calculation.
A fixed term of office, as petitioners recognize, is not an
end in itself. It is a means of promoting judicial independ-
ence, which in turn helps to ensure judicial impartiality. We
believe the applicable provisions of the UCMJ, and corre-
sponding regulations, by insulating military judges from the
effects of command influence, sufficiently preserve judicial
impartiality so as to satisfy the Due Process Clause.


--- PDF page 18 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
Article 26 places military judges under the authority of
the appropriate Judge Advocate General rather than under
the authority of the convening officer. 10 U. S. C. § 826.
Rather than exacerbating the alleged problems relating to
judicial independence, as petitioners suggest, we believe this
structure helps protect that independence. Like all military
officers, Congress made military judges accountable to a su-
perior officer for the performance of their duties. By plac-
ing judges under the control of Judge Advocates General,
who have no interest in the outcome of a particular court-
martial, we believe Congress has achieved an acceptable bal-
ance between independence and accountability.
Article 26 also protects against unlawful command in-
fluence by precluding a convening authority or any com-
manding officer from preparing or reviewing any report
concerning the effectiveness, fitness, or efficiency of a mili-
tary judge relating to his judicial duties. Ibid. Article 37
prohibits convening authorities from censuring, reprimand-
ing, or admonishing a military judge "with respect to the
findings or sentence adjudged by the court, or with respect
to any other exercise of its or his functions in the conduct of
the proceeding." 10 U. S. C. § 837. Any officer who "know-
ingly and intentionally fails to enforce or comply" with Arti-
cle 37 "shall be punished as a court-martial may direct."
Art. 98, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. § 898. The Code also provides
that a military judge, either trial or appellate, must refrain
from adjudicating a case in which he has previously partici-
pated, Arts. 26(c), 66(h), UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. §§ 826(c), 866(h),
and the Code allows the accused to challenge both a court-
martial member and a court-martial judge for cause, Art.
41, UCMJ, 10 U. S. C. §841. The Code also allows the
accused to learn the identity of the military judge before
choosing whether to be tried by the judge alone, or by the
judge and court-martial members. Art. 16, UCMJ, 10
U. S. C. § 816.


--- PDF page 19 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of the Court
The entire system, finally, is overseen by the Court of Mili-
tary Appeals, which is composed entirely of civilian judges
who serve for fixed terms of 15 years. That court has dem-
onstrated its vigilance in checking any attempts to exert im-
proper influence over military judges. In United States v.
Mabe, 33 M. J. 200 (1991), for example, the court considered
whether the Judge Advocate General of the Navy, or his des-
ignee, could rate a military judge based on the appropriate-
ness of the judge's sentences at courts-martial. As the
court later described: "We held [in Mabel that the existence
of such a power in these military officers was inconsistent
with Congress' establishment of the military 'judge' in Arti-
cle 26 and its exercise violated Article 37 of the Code."
Graf, 35 M. J., at 465. And in Graf, the court held that it
would also violate Articles 26 and 37 if a Judge Advocate
General decertified or transferred a military judge based on
the General's opinion of the appropriateness of the judge's
findings and sentences. Ibid.7
The absence of tenure as a historical matter in the system
of military justice, and the number of safeguards in place to
ensure impartiality, lead us to reject petitioners' due process
challenge. Petitioners have fallen far short of demonstrat-
ing that the factors favoring fixed terms of office are so ex-
traordinarily weighty as to overcome the balance achieved
by Congress. See Middendorf, 425 U. S., at 44.
For the reasons stated, we reject the petitioners' Appoint-
ments Clause and Due Process Clause attacks on the judges
who convicted them and those who heard their appeals. The
judgments of the Court of Military Appeals are accordingly
Affirmed.
7 This added limitation on the power of the Judge Advocates General
to remove military judges refutes petitioners' contention that Judge Ad-
vocates General have unfettered discretion both to appoint and remove
military judges.


--- PDF page 20 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
JUSTICE SOUTER, concurring.
I join the Court's opinion on the understanding that mili-
tary judges, like ordinary commissioned military officers, are
"inferior officers" within the meaning of the Appointments
Clause. Because these cases would raise a far more difficult
constitutional question than the one the Court today decides
if, as petitioners argue, military judges were "principal offi-
cers," I write separately to explain why I conclude that they
are not. I
Under the Appointments Clause, the President "shall nom-
inate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate,
shall appoint" all "Officers of the United States" (or "princi-
pal officers," as we have called them, see Morrison v. Olson,
487 U. S. 654, 670 (1988); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 132
(1976)). Art. II, § 2. "[B]ut the Congress may by Law vest
the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in
the Heads of Departments." Ibid.
Military officers performing ordinary military duties are
inferior officers, and none of the parties to this case contends
otherwise. Though military officers are appointed in the
manner of principal officers, no analysis permits the conclu-
sion that each of the more than 240,000 active military offi-
cers (see Department of Defense, Military Manpower Statis-
tics 18 (Mar. 31, 1993) (Table 9)) is a principal officer. See
Morrison v. Olson, supra, at 670-673 (outlining criteria for
determining Appointments Clause status of a federal officer).
Congress has simply declined to adopt the less onerous ap-
pointment process available for inferior officers.
The Uniform Code of Military Justice authorizes the Judge
Advocate General of the relevant branch of the Armed
Forces to select as a military judge any commissioned mili-
tary officer who meets certain qualifications going to legal
knowledge and experience. See ante, at 168. If, as peti-


--- PDF page 21 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
tioners argue, military judges were principal officers, this
method of choosing them from among the ranks of inferior
officers would raise two constitutional questions. As to mil-
itary officers who received their commissions before Con-
gress created the post of military judge in 1968, the question
would be whether the duties of a principal officer may be
assigned to an existing multiperson inferior Office, so that
some of the office's occupants, at the choice of a lower level
Executive Branch official, will serve in new principal-officer
positions. And as to officers who received their commis-
sions after 1968 and whose appointments therefore included
the potential for service as military judge, the question
would be whether a multiperson office may be created in
which individuals will occupy, again at the choice of a lower
level Executive Branch official, either inferior-officer or
principal-officer positions.
The Appointments Clause requires each question to be an-
swered in the negative. "The Constitution, for purposes of
appointment, very clearly divides all its officers into two
classes," United States v. Germaine, 99 U. S. 508, 509 (1879),
and though Congress has broad power to create federal of-
fices and assign duties to them, see Myers v. United States,
272 U. S. 52, 128-129 (1926), it may not, even with the Presi-
dent's assent, disregard the Constitution's distinction be-
tween principal and inferior officers. It may not, in particu-
lar, dispense with the precise process of appointment
required for principal officers, whether directly or "by indi-
rection." Springer v. Philippine Islands, 277 U. S. 189, 202
(1928). Accordingly, I find it necessary to consider the sta-
tus of military judges under the Appointments Clause but,
first, to explain why the Appointments Clause's origins and
purposes support my reading of its text.
A
In framing an Appointments Clause that would ensure "a
judicious choice" of individuals to fill the important offices


--- PDF page 22 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
of the Union, The Federalist No. 76, p. 510 (J. Cooke ed.
1961) (A. Hamilton); the delegates to the Philadelphia Con-
vention could draw on their experiences with two flawed
methods of appointment. They were aware of the pre-
revolutionary "'manipulation of official appointments"' by
the Crown and its colonial governors, "one of the American
revolutionary generation's greatest grievances against exec-
utive power." Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 883
(1991) (quoting G. Wood, The Creation of The American
Republic 1776-1787, p. 79 (1969)). They were also aware of
the postrevolutionary abuse by several state legislatures
which, in reaction, had been given the sole power of appoint-
ment; by the time of the Convention the lodging of exclusive
appointing authority in state legislatures "'had become the
principal source of division and faction in the states."'
Freytag, supra, at 904, and n. 4 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
part and concurring in judgment) (quoting Wood, supra, at
407).
With error and overcorrection behind them, the Framers
came to appreciate the necessity of separating at least to
some degree the power to create federal offices (a power they
assumed would belong to Congress) from the power to fill
them, and they came to see good reason for placing the initia-
tive to appoint the most important federal officers in the
single-person presidency, not the multimember Legislature.
But the Framers also recognized that lodging the appoint-
ment power in the President alone would pose much the
same risk as lodging it exclusively in Congress: the risk of"a[n] incautious or corrupt nomination." 2 M. Farrand, Rec-
ords of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 43 (rev. ed. 1937)
(J. Madison) (hereinafter Farrand). Just as the Appoint-
ments Clause's grant to the President of the power to nomi-
nate principal officers would avert legislative despotism, its
requirement of Senate confirmation would serve as an "ex-
cellent check" against Presidential missteps or wrongdoing.


--- PDF page 23 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
The Federalist No. 76, supra, at 513.1 Accord, 3 J. Story,
Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States 374-
377 (1833) (The President will be more likely than "a large
[legislative] body" to make appointments whose "qualifica-
tions are unquestioned, and unquestionable"; but because
1 Hamilton's Federalist Papers writings contain the most thorough con-
temporary justification for the method of appointing principal officers that
the Framers adopted. See The Federalist Nos. 76 and 77, pp. 509-521.
Hamilton was clear that the President ought initially to select principal
officers and that the Presidentwas therefore rightly given the sole power
to nominate:
"The sole and undivided responsibility of one man will naturally beget
a livelier sense of duty and a more exact regard to reputation. He will
on this account feel himself under stronger obligations, and more inter-
ested to investigate with care the qualities requisite to the stations to be
filled, and to prefer with impartiality the persons who may have the fairest
pretentions to them." Id., No. 76, at 510-511.
Hamilton also left no doubt that the role of ultimate approval assigned
to the Senate was vital:
"To what purpose then require the co-operation of the Senate? I
answer, that the necessity of their concurrence would have a powerful,
though in general a silent operation. It would be an excellent check upon
a spirit of favoritism in the President, and would tend greatly to prevent
the appointment of unfit characters from State prejudice, from family con-
nection, from personal attachment, or from a view to popularity." Id.,
at 513.
The same notes were struck in the Constitutional Convention, where
Hamilton was actually the first to suggest that both the President and
the Senate be involved in the appointments process. See 1 Farrand 128;
J. Harris, The Advice and Consent of the Senate 21 (1953). For example,
Gouvernor Morris, who was among those initially favoring vesting exclu-
sive appointment power in the President, see 2 Farrand 82, 389, ultimately
defended the assignment of shared authority for appointment on the
ground that "as the President was to nominate, there would be responsibil-
ity, and as the Senate was to concur, there would be security." Id., at
539. See also 4 J. Elliot, Debates on the Federal Constitution 134 (1891)
(James Iredell in North Carolina ratifying convention) ("[T]he Senate has
no other influence but a restraint on improper appointments .... [The
Appointments Clause provides] a double security"). See generally Har-
ris, supra, at 17-26 (summarizing debates in the Constitutional Convention
and in the ratifying conventions).


--- PDF page 24 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
exclusive Presidential appointment power "may be abused,"
the Appointments Clause provides the "salutary check" of
Senate confirmation, and "It]he consciousness of this check
will make the president more circumspect, and deliberate in
his nominations for office").
In the Framers' thinking, the process on which they set-
tled for selecting principal officers would ensure "judicious"
appointments not only by empowering the President and the
Senate to check each other, but also by allowing the public to
hold the President and Senators accountable for injudicious
appointments. "[T]he circumstances attending an appoint-
ment [of a principal officer], from the mode of conducting it,
would naturally become matters of notoriety," Hamilton
wrote; "and the public would be at no loss to determine what
part had been performed by the different actors." The Fed-
eralist No. 77, at 517. As a result,
"[t]he blame of a bad nomination would fall upon the
president singly and absolutely. The censure of reject-
ing a good one would lie entirely at the door of the sen-
ate; aggravated by the consideration of their having
counteracted the good intentions of the executive. If
an ill appointment should be made the executive for
nominating and the senate for approving would partici-
pate though in different degrees in the opprobrium and
disgrace." Ibid.
The strategy by which the Framers sought to ensure ju-
dicious appointments of principal officers is, then, familiar
enough: the Appointments Clause separates the Govern-
ment's power but also provides for a degree of intermingling,
all to ensure accountability and "preclude the exercise of
arbitrary power." Myers v. United States, 272 U. S., at
293 (Brandeis, J., dissenting).
The strict requirements of nomination by the President
and confirmation by the Senate were not carried over to the
appointment of inferior officers. A degree of flexibility was


--- PDF page 25 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
thought appropriate in providing for the appointment of of-
ficers who, by definition, would have only inferior govern-
mental authority. See 2 Farrand 627. But although they
allowed an alternative appointment method for inferior offi-
cers, the Framers still structured the alternative to ensure
accountability and check governmental power: any decision
to dispense with Presidential appointment and Senate con-
firmation is Congress's to make, not the President's, but Con-
gress's authority is limited to.assigning the appointing power
to the highly accountable President or the heads of federal
departments, or, where appropriate, to the courts of law.
B
If the structural benefits the Appointments Clause was de-
signed to provide are to be preserved, the Clause must be
read to forbid the two ways in which the benefits can be
defeated. First, no branch may aggrandize its own appoint-
ment power at the expense of another. See Buckley v.
Valeo, 424 U. S., at 128-129. Congress, for example, may
not unilaterally fill any federal office; and the President may
neither select a principal officer without the Senate's concur-
rence, nor fill any office without Congress's authorization. 2
2 While it is true that "the debates of the Constitutional Convention,
and the Federalist Papers, are replete with expressions of fear that the
Legislative Branch of the National Government will aggrandize itself at
the expense of the other two branches," Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 129
(1976), the Framers also expressed concern over the threat of expanding
Presidential power, including specifically in the context of appointments.
See, e. g., 1 Farrand 101 (G. Mason); id., at 103 (B. Franklin). Indeed,
the Framers added language to both halves of the Appointments Clause
specifically to address the concern that the President might attempt uni-
laterally to create and fill federal offices. See C. Warren, The Making of
the Constitution 642 (1937) (discussing references in the Appointments
Clause to principal offices "'established by Law,"' and to the power of
appointing inferior officers which "'Congress may by law"' vest as speci-
fied). No doubt, Article I's assignment to Congress of the power to make
laws makes the Legislative Branch the most likely candidate for encroach-
ing on the power of the others. But Article II gives the President means


--- PDF page 26 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
Second, no branch may abdicate its Appointments Clause
duties. Congress, for example, may not authorize the ap-
pointment of a principal officer without Senate confirmation;
nor may the President allow Congress or a lower level Exec-
utive Branch official to select a principal officer.3
To be sure, "power is of an encroaching nature" and more
likely to be usurped than surrendered. The Federalist No.
48, at 332 (J. Madison). For this reason, our Appointments
Clause cases (like our separation-of-powers cases generally)
have typically addressed allegations of aggrandizement
rather than abdication. See, e. g., Buckley v. Valeo, supra;
Springer v. Philippine Islands, 277 U. S. 189 (1928); Shoe-
maker v. United States, 147 U. S. 282 (1893). 4 Nevertheless,
of his own to encroach, and indeed we have been forced to invalidate Presi-
dential attempts to usurp legislative authority, as the Buckley Court rec-
ognized: "The Court has held that the President may not execute and
exercise legislative authority belonging only to Congress." Buckley,
supra, at 123 (citing Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U. S.
579 (1952)).
8 In Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U.S. 868, 884 (1991), we observed
that in the Appointments Clause the Framers limited the "diffusion" of
the appointment power in order to "ensure that those who wielded it
were accountable to political force and the will of the people." Id., at 884.
Depending on the means used to circumvent the Appointments Clause,
"diffusion" can implicate either the anti-aggrandizement or the anti-
abdication principle. If the full Congress creates a principal office and
fills it, for example, it has adopted a more diffuse and less accountable
mode of appointment than the Constitution requires; and it has violated
the bar on aggrandizement. Cf The Federalist No. 77, at 519 (explaining
that the House of Representatives is too numerous a body to be involved
in appointments). And if Congress, with the President's approval, au-
thorizes a lower level Executive Branch official to appoint a principal offi-
cer, it again has adopted a more diffuse and less accountable mode of ap-
pointment than the Constitution requires; this time it has violated the bar
on abdication.
4The theme of abdication has not been entirely absent, however. In
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654 (1988), the Court considered a challenge
to a law authorizing appointment of an independent counsel by a three-
judge panel and without Senate confirmation. Though the law was


--- PDF page 27 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
"[t]he structural interests protected by the Appointments
Clause are not those of any one branch of Government but
of the entire Republic," and "[n]either Congress nor the Ex-
ecutive can agree to waive th[e] structural protection[s]" the
Clause provides. Freytag, 501 U. S., at 880. The Appoint-
ments Clause forbids both aggrandizement and abdication.6
C
If military judges were principal officers, the method for
selecting them, which is prescribed in legislation adopted by
adopted by Congress and signed by the President, the Court said that the
law would nevertheless violate the Appointments Clause if the independ-
ent counsel were a principal officer. See id., at 671. If the independent
counsel were such an officer, the law would represent an impermissible
abdication by both Congress and the President of their Appointments
Clause duties.
5 Cf. J W Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U. S. 394, 406 (1928)
(Taft, C. J.) ("[Ilt is a breach of the National fundamental law if Congress
gives up its legislative power and transfers it to the President, or to the
Judicial branch, or if by law it attempts to invest itself or its members
with either executive power or judicial power"). As Chief Justice Taft's
remark suggests, the ready analogy to the Appointments Clause's anti-
abdication principle is what has been called "nondelegation doctrine."
The Court has unanimously invalidated legislation in which Congress dele-
gated "to others the essential legislative functions with which it is...
vested," A L. A Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U. S. 495,
529 (1935); id., at 553-554 (Cardozo, J., concurring), and it has read other
statutes narrowly to avoid annulling them as excessive abdications of con-
stitutional responsibility, see Industrial Union Dept., AFL-CIO v. Ameri-
can Petroleum Institute, 448 U. S. 607, 646 (1980) (plurality opinion); Na-
tional Cable Television Assn., Inc. v. United States, 415 U. S. 336, 342
(1974). See also Industrial Union Dept., supra, at 672-676 (REHNQUIST,
J., concurring in judgment) (discussing limits on the delegation of Con-
gress's legislative power). Nondelegation doctrine has been criticized.
But see J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 131-134 (1980) (distinguishing non-
delegation doctrine from less defensible theories invoked to strike down
New Deal legislation). Barring Appointments Clause abdication strikes
me as plainly less problematic, however, because the text of the Constitu-
tion describes with precision the nature of the branches' appointments
powers.


--- PDF page 28 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
Congress and signed by the President, would amount to an
impermissible abdication by both political branches of their
Appointments Clause duties. Military officers commis-
sioned before 1968, though they received Presidential ap-
pointment and Senate confirmation, were chosen to fill infe-
rior offices that did not carry the possibility of service as a
military judge. If military judges were principal officers,
the Military Justice Act of 1968 would have authorized the
creation and filling of principal offices without any Presiden-
tial nomination or Senate confirmation to that principal of-
fice, or indeed to any principal office at all. Such a process
would preclude the President, the Senate, and the public
from playing the parts assigned to them, parts the Framers
thought essential to preventing the exercise of arbitrary
power and encouraging judicious appointments of principal
officers.
The office to which military officers have been appointed
since enactment of the 1968 Act includes the potential for
service as a military judge. But that would be a sufficient
response to petitioners' Appointments Clause objection only
if military judges were inferior officers. Otherwise, the
method for selecting military judges even from the ranks of
post-1968 commissioned officers would reflect an abdication
of the political branches' Appointments Clause duties with
respect to principal officers. Admittedly, the degree of abdi-
cation would not be as extreme as in the prior setting, for
the President and Senate are theoretically aware that each
officer nominated and confirmed may serve as a military
judge. Judging by the purposes of the Appointments
Clause, however, this difference is immaterial. It cannot se-
riously be contended that in confirming the literally tens of
thousands of military officers each year the Senate would, or
even could, adequately focus on the remote possibility that a
small number of them would eventually serve as military


--- PDF page 29 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
judges.6  And the method for appointing military judges
allows the President no formal role at all in the selection of
the particular individuals who will actually serve in those
positions. This process likewise deprives the public of any
realistic ability to hold easily identifiable elected officials to
account for bad appointments. Thus while, as the Court ex-
plains, see ante, at 171-172, Congress has certainly at-
tempted to create a single military office that includes the
potential of service as a military judge, I believe the Ap-
pointments Clause forbids the creation of such a single office
that combines inferior- and principal-officer roles, thereby
disregarding the special treatment the Constitution requires
for the appointment of principal officers. For these reasons,
if military judges were principal officers, the current scheme
for appointing them would raise a serious Appointments
Clause problem indeed, as the Solicitor General conceded at
oral argument. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 30-31.
D
The argument that military judges are principal officers is
far from frivolous. It proceeds by analogizing military
judges to Article III circuit and district judges, who are prin-
cipal officers,7 and to Article I Tax Court judges, who Frey-
6Writing in 1953, one observer pointed out that if each of the 49,956
nominations for military office sent to the Senate in 1949 "were considered
for one minute. . . , it would require 832 hours to pass upon the nomina-
tions [or] an average of more than 5 hours each day that the Senate is in
session." Harris, Advice and Consent of the Senate, at 331. This ob-
server concluded that "Senate confirmation of military and naval officers
has become for all practical purposes an empty formality." Ibid.7It is true that the Court has never so held and that the Constitution
refers to the lower federal courts as "inferior Courts." Art. III, § 1. But
from the early days of the Republic "[t]he practical construction has uni-
formly been that [judges of the inferior courts] are not .... inferior offi-
cers," 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution 456, n. 1 (1833), and
I doubt many today would disagree. In Freytag, indeed, the Court as-


--- PDF page 30 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
SOUTER, J., concurring
tag suggests are principal officers too (since, Freytag held,
Tax Court judges may appoint inferior officers). In terms
of the factors identified in Morrison v. Olson as significant
to determining the Appointments Clause status of a federal
officer, the office of military judge is not "limited in tenure,"
as that. phrase was used in Morrison to describe "appoint-
[ment] essentially to accomplish a single task [at the end of
which] the office is terminated." 487 U. S., at 672. Nor are
military judges "limited in jurisdiction," as used in Morrison
to refer to the fact that an independent counsel may investi-
gate and prosecute only those individuals, and for only those
crimes, within the scope of the jurisdiction granted by the
special three-judge appointing court. See ibid. Over the
cases before them, military judges would seem to be no more
"limited [in] duties" than lower Article III or Tax Court
judges. Id., at 671. And though military judges are re-
movable, the same is true of "most (if not all) principal offi-
cers in the Executive Branch." Id., at 716 (SCALIA, J., dis-
senting) (emphasis deleted).
The argument that military judges are principal officers,
however, is not without response. Since Article I military
judges are much more akin to Article I Tax Court judges
than lower Article III judges, the analogy to Tax Court
judges proves nothing if Tax Court judges are inferior offi-
cers, which they may be. The history that justifies declar-
ing the judges of "inferior" Article III courts to be principal
officers is not available for Tax Court judges, and though
Freytag holds that the Tax Court is a "Cour[t] of Law" that
can appoint inferior officers, it may be that the Appointments
sumed that lower federal judges were principal officers. See 501 U. S., at
884 (listing "ambassadors, ministers, heads of departments, and judges"
as principal officers). But see Shartel, Federal Judges-Appointment,
Supervision,' and Removal-Some Possibilities Under the Constitution, 28
Mich. L. Rev. 485, 499-529 (1930) (arguing that lower federal judges
should, and constitutionally can, be appointed by the Chief Justice).


--- PDF page 31 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
SOUTER, J., concurring
Clause envisions appointment of some inferior officers by
other inferior officers.
But even if Tax Court judges are principal officers, mili-
tary trial judges compare poorly with them, because not only
the legal rulings of military trial judges but also their fact-
finding and sentencing are subject to de novo scrutiny by
the Courts of Military Review. See 10 U. S. C. § 866(c).
Though the powers of Court of Military Review judges are
correspondingly greater, they too are distinguishable from
Tax Court judges, First, Tax Court judges are removable
only for cause, se 26 U. S. C. § 7443(f), while Court of Mili-
tary Review judges may be freely "detail[ed]" by the rele-
vant Judge Advocate General to nonjudicial assignments.8
See ante, at 171-172. Second, Tax Court judges serve fixed
15-year terms, see 26 U. S. C. § 7443(e), while Court of Mili-
tary Review judges have no fixed term of office and typically
serve for far less than 15 years.9 See Brief for Petitioners
5 (military judges "often serve terms of two, three, or four
years").
"The line between 'inferior' and 'principal' officers is one
that is far from clear," Morrison, 487 U.S., at 671, and
though there is a good deal of force to the argument that
military judges, at least those on the Courts of Military Re-
view, are principal officers, it is ultimately hard to say with
any certainty on which side of the line they fall. The Court
8 According to the Government, "[tihe [Uniform Code of Military Justice]
and the services' implementing regulations are carefully structured to en-
sure that military judges are independent and impartial." Brief for
United States 42. This is offered to repel petitioners' due process claim,
but it strengthens petitioners' Appointments Clause position. It does not
strengthen it enough, however, for the fact remains that military judges
are removable for a broad array of reasons.
9 According to the Government, "military judges have the equivalent of
tenure in the form of stable tours of duty." Id., at 31. Again, though
offered as a defense to petitioners' due process challenge, this aids peti-
tioners' Appointments Clause argument. The fact remains, however, that
the statute provides no fixed term of office for military judges.


--- PDF page 32 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
GINSBURG, J., concurring
has never decided how to resolve doubt in this area; the Mor-
rison Court did not address this issue since it understood
the independent counsel to be "clearly" an inferior officer.
Ibid. Forced to decide now, I agree with the approach of-
fered by then-Judge Ginsburg in her Court of Appeals opin-
ion in the independent-counsel case. "Where ... the label
that better fits an officer is fairly debatable, the fully rational
congressional determination surely merits . . . tolerance."
In re Sealed Case, 838 F. 2d 476, 532 (CADC) (dissenting
opinion), rev'd sub nom. Morrison v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654
(1988). Since the chosen method for selecting military
judges shows that neither Congress nor the President
thought military judges were principal officers, and since in
the preseneo of doubt defereneo to the political branches'
judgment is appropriate, I conclude that military judges are
inferior officers for purposes of the Appointments Clause.
II
Because the limits the Appointments Clause places on the
creation and assignment of duties to inferior offices are re-
spected here, for the reasons the Court and JUSTICE SCALIA
give, and on the understanding that the Court addresses only
the Appointments Clause's limits regarding inferior officers,
I join the Court's opinion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG, concurring.
The care the Court has taken to analyze petitioners' claims
demonstrates once again that men and women in the Armed
Forces do not leave constitutional safeguards and judicial
protection behind when they enter military service. To-
day's decision upholds a system of military justice notably
more sensitive to due process concerns than the one prevail-
ing through most of our country's history, when military jus-
tice was done without any requirement that legally trained
officers preside or even participate as judges. Nevertheless,
there has been no peremptory rejection of petitioners' pleas.


--- PDF page 33 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
Instead, the close inspection reflected in the Court's opinion
confirms:
"[I]t is the function of the courts to make sure, in cases
properly coming before them, that the men and women
constituting our Armed Forces are treated as honored
members of society whose rights do not turn on the
charity of a military commander.... A member of the
Armed Forces is entitled to equal justice under law not
as conceived by the generosity of a commander but as
written in the Constitution ... ." Winters v. United
States, 89 S. Ct. 57, 59-60, 21 L. Ed. 2d 80, 84 (1968)
(Douglas, J., in chambers).
See also Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U. S. 677 (1973); Har-
mon v. Brucker, 355 U. S. 579 (1958); Crawford v. Cushman,
531 F. 2d 1114 (CA2 1976).
JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
I think the Appointments Clause issue requires somewhat
more analysis than the Court provides, and the Due Process
Clause issue somewhat less.
As to the former- The Court states that these cases differ
from Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U. S. 282 (1893), be-
cause, after the passage of the Military Justice Act of 1968,
military judges could be selected from "hundreds or perhaps
thousands of qualified commissioned officers," ante, at 174, so
that there is no concern (as there was in Shoemaker, where a
single incumbent held the office whose duties were enlarged)
that "Congress was trying to both create an office and also
select a particular individual to fill the office," ante, at 174.
That certainly distinguishes Shoemaker, but I do not see
why it leads to the Court's conclusion that therefore "ger-
inaneness" analysis need not be conducted here as it was in


--- PDF page 34 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
Shoemaker (though the Court proceeds to conduct it anyway,
ante, at 174-176).
Germaneness analysis must be conducted, it seems to me,
whenever that is necessary to assure that the conferring of
new duties does not violate the Appointments Clause. Viola-
tion of the Appointments Clause occurs not only when (as in
Shoemaker) Congress may be aggrandizing itself (by effec-
tively appropriating the appointment power over the officer
exercising the new duties), but also when Congress, without
aggrandizing itself, effectively lodges appointment power in
any person other than those whom the Constitution specifies.
Thus, "germaneness" is relevant whenever Congress gives
power to confer new duties to anyone other than the few
potential recipients of the appointment power specified in
the Appointments Clause-i. e., the President, the Courts of
Law, and Heads of Departments.
The Judge Advocates General are none of these. There-
fore, if acting as a military judge under the Military Justice
Act of 1968 is nongermane to serving as a military officer,
giving Judge Advocates General the power to appoint mili-
tary officers to serve as military judges would violate the
Appointments Clause, even if there were "hundreds or
perhaps thousands" of individuals from whom the selections
could be made. For taking on the nongermane duties of
military judge would amount to assuming a new "Offic[e]"
within the meaning of Article II, and the appointment to that
office would have to comply with the strictures of Article II.
I find the Appointments Clause not to have been violated
in the present case, only because I agree with the Court's
dictum that the new duties are germane.*
*The further issues perceptively discussed in JUSTICE SOUTER'S concur-
rence-namely, whether the Appointments Clause permits conferring
principal-officer responsibilities upon an inferior officer in a manner other
than that required for the appointment of a principal officer (and, if not,
whether the responsibilities of a military judge are those of a principal
officer)-were in my view wisely avoided by the Court, since they were


--- PDF page 35 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994)
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
II
With respect to the Due Process Clause challenge, I think
it neither necessary nor appropriate for this Court to pro-
nounce whether "Congress has achieved an acceptable bal-
ance between independence and accountability," ante, at 180.
As today's opinion explains, a fixed term of office for a mili-
tary judge "has never been a part of the military justice
tradition," ante, at 178. "Courts-martial... have been con-
ducted in this country for over 200 years without the pres-
ence of a tenured judge," ante, at 179. Thus, in the Military
Justice Act of 1968 the people's elected representatives
achieved a "balance between independence and accountabil-
ity" which, whether or not "acceptable" to five Justices of
this Court, gave members of the military at least as much
procedural protection, in the respects at issue here, as they
enjoyed when the Fifth Amendment was adopted and have
enjoyed ever since. That is enough, and to suggest other-
wise arrogates to this Court a power it does not possess.
"[A] process of law, which is not otherwise forbidden,
must be taken to be due process of law, if it can show
the sanction of settled usage both in England and in this
country .... [That which], in substance, has been im-
memorially the actual law of the land ... is due process
of law." Hurtado v. California, 110 U. S. 516, 528
(1884).
inadequately presented and not at all argued. The Petition for Certiorari
said only: "There is considerable force to the argument that military appel-
late judges are 'superior' or 'principal' officers, in which case the President
must appoint them with the advice and consent of the Senate. But in any
event ..... " Pet. for Cert. 12. The only reference in petitioners' brief
was the statement that "if military judges are principal officers, it is an
even more serious transgression of the purposes of the Appointments
Clause to have their original commissions substitute for an appointment
to a principal office." Brief for Petitioners 15. As JusnCE SOUTER'S
opinion demonstrates, the issues are complex; they should be resolved only
after full briefing and argument.


--- PDF page 36 ---
WEISS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALMA, J.
As sometimes ironically happens when judges seek to deny
the power of historical practice to restrain their decrees, see,
e. g., Burnham v. Superior Court of Cal., County of Marin,
495 U. S. 604, 637-639 (1990) (Brennan, J., concurring in judg-
ment), the present judgment makes no sense except as a con-
sequence of historical practice. Today's opinion finds "an
acceptable balance between independence and accountabil-
ity" because the Uniform Code of Military Justice "protects
against unlawful command influence by precluding a conven-
ing authority or any commanding officer from preparing or
reviewing any report concerning the effectiveness, fitness, or
efficiency of a military judge relating to his judicial duties";
because it "prohibits convening authorities from censuring,
reprimanding, or admonishing a military judge '... with re-
spect to any ... exercise of ... his functions in the conduct
of the proceeding' "; and because a Judge Advocate General
cannot decertify or transfer a military judge "based on the
General's opinion of the appropriateness of the judge's find-
ings and sentences." Ante, at 180, 181. But no one can
suppose that similar protections against improper influence
would suffice to validate a state criminal-law system in
which felonies were tried by judges serving at the pleasure
of the Executive. I am confident that we would not be satis-
fied with mere formal prohibitions in the civilian context, but
would hold that due process demands the structural protec-
tion of tenure in office, which has been provided in England
since 1700, see J. H. Baker, An Introduction to English Legal
History 145-146 (2d ed. 1979), was provided in almost all the
former English colonies from the time of the Revolution, see
Ziskind, Judicial Tenure in the American Constitution: Eng-
lish and American Precedents, 1969 S. Ct. Rev. 135, 138-147,
and is provided in all the States today, see National Center
for State Courts, Conference of State Court Administrators,
State Court Organization 1987, pp. 271-302 (1988). (It is
noteworthy that one of the grievances recited against King
George III in the Declaration of Independence was that "[h]e


--- PDF page 37 ---
Cite as: 510 U. S. 163 (1994) 199
Opinion of SCALA, J.
has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure
of their offices.")
Thus, while the Court's opinion says that historical prac-
tice is merely "a factor that must be weighed in [the] calcula-
tion," ante, at 179, it seems to me that the Court's judgment
today makes the fact of a differing military tradition utterly
conclusive. That is as it should be: "[N]o procedure firmly
rooted in the practices of our people can be so 'fundamen-
tally unfair' as to deny due process of law." Pacific Mut.
Life Ins. Co. v. Haslip, 499 U. S. 1, 38 (1991) (SCALIA, J.,
concurring).
For these reasons, I concur in Parts I and II-A and concur
in the judgment.
