SOURCE: https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/guidelines-manual/1992/manual-pdf/Chapter_4.pdf

[[PDF page 1]]
CHAPTER FOUR - CRIMINAL HISTORY AND CRIMINAL LIVELIHOOD
PART A - CRIMINAL HISTORY
Introductory Commentary
The Comprehensive Crime Control Act sets forth four purposes of sentencing. (See
18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2).) A defendant's record of past criminal conduct is directly relevant to those
purposes. A defendant with a record of prior criminal behavior is more culpable than a first offender
and thus deserving of greater punishment. General deterrence of criminal conduct dictates that a
clear message be sent to society that repeated criminal behavior will aggravate the need for
punishment with each recurrence. To protect the public from further crimes of the particular
defendant, the likelihood of recidivism and future criminal behavior must be considered. Repeated
criminal behavior is an indicator of a limited likelihood of successful rehabilitation.
The specific factors included in §4A1.1 and §4A1.3 are consistent with the extant empirical
research assessing correlates of recidivism and patterns of career criminal behavior. While empirical
research has shown that other factors are correlated highly with the likelihood of recidivism, e.g.. age
and drug abuse, for policy reasons they were not included here at this time. The Commission has
made no definitive judgment as to the reliability of the existing data. However, the Commission will
review additional data insofar as they become available in the future.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987.
§4A1.1. Criminal History Category
The total points from items (a) through (f) determine the criminal history category
in the Sentencing Table in Chapter Five, Part A.
(a) Add 3 points for each prior sentence of imprisonment exceeding one year and
one month.
(b) Add 2 points for each prior sentence of imprisonment of at least sixty days not
counted in (a).
(c) Add 1 point for each prior sentence not counted in (a) or (b), up to a total of
4 points for this item.
(d) Add 2 points if the defendant committed the instant offense while under any
criminal justice sentence, including probation, parole, supervised release,
imprisonment, work release, or escape status.
(e) Add 2 points if the defendant committed the instant offense less than
two years after release from imprisonment on a sentence counted under (a) or
(b) or while in imprisonment or escape status on such a sentence. If 2 points
are added for item (d), add only 1 point for this item.
(f) Add 1 point for each prior sentence resulting from a conviction of a crime of
violence that did not receive any points under (a), (b), or (c) above because
such sentence was considered related to another sentence resulting from a
267 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 2]]
conviction of a crime of violence, up to a total of 3 points for this item.
Provided, that this item does not apply where the sentences are considered
related because the offenses occurred on the same occasion.
Commentary
The total criminal history points from §4A1.1 determine the criminal history category (I-VI) in
the Sentencing Table in Chapter Five, Part A. The definitions and instructions in §4A1.2 govern the
computation of the criminal history points. Therefore, §§4A1.1 and 4A1.2 must be read together.
The following notes highlight the interaction of §§4A1.1 and 4A1.2.
Application Notes:
1. §4ALl(a). Three points are added for each prior sentence of imprisonment exceeding one year
and one month. There is no limit to the number of points that may be counted under this
item. The term "prior sentence1' is defined at §4A1.2(a). The term "sentence of imprisonment"
is defined at §4A1.2(b). Where a prior sentence of imprisonment resulted from a revocation
of probation, parole, or a similar form of release, see. §4A1.2(k).
Certain prior sentences are not counted or are counted only under certain conditions:
A sentence imposed more than fifteen years prior to the defendant's commencement of
the instant offense is not counted unless the defendant's incarceration extended into this
fifteen-year period. See §4A1.2(e).
A sentence imposed for an offense committed prior to the defendant's eighteenth birthday
is Counted under this item only if it resulted from an adult conviction. See §4A1.2(d).
A sentence for a foreign conviction, a conviction that has been expunged, or an invalid
conviction is not counted. See, §4A1.2(h) and (j) and the Commentary to §4A1.2.
2. §4Al.l(b). Two points are added for each prior sentence of imprisonment of at least sixty days
not counted in §4Al.l(a). There is no limit to the number of points that may be counted
under this item. The term "prior sentence" is defined at §4A1.2(a). The term "sentence of
imprisonment" is defined at §4A1.2(b). Where a prior sentence of imprisonment resulted from
a revocation of probation, parole, or a similar form of release, see, §4AL2(k).
Certain prior sentences are not counted or are counted only under certain conditions:
A sentence imposed more than ten years prior to the defendant's commencement of the
instant offense is not counted. See. §4A1.2(e).
An adult or juvenile sentence imposed for an offense committed prior to the defendant's
eighteenth birthday is counted only if confinement resulting from such sentence extended
into the five-year period preceding the defendant's commencement of the instant offense.
See §4A1.2(d).
Sentences for certain specified non-felony offenses are never counted. See, §4AI.2(c)(2).
A sentence for a foreign conviction or a tribal court conviction, an expunged conviction,
or an invalid conviction is not counted. See §4A1.2(h), (i), (j), and the Commentary
to §4A12.
268 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 3]]
A military sentence is counted only if imposed by a general or special court martial. See,
§4A1.2(g).
3. §4Al.l(c). One point is added for each prior sentence not counted under §4Al.l(a) or (b).
A maximum of four points may be counted under this item. The term "prior sentence" is
defined at §4A1.2(a).
Certain prior sentences are not counted or are counted only under certain conditions:
A sentence imposed more than ten years prior to the defendant's commencement of the
instant offense is not counted. See. §4A1.2(e).
An adult or juvenile sentence imposed for an offense committed prior to the defendant's
eighteenth birthday is counted only if imposed within five years of the defendant's
commencement of the current offense. See. §4A1.2(d).
Sentences for certain specified non-felony offenses are counted only if they meet certain
requirements. See. §4A1.2(c)(l).
Sentences for certain specified non-felony offenses are never counted. See. §4A1.2(c)(2).
A diversionary disposition is counted only where there is a finding or admission of guilt
in a judicial proceeding. See. §4A1.2(f).
A sentence for a foreign conviction, a tribal court conviction, an expunged conviction,
or an invalid conviction, is not counted. See. §4A1.2(h), (i), (j), and the Commentary
to §4A1.2.
A military sentence is counted only if imposed by a general or special court martial. See
§4A1.2(g).
4. §4Al.l(d). Two points are added if the defendant committed any part of the instant offense
(i.e.. any relevant conduct) while under any criminal justice sentence, including probation,
parole, supervised release, imprisonment, work release, or escape status. Failure to report for
service of a sentence of imprisonment is to be treated as an escape from such sentence. See.
§4A1.2(n). For the purposes of this item, a "criminal justice sentence" means a sentence
countable under §4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal History) having
a custodial or supervisory component, although active supervision is not required for this item
to apply. For example, a term of unsupervised probation would be included; but a sentence
to pay a fine, by itself, would not be included. A defendant who commits the instant offense
while a violation warrant from a prior sentence is outstanding (e.g.. a probation, parole, or
supervised release violation warrant) shall be deemed to be under a criminal justice sentence
for the purposes of this provision if that sentence is otherwise countable, even if that sentence
would have expired absent such warrant. See. §4A1.2(m).
5. §4ALl(el Two points are added if the defendant committed any part of the instant offense
(i.e., any relevant conduct) less than two years following release from confinement on a
sentence counted under §4All(a) or (b). This also applies if the defendant committed the
instant offense while in imprisonment or escape status on such a sentence. Failure to report
for service of a sentence of imprisonment is to be treated as an escape from such sentence.
See §4A1.2(n). However, if two points are added under §4All(d), only one point is added
under §4AU(e).
269 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 4]]
6. §4Al.l(f). Where the defendant received two or more prior sentences as a result of convictions
for crimes of violence that are treated as related cases but did not arise from the same occasion
(i.e.. offenses committed on different occasions that were part of a single common scheme or
plan or were consolidated for trial or sentencing; see. Application Note 3 of the Commentary
to §4A1.2), one point is added under §4All(f) for each such sentence that did not result in
any additional points under §4Al.l(a), (b), or (c). A total of up to 3 points may be added
under §4Al.l(f). 'Crime of violence' is defined in §4B1.2(1); see. §4A1.2(p).
For example, a defendant's criminal history includes two robbery convictions for offenses
committed on different occasions that were consolidated for sentencing and therefore are treated
as related. If the defendant received a five-year sentence of imprisonment for one robbery and
a four-year sentence of imprisonment for the other robbery (consecutively or concurrently), a
total of 3 points is added under §4All(a). An additional point is added under §4Al.l(f)
because the second sentence did not result in any additional point(s) (under §4Al.l(a), (b),
or (c)). In contrast, if the defendant received a one-year sentence of imprisonment for one
robbery and a nine-month consecutive sentence of imprisonment for the other robbery, a total
of 3 points also is added under §4Al.l(a) (a one-year sentence of imprisonment and a
consecutive nine-month sentence of imprisonment are treated as a combined one-year-nine-
month sentence of imprisonment). But no additional point is added under §4Al.l(f) because
the sentence for the second robbery already resulted in an additional point under §4Al.l(a).
Without the second sentence, the defendant would only have received two points under
§4Al.l(b) for the one-year sentence of imprisonment).
Background: Prior convictions may represent convictions in the federal system, fifty state systems,
the District of Columbia, territories, and foreign, tribal, and military courts. There are jurisdictional
variations in offense definitions, sentencing structures, and manner of sentence pronouncement. To
minimize problems with imperfect measures of past crime seriousness, criminal history categories are
based on the maximum term imposed in previous sentences rather than on other measures, such as
whether the conviction was designated a felony or misdemeanor. In recognition of the imperfection
of this measure however, §4A1.3 permits information about the significance or similarity of past
conduct underlying prior convictions to be used as a basis for imposing a sentence outside the
applicable guideline range.
Subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) of §4A1.1 distinguish confinement sentences longer than one year
and one month, shorter confinement sentences of at least sixty days, and all other sentences, such
as confinement sentences of less than sixty days, probation, fines, and residency in a halfway house.
Section 4Al.l(d) implements one measure of recency by adding two points if the defendant was
under a criminal justice sentence during any part of the instant offense.
Section 4Al.l(e) implements another measure of recency by adding two points if the defendant
committed any part of the instant offense less than two years immediately following his release from
confinement on a sentence counted under §4Al.l(a) or (b). Because of the potential overlap of (d)
and (e), their combined impact is limited to three points. However, a defendant who falls within
both (d) and (e) is more likely to commit additional crimes; thus, (d) and (e) are not completely
combined.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 259-
261); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendments 381 and 382).
270 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 5]]
§4A1.2. Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal History
(a) Prior Sentence Defined
(1) The term "prior sentence" means any sentence previously imposed upon
adjudication of guilt, whether by guilty plea, trial, or plea of nolo
contendere. for conduct not part of the instant offense.
(2) Prior sentences imposed in unrelated cases are to be counted
separately. Prior sentences imposed in related cases are to be treated
as one sentence for purposes of §4Al.l(a), (b), and (c). Use the
longest sentence of imprisonment if concurrent sentences were imposed
and the aggregate sentence of imprisonment imposed in the case of
consecutive sentences.
(3) A conviction for which the imposition or execution of sentence was
totally suspended or stayed shall be counted as a prior sentence under
§4Al.l(c).
(4) Where a defendant has been convicted of an offense, but not yet
sentenced, such conviction shall be counted as if it constituted a prior
sentence under §4Al.l(c) if a sentence resulting from that conviction
otherwise would be countable. In the case of a conviction for an
offense set forth in §4A1.2(c)(l), apply this provision only where the
sentence for such offense would be countable regardless of type or
length.
"Convicted of an offense," for the purposes of this provision, means that
the guilt of the defendant has been established, whether by guilty plea,
trial, or plea of nolo contendere.
(b) Sentence of Imprisonment Defined
(1) The term "sentence of imprisonment" means a sentence of incarceration
and refers to the maximum sentence imposed.
(2) If part of a sentence of imprisonment was suspended, "sentence of
imprisonment" refers only to the portion that was not suspended.
(c) Sentences Counted and Excluded
Sentences for all felony offenses are counted. Sentences for misdemeanor and
petty offenses are counted, except as follows:
(1) Sentences for the following prior offenses and offenses similar to them,
by whatever name they are known, are counted only if (A) the sentence
was a term of probation of at least one year or a term of imprisonment
of at least thirty days, or (B) the prior offense was similar to an instant
offense:
Careless or reckless driving
Contempt of court
Disorderly conduct or disturbing the peace
271 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 6]]
Driving without a license or with a revoked or suspended
license
False information to a police officer
Fish and game violations
Gambling
Hindering or failure to obey a police officer
Insufficient funds check
Leaving the scene of an accident
Local ordinance violations (excluding local ordinance violations
that are also criminal offenses under state law)
Non-support
Prostitution
Resisting arrest
Trespassing.
(2) Sentences for the following prior offenses and offenses similar to them,
by whatever name they are known, are never counted:
Hitchhiking
Juvenile status offenses and truancy
Loitering
Minor traffic infractions (e^g., speeding)
Public intoxication
Vagrancy.
(d) Offenses Committed Prior to Age Eighteen
(1) If the defendant was convicted as an adult and received a sentence of
imprisonment exceeding one year and one month, add 3 points under
§4Al.l(a) for each such sentence.
(2) In any other case,
(A) add 2 points under §4Al.l(b) for each adult or juvenile
sentence to confinement of at least sixty days if the defendant
was released from such confinement within five years of his
commencement of the instant offense;
(B) add 1 point under §4Al.l(c) for each adult or juvenile sentence
imposed within five years of the defendant's commencement of
the instant offense not covered in (A).
(e) Applicable Time Period
(1) Any prior sentence of imprisonment exceeding one year and one month
that was imposed within fifteen years of the defendant's commencement
of the instant offense is counted. Also count any prior sentence of
imprisonment exceeding one year and one month, whenever imposed,
that resulted in the defendant being incarcerated during any part of
such fifteen-year period.
(2) Any other prior sentence that was imposed within ten years of the
defendant's commencement of the instant offense is counted.
272 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 7]]
(3) Any prior sentence not within the time periods specified above is not
counted.
(4) The applicable time period for certain sentences resulting from offenses
committed prior to age eighteen is governed by §4A1.2(d)(2).
(f) Diversionary Dispositions
Diversion from the judicial process without a finding of guilt (e.g., deferred
prosecution) is not counted. A diversionary disposition resulting from a
finding or admission of guilt, or a plea of nolo contendere. in a judicial
proceeding is counted as a sentence under §4Al.l(c) even if a conviction is not
formally entered, except that diversion from juvenile court is not counted.
(g) Military Sentences
Sentences resulting from military offenses are counted if imposed by a general
or special court martial. Sentences imposed by a summary court martial or
Article 15 proceeding are not counted.
(h) Foreign Sentences
Sentences resulting from foreign convictions are not counted, but may be
considered under §4A1.3 (Adequacy of Criminal History Category).
(i) Tribal Court Sentences
Sentences resulting from tribal court convictions are not counted, but may be
considered under §4A1.3 (Adequacy of Criminal History Category).
(j) Expunged Convictions
Sentences for expunged convictions are not counted, but may be considered
under §4A1.3 (Adequacy of Criminal History Category).
(k) Revocations of Probation. Parole. Mandatory Release, or Supervised Release
(1) In the case of a prior revocation of probation, parole, supervised
release, special parole, or mandatory release, add the original term of
imprisonment to any term of imprisonment imposed upon revocation.
The resulting total is used to compute the criminal history points for
§4Al.l(a), (b), or (c), as applicable.
(2) (A) Revocation of probation, parole, supervised release, special
parole, or mandatory release may affect the points for
§4Al.l(e) in respect to the recency of last release from
confinement.
(B) Revocation of probation, parole, supervised release, special
parole, or mandatory release may affect the time period under
which certain sentences are counted as provided in
§4A1.2(d)(2) and (e). For the purposes of determining the
applicable time period, use the following: (i) in the case of an
273 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 8]]
adult term of imprisonment totaling more than one year and
one month, the date of last release from incarceration on such
sentence (see §4A1.2(e)(l)); (ii) in the case of any other
confinement sentence for an offense committed prior to the
defendant's eighteenth birthday, the date of the defendant's last
release from confinement on such sentence (see
§4A1.2(d)(2)(A)); and (iii) in any other case, the date of the
original sentence (see §4A1.2(d)(2)(B) and (e)(2)).
(I) Sentences on Appeal
Prior sentences under appeal are counted except as expressly provided below.
In the case of a prior sentence, the execution of which has been stayed pending
appeal, §4Al.l(a), (b), (c), (d), and (f) shall apply as if the execution of such
sentence had not been stayed; §4Al.l(e) shall not apply.
(m) Effect of a Violation Warrant
For the purposes of §4Al.l(d), a defendant who commits the instant offense
while a violation warrant from a prior sentence is outstanding (e.g., a
probation, parole, or supervised release violation warrant) shall be deemed to
be under a criminal justice sentence if that sentence is otherwise countable,
even if that sentence would have expired absent such warrant.
(n) Failure to Report for Service of Sentence of Imprisonment
For the purposes of §4Al.l(d) and (e), failure to report for service of a
sentence of imprisonment shall be treated as an escape from such sentence.
(o) Felony Offense
For the purposes of §4A1.2(c), a "felony offense" means any federal, state, or
local offense punishable by death or a term of imprisonment exceeding one
year, regardless of the actual sentence imposed.
(p) Crime of Violence Defined
For the purposes of §4Al.l(f), the definition of "crime of violence" is that set
forth in §4B 1.2(1).
Commentary
Application Notes:
I Prior Sentence. "Prior sentence" means a sentence imposed prior to sentencing on the instant
offense, other than a sentence for conduct that is part of the instant offense. See. §4A1.2(a).
A sentence imposed after the defendant's commencement of the instant offense, but prior to
sentencing on the instant offense, is a prior sentence if it was for conduct other than conduct
that was part of the instant offense.
Under §4A1.2(a)(4), a conviction for which the defendant has not yet been sentenced is treated
as if it were a prior sentence under §4AU(c) if a sentence resulting from such conviction
274 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 9]]
otherwise would have been counted. In the case of an offense set forth in §4AL2(c)(l) (which
lists certain misdemeanor and petty offenses), a conviction for which the defendant has not yet
been sentenced is treated as if it were a prior sentence under §4A1.2(a)(4) only where the
offense is similar to the instant offense (because sentences for other offenses set forth in
§4A1.2(c)(l) are counted only if they are of a specified type and length).
Z Sentence of Imprisonment. To qualify as a sentence of imprisonment, the defendant must have
actually served a period of imprisonment on such sentence (or, if the defendant escaped, would
have served time). See §4A1.2(a)(3) and (b)(2). For the purposes of applying §4AU(a), (b),
or (c), the length of a sentence of imprisonment is the stated maximum (e^ in the case of a
determinate sentence of five years, the stated maximum is five years; in the case of an
indeterminate sentence of one to five years, the stated maximum is five years; in the case of
an indeterminate sentence for a term not to exceed five years, the stated maximum is five years;
in the case of an indeterminate sentence for a term not to exceed the defendant's twenty-first
birthday, the stated maximum is the amount of time in pre-trial detention plus the amount of
time between the date of sentence and the defendant's twenty-first birthday). That is, criminal
history points are based on the sentence pronounced, not the length of time actually served.
See_ §4A1.2(b)(l) and (2). A sentence of probation is to be treated as a sentence under
§4Al.l(c) unless a condition of probation requiring imprisonment of at least sixty days was
imposed.
•?• Related Cases. Prior sentences are not considered related if they were for offenses that were
separated by an intervening arrest (le^ the defendant is arrested for the first offense prior to
committing the second offense). Otherwise, prior sentences are considered related if they
resulted from offenses that (I) occurred on the same occasion, (2) were part of a single
common scheme or plan, or (3) were consolidated for trial or sentencing. The court should
be aware that there may be instances in which this definition is overly broad and will result in
a criminal history score that underrepresents the seriousness of the defendant's criminal history
and the danger that he presents to the public. For example, if a defendant was convicted of
a number of serious non-violent offenses committed on different occasions, and the resulting
sentences were treated as related because the cases were consolidated for sentencing, the
assignment of a single set of points may not adequately reflect the seriousness of the
defendant's criminal history or the frequency with which he has committed crimes. In such
circumstances, an upward departure may be warranted. Note that the above example refers to
serious non-violent offenses. Where prior related sentences result from convictions of crimes
of violence, §4Al.l(f) will apply.
4. Sentences Imposed in the Alternative. A sentence which specifies a fine or other non-
incarcerative disposition as an alternative to a term of imprisonment (e^ $1,000 fine or ninety
days' imprisonment) is treated as a non-imprisonment sentence.
5. Sentences for Driving While Intoxicated or Under the Influence. Convictions for driving while
intoxicated or under the influence (and similar offenses by whatever name they are known) are
counted. Such offenses are not minor traffic infractions within the meaning of §4A1.2(c).
6. Reversed, Vacated, or Invalidated Convictions. Sentences resulting from convictions that have
been reversed or vacated because of errors of law, or because of subsequently-discovered
evidence exonerating the defendant, are not to be counted. Also, sentences resulting from
convictions that a defendant shows to have been previously ruled constitutionally invalid are
not to be counted. Nonetheless, the criminal conduct underlying any conviction that is not
counted in the criminal history score may be considered pursuant to §4A13 (Adequacy of
Criminal History Category).
275 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 10]]
7. Offenses Committed Prior to Age Eighteen. Section 4A1.2(d) covers offenses committed prior
to age eighteen. Attempting to count every juvenile adjudication would have the potential for
creating large disparities due to the differential availability of records. Therefore, for offenses
committed prior to age eighteen, only those that resulted in adult sentences of imprisonment
exceeding one year and one month, or resulted in imposition of an adult or juvenile sentence
or release from confinement on that sentence within five years of the defendant's
commencement of the instant offense are counted. To avoid disparities from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction in the age at which a defendant is considered a "juvenile," this provision applies
to all offenses committed prior to age eighteen.
8. Applicable Time Period. Section 4A1.2(d)(2) and (e) establishes the time period within which
prior sentences are counted. As used in §4A1.2(d)(2) and (e), the term "commencement of the
instant offense" includes any relevant conduct. See, §1BL3 (Relevant Conduct). If the court
finds that a sentence imposed outside this time period is evidence of similar, or serious
dissimilar, criminal conduct, the court may consider this information in determining whether
an upward departure is warranted under §4A1.3 (Adequacy of Criminal History Category).
9. Diversionary Dispositions. Section 4A1.2(f) requires counting prior adult diversionary
dispositions if they involved a judicial determination of guilt or an admission of guilt in open
court. This reflects a policy that defendants who receive the benefit of a rehabilitative sentence
and continue to commit crimes should not be treated with further leniency.
10. Convictions Set Aside or Defendant Pardoned. A number of jurisdictions have various
procedures pursuant to which previous convictions may be set aside or the defendant may be
pardoned for reasons unrelated to innocence or errors of law, e.g.. in order to restore civil rights
or to remove the stigma associated with a criminal conviction. Sentences resulting from such
convictions are to be counted. However, expunged convictions are not counted. §4A1.2(j).
11. Revocations to be Considered. Section 4A1.2(k) covers revocations of probation and other
conditional sentences where the original term of imprisonment imposed, if any, did not exceed
one year and one month. Rather than count the original sentence and the resentence after
revocation as separate sentences, the sentence given upon revocation should be added to the
original sentence of imprisonment, if any, and the total should be counted as if it were one
sentence. By this approach, no more than three points will be assessed for a single conviction,
even if probation or conditional release was subsequently revoked. If the sentence originally
imposed, the sentence imposed upon revocation, or the total of both sentences exceeded one
year and one month, the maximum three points would be assigned. If, however, at the time
of revocation another sentence was imposed for a new criminal conviction, that conviction
would be computed separately from the sentence imposed for the revocation.
Where a revocation applies to multiple sentences, and such sentences are counted separately
under §4A1.2(a)(2), add the term of imprisonment imposed upon revocation to the sentence
that will result in the greatest increase in criminal history points. Example: A defendant was
serving two probationary sentences, each counted separately under §4A1.2(a)(2); probation was
revoked on both sentences as a result of the same violation conduct; and the defendant was
sentenced to a total of 45 days of imprisonment. If one sentence had been a "straight"
probationary sentence and the other had been a probationary sentence that had required service
of 15 days of imprisonment, the revocation term of imprisonment (45 days) would be added
to the probationary sentence that had the 15-day term of imprisonment. This would result in
a total of 2 criminal history points under §4AU(b) (for the combined 60-day term of
imprisonment) and 1 criminal history point under §4Al.l(c) (for the other probationary
sentence).
276 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 11]]
12. Local Ordinance Violations. A number of local jurisdictions have enacted ordinances covering
certain offenses (e^ larceny and assault misdemeanors) that are also violations of state
criminal law. This enables a local court (ejg^ a municipal court) to exercise jurisdiction over
such offenses. Such offenses are excluded from the definition of local ordinance violations in
§4A1.2(c)(l) and, therefore, sentences for such offenses are to be treated as if the defendant
had been convicted under state law.
13. Insufficient Funds Check. "Insufficient funds check," as used in §4A1.2(c)(l), does not include
any conviction establishing that the defendant used a false name or non-existent account.
Background: Prior sentences, not otherwise excluded, are to be counted in the criminal history score,
including uncounseled misdemeanor sentences where imprisonment was not imposed.
The Commission leaves for court determination the issue of whether a defendant may
collaterally attack at sentencing a prior conviction.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 262-
265); November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendments 352 and 353); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendments
381 and 382); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 472).
§4AL3. Adequacy of Criminal History Category (Policy Statement)
If reliable information indicates that the criminal history category does not adequately
reflect the seriousness of the defendant's past criminal conduct or the likelihood that
the defendant will commit other crimes, the court may consider imposing a sentence
departing from the otherwise applicable guideline range. Such information may
include, but is not limited to, information concerning:
(a) prior sentence(s) not used in computing the criminal history category (e.g..
sentences for foreign and tribal offenses);
(b) prior sentence(s) of substantially more than one year imposed as a result of
independent crimes committed on different occasions;
(c) prior similar misconduct established by a civil adjudication or by a failure to
comply with an administrative order;
(d) whether the defendant was pending trial or sentencing on another charge at
the time of the instant offense;
(e) prior similar adult criminal conduct not resulting in a criminal conviction.
A departure under this provision is warranted when the criminal history category
significantly under-represents the seriousness of the defendant's criminal history or the
likelihood that the defendant will commit further crimes. Examples might include the
case of a defendant who (1) had several previous foreign sentences for serious
offenses, (2) had received a prior consolidated sentence of ten years for a series of
serious assaults, (3) had a similar instance of large scale fraudulent misconduct
established by an adjudication in a Securities and Exchange Commission enforcement
proceeding, (4) committed the instant offense while on bail or pretrial release for
another serious offense or (5) for appropriate reasons, such as cooperation in the
prosecution of other defendants, had previously received an extremely lenient sentence
277 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 12]]
for a serious offense. The court may, after a review of all the relevant information,
conclude that the defendant's criminal history was significantly more serious than that
of most defendants in the same criminal history category, and therefore consider an
upward departure from the guidelines. However, a prior arrest record itself shall not
be considered under §4A1.3.
There may be cases where the court concludes that a defendant's criminal history
category significantly over-represents the seriousness of a defendant's criminal history
or the likelihood that the defendant will commit further crimes. An example might
include the case of a defendant with two minor misdemeanor convictions close to ten
years prior to the instant offense and no other evidence of prior criminal behavior in
the intervening period. The court may conclude that the defendant's criminal history
was significantly less serious than that of most defendants in the same criminal history
category (Category II), and therefore consider a downward departure from the
guidelines.
In considering a departure under this provision, the Commission intends that the court
use, as a reference, the guideline range for a defendant with a higher or lower
criminal history category, as applicable. For example, if the court concludes that the
defendant's criminal history category of HI significantly under-represents the
seriousness of the defendant's criminal history, and that the seriousness of the
defendant's criminal history most closely resembles that of most defendants with
Criminal History Category IV , the court should look to the guideline range specified
for a defendant with Criminal History Category IV to guide its departure. The
Commission contemplates that there may, on occasion, be a case of an egregious,
serious criminal record in which even the guideline range for Criminal History
Category VI is not adequate to reflect the seriousness of the defendant's criminal
history. In such a case, a departure above the guideline range for a defendant with
Criminal History Category VI may be warranted. In determining whether an upward
departure from Criminal History Category VI is warranted, the court should consider
that the nature of the prior offenses rather than simply their number is often more
indicative of the seriousness of the defendant's criminal record. For example, a
defendant with five prior sentences for very large-scale fraud offenses may have
15 criminal history points, within the range of points typical for Criminal History
Category VI, yet have a substantially more serious criminal history overall because of
the nature of the prior offenses. On the other hand, a defendant with nine prior
60-day jail sentences for offenses such as petty larceny, prostitution, or possession of
gambling slips has a higher number of criminal history points (18 points) than the
typical Criminal History Category VI defendant, but not necessarily a more serious
criminal history overall. Where the court determines that the extent and nature of the
defendant's criminal history, taken together, are sufficient to warrant an upward
departure from Criminal History Category VI, the court should structure the
departure by moving incrementally down the sentencing table to the next higher
offense level in Criminal History Category VI until it finds a guideline range
appropriate to the case.
However, this provision is not symmetrical. The lower limit of the range for Criminal
History Category I is set for a first offender with the lowest risk of recidivism.
Therefore, a departure below the lower limit of the guideline range for Criminal
History Category I on the basis of the adequacy of criminal history cannot be
appropriate.
278 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 13]]
Commentary
Background: This policy statement recognizes that the criminal history score is unlikely to take into
account all the variations in the seriousness of criminal history that may occur. For example, a
defendant with an extensive record of serious, assaultive conduct who had received what might now
be considered extremely lenient treatment in the past might have the same criminal history category
as a defendant who had a record of less serious conduct. Yet, the first defendant's criminal history
clearly may be more serious. This may be particularly true in the case of younger defendants (e.g.,
defendants in their early twenties or younger) who are more likely to have received repeated lenient
treatment, yet who may actually pose a greater risk of serious recidivism than older defendants. This
policy statement authorizes the consideration of a departure from the guidelines in the limited
circumstances where reliable information indicates that the criminal history category does not
adequately reflect the seriousness of the defendant's criminal history or likelihood of recidivism, and
provides guidance for the consideration of such departures.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 381);
November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 460).
279 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 14]]
[Page intentionally blank]
280 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 15]]
PART B - CAREER OFFENDERS AND CRIMINAL LIVELIHOOD
§4B1.1. Career Offender
A defendant is a career offender if (1) the defendant was at least eighteen years old
at the time of the instant offense, (2) the instant offense of conviction is a felony that
is either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense, and (3) the defendant
has at least two prior felony convictions of either a crime of violence or a controlled
substance offense. If the offense level for a career criminal from the table below is
greater than the offense level otherwise applicable, the offense level from the table
below shall apply. A career offender's criminal history category in every case shall be
Category VI.
Offense Statutory Maximum Offense Level*
(A) Life 37
(B) 25 years or more 34
(C) 20 years or more, but less than 25 years 32
(D) 15 years or more, but less than 20 years 29
(E) 10 years or more, but less than 15 years 24
(F) 5 years or more, but less than 10 years 17
(G) More than 1 year, but less than 5 years 12.
*If an adjustment from §3E1.1 (Acceptance of Responsibility) applies, decrease the
offense level by the number of levels corresponding to that adjustment.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. "Crime of violence," "controlled substance offense," and "two prior felony convictions" are
defined in §4B1.2.
2. "Offense Statutory Maximum" refers to the maximum term of imprisonment authorized for the
offense of conviction that is a crime of violence or controlled substance offense. If more than
one count of conviction is of a crime of violence or controlled substance offense, use the
maximum authorized term of imprisonment for the count that authorizes the greatest maximum
term of imprisonment.
Background: 28 U.S.C. § 994(h) mandates that the Commission assure that certain "career"
offenders, as defined in the statute, receive a sentence of imprisonment "at or near the maximum term
authorized." Section 4B1.1 implements this mandate. The legislative history of this provision
suggests that the phrase "maximum term authorized" should be construed as the maximum term
authorized by statute. See S. Rep. 98-225, 98th Cong., 1st Sess. 175 (1983), 128 Cong. Rec. 26, 511-
12 (1982) (text of "Career Criminals" amendment by Senator Kennedy), 26, 515 (brief summary of
amendment), 26, 517-18 (statement of Senator Kennedy).
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendments 47
and 48); November 1,1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 266 and 267); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment
459).
281 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 16]]
§4B1.2. Definitions of Terms Used in Section 4B1.1
(1) The term "crime of violence" means any offense under federal or state law
punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year that —
(i) has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical
force against the person of another, or
(ii) is burglary of a dwelling, arson, or extortion, involves use of explosives,
or otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of
physical injury to another.
(2) The term "controlled substance offense" means an offense under a federal or
state law prohibiting the manufacture, import, export, distribution, or
dispensing of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) or the
possession of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) with intent
to manufacture, import, export, distribute, or dispense.
(3) The term "two prior felony convictions" means (A) the defendant committed
the instant offense subsequent to sustaining at least two felony convictions of
either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense (Le., two felony
convictions of a crime of violence, two felony convictions of a controlled
substance offense, or one felony conviction of a crime of violence and one
felony conviction of a controlled substance offense), and (B) the sentences for
at least two of the aforementioned felony convictions are counted separately
under the provisions of §4Al.l(a), (b), or (c). The date that a defendant
sustained a conviction shall be the date that the guilt of the defendant has
been established, whether by guilty plea, trial, or plea of nolo contendere.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. The terms "crime of violence" and "controlled substance offense" include the offenses of aiding
and abetting, conspiring, and attempting to commit such offenses.
2. "Crime of violence" includes murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, aggravated assault, forcible sex
offenses, robbery, arson, extortion, extortionate extension of credit, and burglary of a dwelling.
Other offenses are included where (A) that offense has as an element the use, attempted use,
or threatened use of physical force against the person of another, or (B) the conduct set forth
(i.e., expressly charged) in the count of which the defendant was convicted involved use of
explosives (including any explosive material or destructive device) or, by its nature, presented
a serious potential risk of physical injury to another. Under this section, the conduct of which
the defendant was convicted is the focus of inquiry.
The term "crime of violence" does not include the offense of unlawful possession of a firearm
by a felon. Where the instant offense is the unlawful possession of a firearm by a felon,
§2K2.1 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition;
Prohibited Transactions Involving Firearms or Ammunition) provides an increase in offense
level if the defendant has one or more prior felony convictions for a crime of violence or
controlled substance offense; and, if the defendant is sentenced under the provisions of
18 U.S.C. § 924(e), §4B1.4 (Armed Career Criminal) will apply.
282 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 17]]
3. "Prior felony conviction" means a prior adult federal or state conviction for an offense
punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year, regardless of whether such
offense is specifically designated as a felony and regardless of the actual sentence imposed.
A conviction for an offense committed at age eighteen or older is an adult conviction. A
conviction for an offense committed prior to age eighteen is an adult conviction if it is
classified as an adult conviction under the laws of the jurisdiction in which the defendant was
convicted (§& a federal conviction for an offense committed prior to the defendant's eighteenth
birthday is an adult conviction if the defendant was expressly proceeded against as an adult).
4. The provisions of §4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal History) are
applicable to the counting of convictions under §4B1.1.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 49);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendment 268); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 433); November
1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 461).
§4BL3. Criminal Livelihood
If the defendant committed an offense as part of a pattern of criminal conduct
engaged in as a livelihood, his offense level shall be not less than 13, unless §3E1.1
(Acceptance of Responsibility) applies, in which event his offense level shall be not
less than 11.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. "Pattern of criminal conduct" means planned criminal acts occurring over a substantial period
of time. Such acts may involve a single course of conduct or independent offenses.
2. "Engaged in as a livelihood" means that (1) the defendant derived income from the pattern of
criminal conduct that in any twelve-month period exceeded 2,000 times the then existing hourly
minimum wage under federal law; and (2) the totality of circumstances shows that such
criminal conduct was the defendant's primary occupation in that twelve-month period (e&j the
defendant engaged in criminal conduct rather than regular, legitimate employment; or the
defendant's legitimate employment was merely a front for his criminal conduct).
Background: Section 4B1.3 implements 28 U.S.C. § 994(i)(2), which directs the Commission to
ensure that the guidelines specify a "substantial term of imprisonment" for a defendant who
committed an offense as part of a pattern of criminal conduct from which he derived a substantial
portion of his income.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective June 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 50);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendment 269); November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendment 354).
§4B1.4. Armed Career Criminal
(a) A defendant who is subject to an enhanced sentence under the provisions of
18 U.S.C. § 924(e) is an armed career criminal.
283 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 18]]
(b) The offense level for an armed career criminal is the greatest of:
(1) the offense level applicable from Chapters Two and Three; or
(2) the offense level from §4B1.1 (Career Offender) if applicable; or
(3) (A) 34, if the defendant used or possessed the firearm or
ammunition in connection with a crime of violence or
controlled substance offense, as defined in §4B 1.2(1), or if the
firearm possessed by the defendant was of a type described in
26 U.S.C. § 5845(a)*; or
(B) 33, otherwise.*
*If an adjustment from §3E1.1 (Acceptance of Responsibility) applies,
decrease the offense level by the number of levels corresponding to that
adjustment.
(c) The criminal history category for an armed career criminal is the greatest of:
(1) the criminal history category from Chapter Four, Part A (Criminal
History), or §4B1.1 (Career Offender) if applicable; or
(2) Category VI, if the defendant used or possessed the firearm or
ammunition in connection with a crime of violence or controlled
substance offense, as defined in §4B1.2(1), or if the firearm possessed
by the defendant was of a type described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a); or
(3) Category IV.
Commentary
Application Note:
1. This guideline applies in the case of a defendant subject to an enhanced sentence under
18 U.S.C. § 924(e). Under 18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(l), a defendant is subject to an enhanced
sentence if the instant offense of conviction is a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) and the
defendant has at least three prior convictions for a "violent felony" or "serious drug offense,"
or both, committed on occasions different from one another. The terms "violent felony" and
"serious drug offense" are defined in 18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(2). It is to be noted that the
definitions of "violent felony" and "serious drug offense" in 18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(2) are not
identical to the definitions of "crime of violence" and "controlled substance offense" used in
§4B1.1 (Career Offender), nor are the time periods for the counting of prior sentences under
§4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal History) applicable to the
determination of whether a defendant is subject to an enhanced sentence under 18 U.S.C.
§ 924(e).
It is also to be noted that the procedural steps relative to the imposition of an enhanced
sentence under 18 U.S.C. § 924(e) are not set forth by statute and may vary to some extent
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
284 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 19]]
Background: This section implements 18 U.S.C. § 924(e), which requires a minimum sentence of
imprisonment of fifteen years for a defendant who violates 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) and has three previous
convictions for a violent felony or a serious drug offense. If the offense level determined under this
section is greater than the offense level otherwise applicable, the offense level determined under this
section shall be applied. A minimum criminal history category (Category TV) is provided, reflecting
that each defendant to whom this section applies will have at least three prior convictions for serious
offenses. In some cases, the criminal history category may not adequately reflect the defendant's
criminal history; see. §4A1.3 (Adequacy of Criminal History Category).
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendment 355). Amended effective November 1, 1992
(see Appendix C, amendment 459).
235 November 1,1992