SOURCE: https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/guidelines-manual/1992/manual-pdf/Chapter_1.pdf

[[PDF page 1]]
CHAPTER ONE - INTRODUCTION
AND GENERAL APPLICATION PRINCIPLES
PART A - INTRODUCTION
1. Authority
The United States Sentencing Commission ("Commission") is an independent agency in the
judicial branch composed of seven voting and two non-voting, ex officio members. Its principal
purpose is to establish sentencing policies and practices for the federal criminal justice system that
will assure the ends of justice by promulgating detailed guidelines prescribing the appropriate
sentences for offenders convicted of federal crimes.
The guidelines and policy statements promulgated by the Commission are issued pursuant
to Section 994(a) of Title 28, United States Code.
2. The Statutory Mission
The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 (Title II of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of
1984) provides for the development of guidelines that will further the basic purposes of criminal
punishment: deterrence, incapacitation, just punishment, and rehabilitation. The Act delegates
broad authority to the Commission to review and rationalize the federal sentencing process.
The Act contains detailed instructions as to how this determination should be made, the
most important of which directs the Commission to create categories of offense behavior and
offender characteristics. An offense behavior category might consist, for example, of "bank
robbery/committed with a gun/$2500 taken." An offender characteristic category might be
"offender with one prior conviction not resulting in imprisonment." The Commission is required
to prescribe guideline ranges that specify an appropriate sentence for each class of convicted
persons determined by coordinating the offense behavior categories with the offender characteristic
categories. Where the guidelines call for imprisonment, the range must be narrow: the maximum
of the range cannot exceed the minimum by more than the greater of 25 percent or six months.
28 U.S.C. § 994(b)(2).
Pursuant to the Act, the sentencing court must select a sentence from within the guideline
range. If, however, a particular case presents atypical features, the Act allows the court to depart
from the guidelines and sentence outside the prescribed range. In that case, the court must
specify reasons for departure. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b). If the court sentences within the guideline
range, an appellate court may review the sentence to determine whether the guidelines were
correctly applied. If the court departs from the guideline range, an appellate court may review
the reasonableness of the departure. 18 U.S.C. § 3742. The Act also abolishes parole, and
substantially reduces and restructures good behavior adjustments.
The Commission's initial guidelines were submitted to Congress on April 13, 1987. After
the prescribed period of Congressional review, the guidelines took effect on November 1, 1987,
and apply to all offenses committed on or after that date. The Commission has the authority to
submit guideline amendments each year to Congress between the beginning of a regular
Congressional session and May 1. Such amendments automatically take effect 180 days after
submission unless a law is enacted to the contrary. 28 U.S.C. § 994(p).
November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 2]]
The initial sentencing guidelines and policy statements were developed after extensive
hearings, deliberation, and consideration of substantial public comment. The Commission
emphasizes, however, that it views the guideline-writing process as evolutionary. It expects, and
the governing statute anticipates, that continuing research, experience, and analysis will result in
modifications and revisions to the guidelines through submission of amendments to Congress. To
this end, the Commission is established as a permanent agency to monitor sentencing practices
in the federal courts.
3. The Basic Approach (Policy Statement)
To understand the guidelines and their underlying rationale, it is important to focus on the
three objectives that Congress sought to achieve in enacting the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.
The Act's basic objective was to enhance the ability of the criminal justice system to combat crime
through an effective, fair sentencing system. To achieve this end, Congress first sought honesty
in sentencing. It sought to avoid the confusion and implicit deception that arose out of the pre-
guidelines sentencing system which required the court to impose an indeterminate sentence of
imprisonment and empowered the parole commission to determine how much of the sentence an
offender actually would serve in prison. This practice usually resulted in a substantial reduction
in the effective length of the sentence imposed, with defendants often serving only about one-third
of the sentence imposed by the court.
Second, Congress sought reasonable uniformity in sentencing by narrowing the wide disparity
in sentences imposed for similar criminal offenses committed by similar offenders. Third,
Congress sought proportionality in sentencing through a system that imposes appropriately
different sentences for criminal conduct of differing severity.
Honesty is easy to achieve: the abolition of parole makes the sentence imposed by the court
the sentence the offender will serve, less approximately fifteen percent for good behavior. There
is a tension, however, between the mandate of uniformity and the mandate of proportionality.
Simple uniformity — sentencing every offender to five years -- destroys proportionality. Having
only a few simple categories of crimes would make the guidelines uniform and easy to administer,
but might lump together offenses that are different in important respects. For example, a single
category for robbery that included armed and unarmed robberies, robberies with and without
injuries, robberies of a few dollars and robberies of millions, would be far too broad.
A sentencing system tailored to fit every conceivable wrinkle of each case would quickly
become unworkable and seriously compromise the certainty of punishment and its deterrent effect.
For example: a bank robber with (or without) a gun, which the robber kept hidden (or
brandished), might have frightened (or merely warned), injured seriously (or less seriously), tied
up (or simply pushed) a guard, teller, or customer, at night (or at noon), in an effort to obtain
money for other crimes (or for other purposes), in the company of a few (or many) other robbers,
for the first (or fourth) time.
The list of potentially relevant features of criminal behavior is long; the fact that they can
occur in multiple combinations means that the list of possible permutations of factors is virtually
endless. The appropriate relationships among these different factors are exceedingly difficult to
establish, for they are often context specific. Sentencing courts do not treat the occurrence of a
simple bruise identically in all cases, irrespective of whether that bruise occurred in the context
of a bank robbery or in the context of a breach of peace. This is so, in part, because the risk that
such a harm will occur differs depending on the underlying offense with which it is connected; and
also because, in part, the relationship between punishment and multiple harms is not simply
additive. The relation varies depending on how much other harm has occurred. Thus, it would
November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 3]]
not be proper to assign points for each kind of harm and simply add them up, irrespective of
context and total amounts.
The larger the number of subcategories of offense and offender characteristics included in
the guidelines, the greater the complexity and the less workable the system. Moreover, complex
combinations of offense and offender characteristics would apply and interact in unforeseen ways
to unforeseen situations, thus failing to cure the unfairness of a simple, broad category system.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, probation officers and courts, in applying a complex system
having numerous subcategories, would be required to make a host of decisions regarding whether
the underlying facts were sufficient to bring the case within a particular subcategory. The greater
the number of decisions required and the greater their complexity, the greater the risk that
different courts would apply the guidelines differently to situations that, in fact, are similar,
thereby reintroducing the very disparity that the guidelines were designed to reduce.
In view of the arguments, it would have been tempting to retreat to the simple, broad
category approach and to grant courts the discretion to select the proper point along a broad
sentencing range. Granting such broad discretion, however, would have risked correspondingly
broad disparity in sentencing, for different courts may exercise their discretionary powers in
different ways. Such an approach would have risked a return to the wide disparity that Congress
established the Commission to reduce and would have been contrary to the Commission's mandate
set forth in the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.
In the end, there was no completely satisfying solution to this problem. The Commission
had to balance the comparative virtues and vices of broad, simple categorization and detailed,
complex subcategorization, and within the constraints established by that balance, minimize the
discretionary powers of the sentencing court. Any system will, to a degree, enjoy the benefits and
suffer from the drawbacks of each approach.
A philosophical problem arose when the Commission attempted to reconcile the differing
perceptions of the purposes of criminal punishment. Most observers of the criminal law agree that
the ultimate aim of the law itself, and of punishment in particular, is the control of crime. Beyond
this point, however, the consensus seems to break down. Some argue that appropriate punishment
should be defined primarily on the basis of the principle of "just deserts." Under this principle,
punishment should be scaled to the offender's culpability and the resulting harms. Others argue
that punishment should be imposed primarily on the basis of practical "crime control"
considerations. This theory calls for sentences that most effectively lessen the likelihood of future
crime, either by deterring others or incapacitating the defendant.
Adherents of each of these points of view urged the Commission to choose between them
and accord one primacy over the other. As a practical matter, however, this choice was
unnecessary because in most sentencing decisions the application of either philosophy will produce
the same or similar results.
In its initial set of guidelines, the Commission sought to solve both the practical and
philosophical problems of developing a coherent sentencing system by taking an empirical
approach that used as a starting point data estimating pre-guidelines sentencing practice. It
analyzed data drawn from 10,000 presentence investigations, the differing elements of various
crimes as distinguished in substantive criminal statutes, the United States Parole Commission's
guidelines and statistics, and data from other relevant sources in order to determine which
distinctions were important in pre-guidelines practice. After consideration, the Commission
accepted, modified, or rationalized these distinctions.
November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 4]]
This empirical approach helped the Commission resolve its practical problem by defining a
list of relevant distinctions that, although of considerable length, was short enough to create a
manageable set of guidelines. Existing categories are relatively broad and omit distinctions that
some may believe important, yet they include most of the major distinctions that statutes and data
suggest made a significant difference in sentencing decisions. Relevant distinctions not reflected
in the guidelines probably will occur rarely and sentencing courts may take such unusual cases into
account by departing from the guidelines.
The Commission's empirical approach also helped resolve its philosophical dilemma. Those
who adhere to a just deserts philosophy may concede that the lack of consensus might make it
difficult to say exactly what punishment is deserved for a particular crime. Likewise, those who
subscribe to a philosophy of crime control may acknowledge that the lack of sufficient data might
make it difficult to determine exactly the punishment that will best prevent that crime. Both
groups might therefore recognize the wisdom of looking to those distinctions that judges and
legislators have, in fact, made over the course of time. These established distinctions are ones
that the community believes, or has found over time, to be important from either a just deserts
or crime control perspective.
The Commission did not simply copy estimates of pre-guidelines practice as revealed by the
data, even though establishing offense values on this basis would help eliminate disparity because
the data represent averages. Rather, it departed from the data at different points for various
important reasons. Congressional statutes, for example, suggested or required departure, as in
the case of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 that imposed increased and mandatory minimum
sentences. In addition, the data revealed inconsistencies in treatment, such as punishing economic
crime less severely than other apparently equivalent behavior.
Despite these policy-oriented departures from pre-guidelines practice, the guidelines
represent an approach that begins with, and builds upon, empirical data. The guidelines will not
please those who wish the Commission to adopt a single philosophical theory and then work
deductively to establish a simple and perfect set of categorizations and distinctions. The guidelines
may prove acceptable, however, to those who seek more modest, incremental improvements in the
status quo, who believe the best is often the enemy of the good, and who recognize that these
guidelines are, as the Act contemplates, but the first step in an evolutionary process. After
spending considerable time and resources exploring alternative approaches, the Commission
developed these guidelines as a practical effort toward the achievement of a more honest, uniform,
equitable, proportional, and therefore effective sentencing system.
4. The Guidelines' Resolution of Maior Issues (Policy Statement)
The guideline-drafting process required the Commission to resolve a host of important policy
questions typically involving rather evenly balanced sets of competing considerations. As an aid
to understanding the guidelines, this introduction briefly discusses several of those issues;
commentary in the guidelines explains others.
(a) Real Offense vs. Charge Offense Sentencing.
One of the most important questions for the Commission to decide was whether to base
sentences upon the actual conduct in which the defendant engaged regardless of the charges for
which he was indicted or convicted ("real offense" sentencing), or upon the conduct that constitutes
the elements of the offense for which the defendant was charged and of which he was convicted
("charge offense" sentencing). A bank robber, for example, might have used a gun, frightened
bystanders, taken $50,000, injured a teller, refused to stop when ordered, and raced away damaging
4 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 5]]
property during his escape. A pure real offense system would sentence on the basis of all
identifiable conduct. A pure charge offense system would overlook some of the harms that did
not constitute statutory elements of the offenses of which the defendant was convicted.
The Commission initially sought to develop a pure real offense system. After all, the pre-
guidelines sentencing system was, in a sense, this type of system. The sentencing court and the
parole commission took account of the conduct in which the defendant actually engaged, as
determined in a presentence report, at the sentencing hearing, or before a parole commission
hearing officer. The Commission's initial efforts in this direction, carried out in the spring and
early summer of 1986, proved unproductive, mostly for practical reasons. To make such a system
work, even to formalize and rationalize the status quo, would have required the Commission to
decide precisely which harms to take into account, how to add them up, and what kinds of
procedures the courts should use to determine the presence or absence of disputed factual
elements. The Commission found no practical way to combine and account for the large number
of diverse harms arising in different circumstances; nor did it find a practical way to reconcile the
need for a fair adjudicatory procedure with the need for a speedy sentencing process given the
potential existence of hosts of adjudicated "real harm" facts in many typical cases. The effort
proposed as a solution to these problems required the use of, for example, quadratic roots and
other mathematical operations that the Commission considered too complex to be workable. In
the Commission's view, such a system risked return to wide disparity in sentencing practice.
In its initial set of guidelines submitted to Congress in April 1987, the Commission moved
closer to a charge offense system. This system, however, does contain a significant number of real
offense elements. For one thing, the hundreds of overlapping and duplicative statutory provisions
that make up the federal criminal law forced the Commission to write guidelines that are
descriptive of generic conduct rather than guidelines that track purely statutory language. For
another, the guidelines take account of a number of important, commonly occurring real offense
elements such as role in the offense, the presence of a gun, or the amount of money actually
taken, through alternative base offense levels, specific offense characteristics, cross references, and
adjustments.
The Commission recognized that a charge offense system has drawbacks of its own. One
of the most important is the potential it affords prosecutors to influence sentences by increasing
or decreasing the number of counts in an indictment. Of course, the defendant's actual conduct
(that which the prosecutor can prove in court) imposes a natural limit upon the prosecutor's
ability to increase a defendant's sentence. Moreover, the Commission has written its rules for the
treatment of multicount convictions with an eye toward eliminating unfair treatment that might
flow from count manipulation. For example, the guidelines treat a three-count indictment, each
count of which charges sale of 100 grams of heroin or theft of $10,000, the same as a single-count
indictment charging sale of 300 grams of heroin or theft of $30,000. Furthermore, a sentencing
court may control any inappropriate manipulation of the indictment through use of its departure
power. Finally, the Commission will closely monitor charging and plea agreement practices and
will make appropriate adjustments should they become necessary.
(b) Departures.
The sentencing statute permits a court to depart from a guideline-specified sentence only
when it finds "an aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not adequately
taken into consideration by the Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines that should
result in a sentence different from that described." 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b). The Commission intends
the sentencing courts to treat each guideline as carving out a "heartland," a set of typical cases
embodying the conduct that each guideline describes. When a court finds an atypical case, one
to which a particular guideline linguistically applies but where conduct significantly differs from
5 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 6]]
the norm, the court may consider whether a departure is warranted. Section 5H1.10 (Race, Sex,
National Origin, Creed, Religion, and Socio-Economic Status), §5H1.12 (Lack of Guidance as a
Youth and Similar Circumstances), the third sentence of §5H1.4 (Physical Condition, Including
Drug Dependence and Alcohol Abuse), and the last sentence of §5K2.12 (Coercion and Duress)
list several factors that the court cannot take into account as grounds for departure. With those
specific exceptions, however, the Commission does not intend to limit the kinds of factors, whether
or not mentioned anywhere else in the guidelines, that could constitute grounds for departure in
an unusual case.
The Commission has adopted this departure policy for two reasons. First, it is difficult to
prescribe a single set of guidelines that encompasses the vast range of human conduct potentially
relevant to a sentencing decision. The Commission also recognizes that the initial set of guidelines
need not do so. The Commission is a permanent body, empowered by law to write and rewrite
guidelines, with progressive changes, over many years. By monitoring when courts depart from
the guidelines and by analyzing their stated reasons for doing so and court decisions with
references thereto, the Commission, over time, will be able to refine the guidelines to specify more
precisely when departures should and should not be permitted.
Second, the Commission believes that despite the courts' legal freedom to depart from the
guidelines, they will not do so very often. This is because the guidelines, offense by offense, seek
to take account of those factors that the Commission's data indicate made a significant difference
in pre-guidelines sentencing practice. Thus, for example, where the presence of physical injury
made an important difference in pre-guidelines sentencing practice (as in the case of robbery or
assault), the guidelines specifically include this factor to enhance the sentence. Where the
guidelines do not specify an augmentation or diminution, this is generally because the sentencing
data did not permit the Commission to conclude that the factor was empirically important in
relation to the particular offense. Of course, an important factor (e.g.. physical injury) may
infrequently occur in connection with a particular crime (e.g.. fraud). Such rare occurrences are
precisely the type of events that the courts' departure powers were designed to cover — unusual
cases outside the range of the more typical offenses for which the guidelines were designed.
It is important to note that the guidelines refer to two different kinds of departure. The first
involves instances in which the guidelines provide specific guidance for departure by analogy or
by other numerical or non-numerical suggestions. For example, the Commentary to §2G1.1
(Transportation for the Purpose of Prostitution or Prohibited Sexual Conduct) recommends a
downward departure of eight levels where a commercial purpose was not involved. The
Commission intends such suggestions as policy guidance for the courts. The Commission expects
that most departures will reflect the suggestions and that the courts of appeals may prove more
likely to find departures "unreasonable" where they fall outside suggested levels.
A second type of departure will remain unguided. It may rest upon grounds referred to in
Chapter Five, Part K (Departures) or on grounds not mentioned in the guidelines. While Chapter
Five, Part K lists factors that the Commission believes may constitute grounds for departure, the
list is not exhaustive. The Commission recognizes that there may be other grounds for departure
that are not mentioned; it also believes there may be cases in which a departure outside suggested
levels is warranted. In its view, however, such cases will be highly infrequent.
(c) Plea Agreements.
Nearly ninety percent of all federal criminal cases involve guilty pleas and many of these
cases involve some form of plea agreement. Some commentators on early Commission guideline
drafts urged the Commission not to attempt any major reforms of the plea agreement process on
the grounds that any set of guidelines that threatened to change pre-guidelines practice radically
6 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 7]]
also threatened to make the federal system unmanageable. Others argued that guidelines that
failed to control and limit plea agreements would leave untouched a "loophole" large enough to
undo the good that sentencing guidelines would bring.
The Commission decided not to make major changes in plea agreement practices in the
initial guidelines, but rather to provide guidance by issuing general policy statements concerning
the acceptance of plea agreements in Chapter Six, Part B (Plea Agreements). The rules set forth
in Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(e) govern the acceptance or rejection of such agreements. The
Commission will collect data on the courts' plea practices and will analyze this information to
determine when and why the courts accept or reject plea agreements and whether plea agreement
practices are undermining the intent of the Sentencing Reform Act. In light of this information
and analysis, the Commission will seek to further regulate the plea agreement process as
appropriate. Importantly, if the policy statements relating to plea agreements are followed,
circumvention of the Sentencing Reform Act and the guidelines should not occur.
The Commission expects the guidelines to have a positive, rationalizing impact upon plea
agreements for two reasons. First, the guidelines create a clear, definite expectation in respect
to the sentence that a court will impose if a trial takes place. In the event a prosecutor and
defense attorney explore the possibility of a negotiated plea, they will no longer work in the dark.
This fact alone should help to reduce irrationality in respect to actual sentencing outcomes.
Second, the guidelines create a norm to which courts will likely refer when they decide whether,
under Rule ll(e), to accept or to reject a plea agreement or recommendation.
(d) Probation and Split Sentences.
The statute provides that the guidelines are to "reflect the general appropriateness of
imposing a sentence other than imprisonment in cases in which the defendant is a first offender
who has not been convicted of a crime of violence or an otherwise serious offense . ..."
28 U.S.C. § 994(j). Under pre-guidelines sentencing practice, courts sentenced to probation an
inappropriately high percentage of offenders guilty of certain economic crimes, such as theft, tax
evasion, antitrust offenses, insider trading, fraud, and embezzlement, that in the Commission's view
are "serious."
The Commission's solution to this problem has been to write guidelines that classify as
serious many offenses for which probation previously was frequently given and provide for at least
a short period of imprisonment in such cases. The Commission concluded that the definite
prospect of prison, even though the term may be short, will serve as a significant deterrent,
particularly when compared with pre-guidelines practice where probation, not prison, was the
norm.
More specifically, the guidelines work as follows in respect to a first offender. For offense
levels one through six, the sentencing court may elect to sentence the offender to probation (with
or without confinement conditions) or to a prison term. For offense levels seven through ten, the
court may substitute probation for a prison term, but the probation must include confinement
conditions (community confinement, intermittent confinement, or home detention). For offense
levels eleven and twelve, the court must impose at least one-half the minimum confinement
sentence in the form of prison confinement, the remainder to be served on supervised release with
a condition of community confinement or home detention. The Commission, of course, has not
dealt with the single acts of aberrant behavior that still may justify probation at higher offense
levels through departures.
November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 8]]
(e) Multi-Count Convictions.
The Commission, like several state sentencing commissions, has found it particularly difficult
to develop guidelines for sentencing defendants convicted of multiple violations of law, each of
which makes up a separate count in an indictment. The difficulty is that when a defendant
engages in conduct that causes several harms, each additional harm, even if it increases the extent
to which punishment is warranted, does not necessarily warrant a proportionate increase in
punishment. A defendant who assaults others during a fight, for example, may warrant more
punishment if he injures ten people than if he injures one, but his conduct does not necessarily
warrant ten times the punishment. If it did, many of the simplest offenses, for reasons that are
often fortuitous, would lead to sentences of life imprisonment -- sentences that neither just deserts
nor crime control theories of punishment would justify.
Several individual guidelines provide special instructions for increasing punishment when the
conduct that is the subject of that count involves multiple occurrences or has caused several
harms. The guidelines also provide general rules for aggravating punishment in light of multiple
harms charged separately in separate counts. These rules may produce occasional anomalies, but
normally they will permit an appropriate degree of aggravation of punishment for multiple offenses
that are the subjects of separate counts.
These rules are set out in Chapter Three, Part D (Multiple Counts). They essentially
provide: (1) when the conduct involves fungible items (e.g., separate drug transactions or thefts
of money), the amounts are added and the guidelines apply to the total amount; (2) when
nonfungible harms are involved, the offense level for the most serious count is increased
(according to a diminishing scale) to reflect the existence of other counts of conviction. The
guidelines have been written in order to minimize the possibility that an arbitrary casting of a
single transaction into several counts will produce a longer sentence. In addition, the sentencing
court will have adequate power to prevent such a result through departures.
(f) Regulatory Offenses.
Regulatory statutes, though primarily civil in nature, sometimes contain criminal provisions
in respect to particularly harmful activity. Such criminal provisions often describe not only
substantive offenses, but also more technical, administratively-related offenses such as failure to
keep accurate records or to provide requested information. These statutes pose two problems:
first, which criminal regulatory provisions should the Commission initially consider, and second,
how should it treat technical or administratively-related criminal violations?
In respect to the first problem, the Commission found that it could not comprehensively treat
all regulatory violations in the initial set of guidelines. There are hundreds of such provisions
scattered throughout the United States Code. To find all potential violations would involve
examination of each individual federal regulation. Because of this practical difficulty, the
Commission sought to determine, with the assistance of the Department of Justice and several
regulatory agencies, which criminal regulatory offenses were particularly important in light of the
need for enforcement of the general regulatory scheme. The Commission addressed these offenses
in the initial guidelines.
In respect to the second problem, the Commission has developed a system for treating
technical recordkeeping and reporting offenses that divides them into four categories. First, in
the simplest of cases, the offender may have failed to fill out a form intentionally, but without
knowledge or intent that substantive harm would likely follow. He might fail, for example, to keep
an accurate record of toxic substance transport, but that failure may not lead, nor be likely to
lead, to the release or improper handling of any toxic substance. Second, the same failure may
8 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 9]]
be accompanied by a significant likelihood that substantive harm will occur; it may make a release
of a toxic substance more likely. Third, the same failure may have led to substantive harm.
Fourth, the failure may represent an effort to conceal a substantive harm that has occurred.
The structure of a typical guideline for a regulatory offense provides a low base offense level
(e.g.. 6) aimed at the first type of recordkeeping or reporting offense. Specific offense
characteristics designed to reflect substantive harms that do occur in respect to some regulatory
offenses, or that are likely to occur, increase the offense level. A specific offense characteristic
also provides that a recordkeeping or reporting offense that conceals a substantive offense will
have the same offense level as the substantive offense.
(g) Sentencing Ranges.
In determining the appropriate sentencing ranges for each offense, the Commission
estimated the average sentences served within each category under the pre-guidelines sentencing
system. It also examined the sentences specified in federal statutes, in the parole guidelines, and
in other relevant, analogous sources. The Commission's Supplementary Report on the Initial
Sentencing Guidelines (1987) contains a comparison between estimates of pre-guidelines
sentencing practice and sentences under the guidelines.
While the Commission has not considered itself bound by pre-guidelines sentencing practice,
it has not attempted to develop an entirely new system of sentencing on the basis of theory alone.
Guideline sentences, in many instances, will approximate average pre-guidelines practice and
adherence to the guidelines will help to eliminate wide disparity. For example, where a high
percentage of persons received probation under pre-guidelines practice, a guideline may include
one or more specific offense characteristics in an effort to distinguish those types of defendants
who received probation from those who received more severe sentences. In some instances, short
sentences of incarceration for all offenders in a category have been substituted for a pre-guidelines
sentencing practice of very wide variability in which some defendants received probation while
others received several years in prison for the same offense. Moreover, inasmuch as those who
pleaded guilty under pre-guidelines practice often received lesser sentences, the guidelines permit
the court to impose lesser sentences on those defendants who accept responsibility for their
misconduct. For defendants who provide substantial assistance to the government in the
investigation or prosecution of others, a downward departure may be warranted.
The Commission has also examined its sentencing ranges in light of their likely impact upon
prison population. Specific legislation, such as the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and the career
offender provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 (28 U.S.C. § 994(h)), required the
Commission to promulgate guidelines that will lead to substantial prison population increases.
These increases will occur irrespective of the guidelines. The guidelines themselves, insofar as
they reflect policy decisions made by the Commission (rather than legislated mandatory minimum
or career offender sentences), are projected to lead to an increase in prison population that
computer models, produced by the Commission and the Bureau of Prisons in 1987, estimated at
approximately 10 percent over a period of ten years.
(h) The Sentencing Table.
The Commission has established a sentencing table that for technical and practical reasons
contains 43 levels. Each level in the table prescribes ranges that overlap with the ranges in the
preceding and succeeding levels. By overlapping the ranges, the table should discourage
unnecessary litigation. Both prosecution and defense will realize that the difference between one
level and another will not necessarily make a difference in the sentence that the court imposes.
Thus, little purpose will be served in protracted litigation trying to determine, for example,
9 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 10]]
whether $10,000 or $11,000 was obtained as a result of a fraud. At the same time, the levels work
to increase a sentence proportionately. A change of six levels roughly doubles the sentence
irrespective of the level at which one starts. The guidelines, in keeping with the statutory
requirement that the maximum of any range cannot exceed the minimum by more than the greater
of 25 percent or six months (28 U.S.C. § 994(b)(2)), permit courts to exercise the greatest
permissible range of sentencing discretion. The table overlaps offense levels meaningfully, works
proportionately, and at the same time preserves the maximum degree of allowable discretion for
the court within each level.
Similarly, many of the individual guidelines refer to tables that correlate amounts of money
with offense levels. These tables often have many rather than a few levels. Again, the reason is
to minimize the likelihood of unnecessary litigation. If a money table were to make only a few
distinctions, each distinction would become more important and litigation over which category an
offender fell within would become more likely. Where a table has many small monetary
distinctions, it minimizes the likelihood of litigation because the precise amount of money involved
is of considerably less importance.
5. A Concluding Note
The Commission emphasizes that it drafted the initial guidelines with considerable caution.
It examined the many hundreds of criminal statutes in the United States Code. It began with
those that were the basis for a significant number of prosecutions and sought to place them in a
rational order. It developed additional distinctions relevant to the application of these provisions
and it applied sentencing ranges to each resulting category. In doing so, it relied upon pre-
guidelines sentencing practice as revealed by its own statistical analyses based on summary reports
of some 40,000 convictions, a sample of 10,000 augmented presentence reports, the parole
guidelines, and policy judgments.
The Commission recognizes that some will criticize this approach as overly cautious, as
representing too little a departure from pre-guidelines sentencing practice. Yet, it will cure wide
disparity. The Commission is a permanent body that can amend the guidelines each year.
Although the data available to it, like all data, are imperfect, experience with the guidelines will
lead to additional information and provide a firm empirical basis for consideration of revisions.
Finally, the guidelines will apply to more than 90 percent of all felony and Class A
misdemeanor cases in the federal courts. Because of time constraints and the nonexistence of
statistical information, some offenses that occur infrequently are not considered in the guidelines.
Their exclusion does not reflect any judgment regarding their seriousness and they will be
addressed as the Commission refines the guidelines over time.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 67
and 68); November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendment 307); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 466).
10 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 11]]
PART B - GENERAL APPLICATION PRINCIPLES
§1B1.1. Application Instructions
(a) Determine the applicable offense guideline section from Chapter Two. See
§1B1.2 (Applicable Guidelines). The Statutory Index (Appendix A) provides
a listing to assist in this determination.
(b) Determine the base offense level and apply any appropriate specific offense
characteristics contained in the particular guideline in Chapter Two in the
order listed.
(c) Apply the adjustments as appropriate related to victim, role, and obstruction
of justice from Parts A, B, and C of Chapter Three.
(d) If there are multiple counts of conviction, repeat steps (a) through (c) for each
count. Apply Part D of Chapter Three to group the various counts and adjust
the offense level accordingly.
(e) Apply the adjustment as appropriate for the defendant's acceptance of
responsibility from Part E of Chapter Three.
(f) Determine the defendant's criminal history category as specified in Part A of
Chapter Four. Determine from Part B of Chapter Four any other applicable
adjustments.
(g) Determine the guideline range in Part A of Chapter Five that corresponds to
the offense level and criminal history category determined above.
(h) For the particular guideline range, determine from Parts B through G of
Chapter Five the sentencing requirements and options related to probation,
imprisonment, supervision conditions, fines, and restitution.
(i) Refer to Parts H and K of Chapter Five, Specific Offender Characteristics and
Departures, and to any other policy statements or commentary in the
guidelines that might warrant consideration in imposing sentence.
Commentary
Application Notes:
I The following are definitions of terms that are used frequently in the guidelines and are of
general applicability (except to the extent expressly modified in respect to a particular guideline
or policy statement):
(a) 'Abducted" means that a victim was forced to accompany an offender to a different
location. For example, a bank robber's forcing a bank teller from the bank into a
getaway car would constitute an abduction.
(b) "Bodily injury" means any significant injury; e& an injury that is painful and obvious,
or is of a type for which medical attention ordinarily would be sought. As used in the
11 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 12]]
guidelines, the definition of this term is somewhat different than that used in various
statutes.
(c) "Brandished" with reference to a dangerous weapon (including a firearm) means that the
weapon was pointed or waved about, or displayed in a threatening manner.
(d) "Dangerous weapon" means an instrument capable of inflicting death or serious bodily
injury. Where an object that appeared to be a dangerous weapon was brandished,
displayed, or possessed, treat the object as a dangerous weapon.
(e) "Firearm" means (i) any weapon (including a starter gun) which will or is designed to
or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive; (ii) the
frame or receiver of any such weapon; (Hi) any firearm muffler or silencer; or (iv) any
destructive device. A weapon, commonly known as a "BB" or pellet gun, that uses air
or carbon dioxide pressure to expel a projectile is a dangerous weapon but not a firearm.
(f) "More than minimal planning" means more planning than is typical for commission of
the offense in a simple form. "More than minimal planning" also exists if significant
affirmative steps were taken to conceal the offense, other than conduct to which §3C1.1
(Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice) applies.
"More than minimal planning" is deemed present in any case involving repeated acts over
a period of time, unless it is clear that each instance was purely opportune.
Consequently, this adjustment will apply especially frequently in property offenses.
In an assault, for example, waiting to commit the offense when no witnesses were present
would not alone constitute more than minimal planning. By contrast, luring the victim
to a specific location, or wearing a ski mask to prevent identification, would constitute
more than minimal planning.
In a commercial burglary, for example, checking the area to make sure no witnesses were
present would not alone constitute more than minimal planning. By contrast, obtaining
building plans to plot a particular course of entry, or disabling an alarm system, would
constitute more than minimal planning.
In a theft, going to a secluded area of a store to conceal the stolen item in one's pocket
would not alone constitute more than minimal planning. However, repeated instances
of such thefts on several occasions would constitute more than minimal planning.
Similarly, fashioning a special device to conceal the property, or obtaining information
on delivery dates so that an especially valuable item could be obtained, would constitute
more than minimal planning.
In an embezzlement, a single taking accomplished by a false book entry would constitute
only minimal planning. On the other hand, creating purchase orders to, and invoices
from, a dummy corporation for merchandise that was never delivered would constitute
more than minimal planning, as would several instances of taking money, each
accompanied by false entries.
(g) "Otherwise used" with reference to a dangerous weapon (including a firearm) means that
the conduct did not amount to the discharge of a firearm but was more than
brandishing, displaying, or possessing a firearm or other dangerous weapon.
12 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 13]]
(h) "Permanent or life-threatening bodily injury" means injury involving a substantial risk of
death; loss or substantial impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or
mental faculty that is likely to be permanent; or an obvious disfigurement that is likely
to be permanent. In the case of a kidnapping, for example, maltreatment to a life-
threatening degree (e&, by denial of food or medical care) would constitute life-
threatening bodily injury.
(i) "Physically restrained" means the forcible restraint of the victim such as by being tied,
bound, or locked up.
(j) "Serious bodily injury" means injury involving extreme physical pain or the impairment
of a function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty; or requiring medical
intervention such as surgery, hospitalization, or physical rehabilitation. As used in the
guidelines, the definition of this term is somewhat different than that used in various
statutes.
(k) "Destructive device" means any article described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(f) (including an
explosive, incendiary, or poison gas (i) bomb, (ii) grenade, (Hi) rocket having a
propellant charge of more than four ounces, (iv) missile having an explosive or
incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, (v) mine, or (vi) device similar to any
of the devices described in the preceding clauses).
(I) "Offense" means the offense of conviction and all relevant conduct under § IB 1.3
(Relevant Conduct) unless a different meaning is specified or is otherwise clear from the
context.
2. Definitions of terms also may appear in other sections. Such definitions are not designed for
general applicability; therefore, their applicability to sections other than those expressly
referenced must be determined on a case by case basis.
The term "includes" is not exhaustive; the term "ej>J' is merely illustrative.
3. The list of "Statutory Provisions" in the Commentary to each offense guideline does not
necessarily include every statute covered by that guideline. In addition, some statutes may be
covered by more than one guideline.
4. The offense level adjustments from more than one specific offense characteristic within an
offense guideline are cumulative (added together) unless the guideline specifies that only the
greater (or greatest) is to be used. Within each specific offense characteristic subsection,
however, the offense level adjustments are alternative; only the one that best describes the
conduct is to be used. E.g.. in §2A2.2(b)(3), pertaining to degree of bodily injury, the
subdivision that best describes the level of bodily injury is used; the adjustments for different
degrees of bodily injury (subdivisions (A)-(E)) are not added together.
5. Where two or more guideline provisions appear equally applicable, but the guidelines authorize
the application of only one such provision, use the provision that results in the greater offense
level. E.g.. in §2A2.2(b)(2), if a firearm is both discharged and brandished, the provision
applicable to the discharge of the firearm would be used.
13 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 14]]
6. In the case of a defendant subject to a sentence enhancement under 18 U.S.C. § 3147 (Penalty
for an Offense Committed While on Release), see, §2J1.7 (Commission of Offense While on
Release).
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 1);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 69-72 and 303); November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendment 361);
November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 388).
§1B1.2. Applicable Guidelines
(a) Determine the offense guideline section in Chapter Two (Offense Conduct)
most applicable to the offense of conviction (Le., the offense conduct charged
in the count of the indictment or information of which the defendant was
convicted). Provided, however, in the case of a plea agreement (written or
made orally on the record) containing a stipulation that specifically establishes
a more serious offense than the offense of conviction, determine the offense
guideline section in Chapter Two most applicable to the stipulated offense.
(b) After determining the appropriate offense guideline section pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section, determine the applicable guideline range in
accordance with § IB 1.3 (Relevant Conduct).
(c) A plea agreement (written or made orally on the record) containing a
stipulation that specifically establishes the commission of additional offense(s)
shall be treated as if the defendant had been convicted of additional count(s)
charging those offense(s).
(d) A conviction on a count charging a conspiracy to commit more than one
offense shall be treated as if the defendant had been convicted on a separate
count of conspiracy for each offense that the defendant conspired to commit.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. This section provides the basic rules for determining the guidelines applicable to the offense
conduct under Chapter Two (Offense Conduct). As a general rule, the court is to use the
guideline section from Chapter Two most applicable to the offense of conviction. The Statutory
Index (Appendix A) provides a listing to assist in this determination. When a particular statute
proscribes only a single type of criminal conduct, the offense of conviction and the conduct
proscribed by the statute will coincide, and there will be only one offense guideline referenced.
When a particular statute proscribes a variety of conduct that might constitute the subject of
different offense guidelines, the court will determine which guideline section applies based upon
the nature of the offense conduct charged in the count of which the defendant was convicted.
However, there is a limited exception to this general rule. Where a stipulation that is set forth
in a written plea agreement or made between the parties on the record during a plea proceeding
specifically establishes facts that prove a more serious offense or offenses than the offense or
offenses of conviction, the court is to apply the guideline most applicable to the more serious
offense or offenses established. The sentence that may be imposed is limited, however, to the
maximum authorized by the statute under which the defendant is convicted. See_ Chapter Five,
14 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 15]]
Part G (Implementing the Total Sentence of Imprisonment). For example, if the defendant
pleads guilty to theft, but admits the elements of robbery as part of the plea agreement, the
robbery guideline is to be applied. The sentence, however, may not exceed the maximum
sentence for theft. See. H. Rep. 98-1017, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 99 (1984).
The exception to the general rule has a practical basis. In cases where the elements of an
offense more serious than the offense of conviction are established by a plea agreement, it may
unduly complicate the sentencing process if the applicable guideline does not reflect the
seriousness of the defendant's actual conduct. Without this exception, the court would be
forced to use an artificial guideline and then depart from it to the degree the court found
necessary based upon the more serious conduct established by the plea agreement. The
probation officer would first be required to calculate the guideline for the offense of conviction.
However, this guideline might even contain characteristics that are difficult to establish or not
very important in the context of the actual offense conduct. As a simple example, §2B1.1
(Larceny, Embezzlement, and Other Forms of Theft) contains monetary distinctions which are
more significant and more detailed than the monetary distinctions in §2B3.1 (Robbery). Then,
the probation officer might need to calculate the robbery guideline to assist the court in
determining the appropriate degree of departure in a case in which the defendant pled guilty to
theft but admitted committing robbery. This cumbersome, artificial procedure is avoided by
using the exception rule in guilty or nolo contendere plea cases where it is applicable.
As with any plea agreement, the court must first determine that the agreement is acceptable, in
accordance with the policies stated in Chapter Six, Part B (Plea Agreements). The limited
exception provided here applies only after the court has determined that a plea, otherwise fitting
the exception, is acceptable.
2. Section lB1.2(b) directs the court, once it has determined the applicable guideline (Le^ the
applicable guideline section from Chapter Two) under §lB1.2(a) to determine any applicable
specific offense characteristics (under that guideline), and any other applicable sentencing
factors pursuant to the relevant conduct definition in §1B1.3. Where there is more than one
base offense level within a particular guideline, the determination of the applicable base offense
level is treated in the same manner as a determination of a specific offense characteristic.
Accordingly, the "relevant conduct" criteria of § IB 1.3 are to be used, unless conviction under
a specific statute is expressly required.
3. In many instances, it will be appropriate that the court consider the actual conduct of the
offender, even when such conduct does not constitute an element of the offense. As described
above, this may occur when an offender stipulates certain facts in a plea agreement. It is more
typically so when the court considers the applicability of specific offense characteristics within
individual guidelines, when it considers various adjustments, and when it considers whether
or not to depart from the guidelines for reasons relating to offense conduct. See_ §§1B1.3
(Relevant Conduct) and 1B1.4 (Information to be Used in Imposing Sentence).
4. Subsections (c) and (d) address circumstances in which the provisions of Chapter Three, Part
D (Multiple Counts) are to be applied although there may be only one count of conviction.
Subsection (c) provides that in the case of a stipulation to the commission of additional
offense(s), the guidelines are to be applied as if the defendant had been convicted of an
additional count for each of the offenses stipulated. For example, if the defendant is convicted
of one count of robbery but, as part of a plea agreement, admits to having committed two
additional robberies, the guidelines are to be applied as if the defendant had been convicted
of three counts of robbery. Subsection (d) provides that a conviction on a conspiracy count
charging conspiracy to commit more than one offense is treated as if the defendant had been
convicted of a separate conspiracy count for each offense that he conspired to commit. For
15 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 16]]
example, where a conviction on a single count of conspiracy establishes that the defendant
conspired to commit three robberies, the guidelines are to be applied as if the defendant had
been convicted on one count of conspiracy to commit the first robbery, one count of conspiracy
to commit the second robbery, and one count of conspiracy to commit the third robbery.
5. Particular care must be taken in applying subsection (d) because there are cases in which the
verdict or plea does not establish which offense(s) was the object of the conspiracy. In such
cases, subsection (d) should only be applied with respect to an object offense alleged in the
conspiracy count if the court, were it sitting as a trier of fact, would convict the defendant of
conspiring to commit that object offense. Note, however, if the object offenses specified in the
conspiracy count would be grouped together under §3D1.2(d) (ej^ a conspiracy to steal three
government checks) it is not necessary to engage in the foregoing analysis, because §lB1.3(a)(2)
governs consideration of the defendant's conduct.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 2);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 73-75 and 303); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 434);
November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 438).
§1B1.3. Relevant Conduct (Factors that Determine the Guideline Range)
(a) Chapters Two (Offense Conduct) and Three (Adjustments). Unless otherwise
specified, (i) the base offense level where the guideline specifies more than
one base offense level, (ii) specific offense characteristics and (iii) cross
references in Chapter Two, and (iv) adjustments in Chapter Three, shall be
determined on the basis of the following:
(1) (A) all acts and omissions committed, aided, abetted, counseled,
commanded, induced, procured, or willfully caused by the
defendant; and
(B) in the case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity (a criminal
plan, scheme, endeavor, or enterprise undertaken by the
defendant in concert with others, whether or not charged as a
conspiracy), all reasonably foreseeable acts and omissions of
others in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity,
that occurred during the commission of the offense of conviction, in
preparation for that offense, or in the course of attempting to avoid
detection or responsibility for that offense;
(2) solely with respect to offenses of a character for which §3D1.2(d) would
require grouping of multiple counts, all acts and omissions described
in subdivisions (1)(A) and (1)(B) above that were part of the same
course of conduct or common scheme or plan as the offense of
conviction;
(3) all harm that resulted from the acts and omissions specified in
subsections (a)(l) and (a)(2) above, and all harm that was the object
of such acts and omissions; and
(4) any other information specified in the applicable guideline.
16 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 17]]
(b) Chapters Four (Criminal History and Criminal Livelihood) and Five
(Determining the Sentence). Factors in Chapters Four and Five that establish
the guideline range shall be determined on the basis of the conduct and
information specified in the respective guidelines.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. The principles and limits of sentencing accountability under this guideline are not always the
same as the principles and limits of criminal liability. Under subsections (a)(l) and (a)(2),
the focus is on the specific acts and omissions for which the defendant is to be held
accountable in determining the applicable guideline range, rather than on whether the defendant
is criminally liable for an offense as a principal, accomplice, or conspirator.
2. A "jointly undertaken criminal activity" is a criminal plan, scheme, endeavor, or enterprise
undertaken by the defendant in concert with others, whether or not charged as a conspiracy.
In the case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity, subsection (a)(l)(B) provides that a
defendant is accountable for the conduct (acts and omissions) of others that was both:
(i) in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity; and
(ii) reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity.
Because a count may be worded broadly and include the conduct of many participants over
a period of time, the scope of the criminal activity jointly undertaken by the defendant (the
"jointly undertaken criminal activity") is not necessarily the same as the scope of the entire
conspiracy, and hence relevant conduct is not necessarily the same for every participant. In
order to determine the defendant's accountability for the conduct of others under subsection
(a)(l)(B), the court must first determine the scope of the criminal activity the particular
defendant agreed to jointly undertake (ue,, the scope of the specific conduct and objectives
embraced by the defendant's agreement). The conduct of others that was both in furtherance
of, and reasonably foreseeable in connection with, the criminal activity jointly undertaken by
the defendant is relevant conduct under this provision. The conduct of others that was not in
furtherance of the criminal activity jointly undertaken by the defendant, or was not reasonably
foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity, is not relevant conduct under this
provision.
In determining the scope of the criminal activity that the particular defendant agreed to jointly
undertake (le^ the scope of the specific conduct and objectives embraced by the defendant's
agreement), the court may consider any explicit agreement or implicit agreement fairly inferred
from the conduct of the defendant and others.
Note that the criminal activity that the defendant agreed to jointly undertake, and the
reasonably foreseeable conduct of others in furtherance of that criminal activity, are not
necessarily identical. For example, two defendants agree to commit a robbery and, during the
course of that robbery, the first defendant assaults and injures a victim. The second defendant
is accountable for the assault and injury to the victim (even if the second defendant had not
agreed to the assault and had cautioned the first defendant to be careful not to hurt anyone)
17 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 18]]
because the assaultive conduct was in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity
(the robbery) and was reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity (given
the nature of the offense).
With respect to offenses involving contraband (including controlled substances), the defendant
is accountable for all quantities of contraband with which he was directly involved and, in the
case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity, all reasonably foreseeable quantities of
contraband that were within the scope of the criminal activity that he jointly undertook.
The requirement of reasonable foreseeability applies only in respect to the conduct (ue^ acts
and omissions) of others under subsection (a)(l)(B). It does not apply to conduct that the
defendant personally undertakes, aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces, procures, or
willfully causes; such conduct is addressed under subsection (a)(l)(A).
Illustrations of Conduct for Winch the Defendant is Accountable
(a) Acts and omissions aided or abetted bv the defendant
(1) Defendant A is one of ten persons hired by Defendant B to off-load a ship
containing marihuana. The off-loading of the ship is interrupted by law
enforcement officers and one ton of marihuana is seized (the amount on the ship
as well as the amount off-loaded). Defendant A and the other off-loaders are
arrested and convicted of importation of marihuana. Regardless of the number
of bales he personally unloaded, Defendant A is accountable for the entire one-
ton quantity of marihuana. Defendant A aided and abetted the off-loading of
the entire shipment of marihuana by directly participating in the off-loading of
that shipment (le^ the specific objective of the criminal activity he joined was
the off-loading of the entire shipment). Therefore, he is accountable for the
entire shipment under subsection (a)(l)(A) without regard to the issue of
reasonable foreseeability. This is conceptually similar to the case of a defendant
who transports a suitcase knowing that it contains a controlled substance and,
therefore, is accountable for the controlled substance in the suitcase regardless
of his knowledge or lack of knowledge of the actual type or amount of that
controlled substance.
In certain cases, a defendant may be accountable for particular conduct under
more than one subsection of this guideline. As noted in the preceding paragraph,
Defendant A is accountable for the entire one-ton shipment of marihuana under
subsection (a)(l)(A). Defendant A also is accountable for the entire one-ton
shipment of marihuana on the basis of subsection (a) (I) (B) (applying to a jointly
undertaken criminal activity). Defendant A engaged in a jointly undertaken
criminal activity (the scope of which was the importation of the shipment of
marihuana). A finding that the one-ton quantity of marihuana was reasonably
foreseeable is warranted from the nature of the undertaking itself (the importation
of marihuana by ship typically involves very large quantities of marihuana). The
specific circumstances of the case (the defendant was one of ten persons off-
loading the marihuana in bales) also support this finding. In an actual case, of
course, if a defendant's accountability for particular conduct is established under
one provision of this guideline, it is not necessary to review alternative provisions
under which such accountability might be established.
18 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 19]]
(b) Acts and omissions aided or abetted bv the defendant: requirement that the conduct of
others be in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity and reasonably
foreseeable
(1) Defendant C is the getaway driver in an armed bank robbery in which $15,000
is taken and a teller is assaulted and injured. Defendant C is accountable for
the money taken under subsection (a)(l)(A) because he aided and abetted the
act of taking the money (the taking of money was the specific objective of the
offense he joined). Defendant C is accountable for the injury to the teller under
subsection (a)(l)(B) because the assault on the teller was in furtherance of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity (the robbery) and was reasonably foreseeable
in connection with that criminal activity (given the nature of the offense).
As noted earlier, a defendant may be accountable for particular conduct under
more than one subsection. In this example, Defendant C also is accountable for
the money taken on the basis of subsection (a)(l)(B) because the taking of
money was in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity (the robbery)
and was reasonably foreseeable (as noted, the taking of money was the specific
objective of the jointly undertaken criminal activity).
(c) Requirement that the conduct of others be in furtherance of the jointly undertaken
criminal activity and reasonably foreseeable; scope of the criminal activity
(1) Defendant D pays Defendant E a small amount to forge an endorsement on an
$800 stolen government check. Unknown to Defendant E, Defendant D then uses
that check as a down payment in a scheme to fraudulently obtain $15,000 worth
of merchandise. Defendant E is convicted of forging the $800 check and is
accountable for the forgery of this check under subsection (a)(l)(A). Defendant
E is not accountable for the $15,000 because the fraudulent scheme to obtain
$15,000 was not in furtherance of the criminal activity he jointly undertook with
Defendant D (le^ the forgery of the $800 check).
(2) Defendants F and G, working together, design and execute a scheme to sell
fraudulent stocks by telephone. Defendant F fraudulently obtains $20,000.
Defendant G fraudulently obtains $35,000. Each is convicted of mail fraud.
Defendants F and G each are accountable for the entire amount ($55,000).
Each defendant is accountable for the amount he personally obtained under
subsection (a)(l)(A). Each defendant is accountable for the amount obtained
by his accomplice under subsection (a)(l)(B) because the conduct of each was
in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity and was reasonably
foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity.
(3) Defendants H and I engaged in an ongoing marihuana importation conspiracy
in which Defendant J was hired only to help off-load a single shipment.
Defendants H, I, and J are included in a single count charging conspiracy to
import marihuana. Defendant J is accountable for the entire single shipment of
marihuana he helped import under subsection (a)(l)(A) and any acts and
omissions in furtherance of the importation of that shipment that were reasonably
foreseeable (see. the discussion in example (a)(l) above). He is not accountable
for prior or subsequent shipments of marihuana imported by Defendants H or I
because those acts were not in furtherance of his jointly undertaken criminal
activity (the importation of the single shipment of marihuana).
19 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 20]]
(4) Defendant K is a wholesale distributor of child pornography. Defendant L is a
retail-level dealer who purchases child pornography from Defendant K and resells
it, but otherwise operates independently of Defendant K Similarly, Defendant
M is a retail-level dealer who purchases child pornography from Defendant K and
resells it, but otherwise operates independently of Defendant K. Defendants L
and M are aware of each other's criminal activity but operate independently.
Defendant N is Defendant K's assistant who recruits customers for Defendant K
and frequently supervises the deliveries to Defendant K's customers. Each
defendant is convicted of a count charging conspiracy to distribute child
pornography. Defendant K is accountable under subsection (a)(l)(A) for the
entire quantity of child pornography sold to Defendants L and M. Defendant N
also is accountable for the entire quantity sold to those defendants under
subsection (a)(l)(B) because the entire quantity was within the scope of his
jointly undertaken criminal activity and reasonably foreseeable. Defendant L is
accountable under subsection (a)(l)(A) only for the quantity of child
pornography that he purchased from Defendant K because the scope of his jointly
undertaken criminal activity is limited to that amount. For the same reason,
Defendant M is accountable under subsection (a)(l)(A) only for the quantity of
child pornography that he purchased from Defendant K.
(5) Defendant O knows about her boyfriend's ongoing drug-trafficking activity, but
agrees to participate on only one occasion by making a delivery for him at his
request when he was ill. Defendant O is accountable under subsection (a)(l)(A)
for the drug quantity involved on that one occasion. Defendant O is not
accountable for the other drug sales made by her boyfriend because those sales
were not in furtherance of her jointly undertaken criminal activity (Le^ the one
delivery).
(6) Defendant P is a street-level drug dealer who knows of other street-level drug
dealers in the same geographic area who sell the same type of drug as he sells.
Defendant P and the other dealers share a common source of supply, but
otherwise operate independently. Defendant P is not accountable for the
quantities of drugs sold by the other street-level drug dealers because he is not
engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal activity with them. In contrast,
Defendant Q, another street-level drug dealer, pools his resources and profits with
four other street-level drug dealers. Defendant Q is engaged in a jointly
undertaken criminal activity and, therefore, he is accountable under subsection
(a)(l)(B) for the quantities of drugs sold by the four other dealers during the
course of his joint undertaking with them because those sales were in furtherance
of the jointly undertaken criminal activity and reasonably foreseeable in
connection with that criminal activity.
(7) Defendant R recruits Defendant S to distribute 500 grams of cocaine. Defendant
S knows that Defendant R is the prime figure in a conspiracy involved in
importing much larger quantities of cocaine. As long as Defendant S's agreement
and conduct is limited to the distribution of the 500 grams, Defendant S is
accountable only for that 500 gram amount (under subsection (a)(l)(A)), rather
than the much larger quantity imported by Defendant R.
(8) Defendants T, U, V, and W are hired by a supplier to backpack a quantity of
marihuana across the border from Mexico into the United States. Defendants T,
U, V, and W receive their individual shipments from the supplier at the same
time and coordinate their importation efforts by walking across the border
20 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 21]]
together for mutual assistance and protection. Each defendant is accountable for
the aggregate quantity of marihuana transported by the four defendants. The four
defendants engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal activity, the object of which
was the importation of the four backpacks containing marihuana (subsection
(a)(l)(B)), and aided and abetted each other's actions (subsection (a)(l)(A))
in carrying out the jointly undertaken criminal activity. In contrast, if Defendants
T, U, V, and W were hired individually, transported their individual shipments
at different times, and otherwise operated independently, each defendant would
be accountable only for the quantity of marihuana he personally transported
(subsection (a)(l)(A)). As this example illustrates, in cases involving contraband
(including controlled substances), the scope of the jointly undertaken criminal
activity (and thus the accountability of the defendant for the contraband that was
the object of that jointly undertaken activity) may depend upon whether, in the
particular circumstances, the nature 6f the offense is more appropriately viewed
as one jointly undertaken criminal activity or as a number of separate criminal
activities.
3. "Offenses of a character for which §3D1.2(d) would require grouping of multiple counts," as
used in subsection (a) (2), applies to offenses for which grouping of counts would be required
under §3D1.2(d) had the defendant been convicted of multiple counts. Application of this
provision does not require the defendant, in fact, to have been convicted of multiple counts.
For example, where the defendant engaged in three drug sales of 10, 15, and 20 grams of
cocaine, as part of the same course of conduct or common scheme or plan, subsection (a) (2)
provides that the total quantity of cocaine involved (45 grams) is to be used to determine the
offense level even if the defendant is convicted of a single count charging only one of the sales.
If the defendant is convicted of multiple counts for the above noted sales, the grouping rules
of Chapter Three, Part D (Multiple Counts) provide that the counts are grouped together.
Although Chapter Three, Part D (Multiple Counts) applies to multiple counts of conviction, it
does not limit the scope of subsection (a) (2). Subsection (a) (2) merely incorporates by
reference the types of offenses set forth in §3D1.2(d); thus, as discussed above, multiple counts
of conviction are not required for subsection (a) (2) to apply.
As noted above, subsection (a)(2) applies to offenses of a character for which §3DL2(d) would
require grouping of multiple counts, had the defendant been convicted of multiple counts. For
example, the defendant sells 30 grams of cocaine (a violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841) on one
occasion and, as part of the same course of conduct or common scheme or plan, attempts to
sell an additional 15 grams of cocaine (a violation of 21 U.S.C. 846) on another occasion.
The defendant is convicted of one count charging the completed sale of 30 grams of cocaine.
The two offenses (sale of cocaine and attempted sale of cocaine), although covered by different
statutory provisions, are of a character for which §3D1.2(d) would require the grouping of
counts, had the defendant been convicted of both counts. Therefore, subsection (a) (2) applies
and the total amount of cocaine (45 grams) involved is used to determine the offense level.
4. "Harm" includes bodily injury, monetary loss, property damage and any resulting harm.
5. If the offense guideline includes creating a risk or danger of harm as a specific offense
characteristic, whether that risk or danger was created is to be considered in determining the
offense level. See, && §2K1.4 (Arson; Property Damage by Use of Explosives); §2Q1.2
(Mishandling of Hazardous or Toxic Substances or Pesticides). If, however, the guideline refers
only to harm sustained (e.g., §2A2.2 (Aggravated Assault); §2B3.1 (Robbery)) or to actual,
attempted or intended harm (&&, §2F1.1 (Fraud and Deceit); §2X1.1 (Attempt, Solicitation,
or Conspiracy)), the risk created enters into the determination of the offense level only insofar
as it is incorporated into the base offense level. Unless clearly indicated by the guidelines,
21 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 22]]
harm that is merely risked is not to be treated as the equivalent of harm that occurred. When
not adequately taken into account by the applicable offense guideline, creation of a risk may
provide a ground for imposing a sentence above the applicable guideline range. See, generally
§ IB 1.4 (Information to be Used in Imposing Sentence); §5K2.0 (Grounds for Departure). The
extent to which harm that was attempted or intended enters into the determination of the
offense level should be determined in accordance with §2X1.1 (Attempt, Solicitation, or
Conspiracy) and the applicable offense guideline.
6. A particular guideline (in the base offense level or in a specific offense characteristic) may
expressly direct that a particular factor be applied only if the defendant was convicted of a
particular statute. For example, in §2S1.1, subsection (a)(l) applies if the defendant "is
convicted under 18 U.S.C. § 1956(a)(l)(A), (a)(2)(A), or (a)(3)(A)." Unless such an express
direction is included, conviction under the statute is not required. Thus, use of a statutory
reference to describe a particular set of circumstances does not require a conviction under the
referenced statute. An example of this usage is found in §2A3.4(a)(2) ("if the offense was
committed by the means set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 2242").
An express direction to apply a particular factor only if the defendant was convicted of a
particular statute includes the determination of the offense level where the defendant was
convicted of conspiracy, attempt, solicitation, aiding or abetting, accessory after the fact, or
misprision of felony in respect to that particular statute. For example, §2Sl.l(a)(l) (which is
applicable only if the defendant is convicted under 18 U.S.C. § 1956(a)(l)(A), (a)(2)(A), or
(a) (3) (A)) would be applied in determining the offense level under §2X3.1 (Accessory After the
Fact) where the defendant was convicted of accessory after the fact to a violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1956(a)(l)(A), (a)(2)(A), or (a)(3)(A).
7. In the case of a partially completed offense (e.g.. an offense involving an attempted theft of
$800,000 and a completed theft of $30,000), the offense level is to be determined in accordance
with §2X1.1 (Attempt, Solicitation, or Conspiracy) whether the conviction is for the substantive
offense, the inchoate offense (attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy), or both. See Application
Note 4 in the Commentary to §2X1.1. Note, however, that Application Note 4 is not applicable
where the offense level is determined under §2Xl.l(c)(l).
8. For the purposes of subsection (a) (2), offense conduct associated with a sentence that was
imposed prior to the acts or omissions constituting the instant federal offense (the offense of
conviction) is not considered as part of the same course of conduct or common scheme or plan
as the offense of conviction.
Examples: (1) The defendant was convicted for the sale of cocaine and sentenced to state
prison. Immediately upon release from prison, he again sold cocaine to the same person, using
the same accomplices and modus operandi. The instant federal offense (the offense of
conviction) charges this latter sale. In this example, the offense conduct relevant to the state
prison sentence is considered as prior criminal history, not as part of the same course of
conduct or common scheme or plan as the offense of conviction. The prior state prison
sentence is counted under Chapter Four (Criminal History and Criminal Livelihood). (2) The
defendant engaged in two cocaine sales constituting part of the same course of conduct or
common scheme or plan. Subsequently, he is arrested by state authorities for the first sale and
by federal authorities for the second sale. He is convicted in state court for the first sale and
sentenced to imprisonment; he is then convicted in federal court for the second sale. In this
case, the cocaine sales are not separated by an intervening sentence. Therefore, under
subsection (a) (2), the cocaine sale associated with the state conviction is considered as relevant
conduct to the instant federal offense. The state prison sentence for that sale is not counted
as a prior sentence; see. §4A1.2(a)(l).
22 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 23]]
Note, however, in certain cases, offense conduct associated with a previously imposed sentence
may be expressly charged in the offense of conviction. Unless otherwise provided, such conduct
will be considered relevant conduct under subsection (a)(l), not (a) (2).
9. "Common scheme or plan" and "same course of conduct" are two closely-related concepts.
(A) Common scheme or plan. For two or more offenses to constitute part of a common
scheme or plan, they must be substantially connected to each other by at least one common
factor, such as common victims, common accomplices, common purpose, or similar modus
operandi. For example, the conduct of five defendants who together defrauded a group of
investors by computer manipulations that unlawfully transferred funds over an eighteen-month
period would qualify as a common scheme or plan on the basis of any of the above listed
factors; Le^ the commonality of victims (the same investors were defrauded on an ongoing
basis), commonality of offenders (the conduct constituted an ongoing conspiracy), commonality
of purpose (to defraud the group of investors), or similarity of modus operandi (the same or
similar computer manipulations were used to execute the scheme).
(B) Same course of conduct. Offenses that do not qualify as part of a common scheme or
plan may nonetheless qualify as part of the same course of conduct if they are sufficiently
connected or related to each other as to warrant the conclusion that they are part of a single
episode, spree, or ongoing series of offenses. Factors that are appropriate to the determination
of whether offenses are sufficiently connected or related to each other to be considered as part
of the same course of conduct include the degree of similarity of the offenses and the time
interval between the offenses. The nature of the offenses may also be a relevant consideration
(e.g., a defendant's failure to file tax returns in three consecutive years appropriately would be
considered as part of the same course of conduct because such returns are only required at
yearly intervals).
10. In the case of solicitation, misprision, or accessory after the fact, the conduct for which the
defendant is accountable includes all conduct relevant to determining the offense level for the
underlying offense that was known, or reasonably should have been known, by the defendant.
Background: This section prescribes rules for determining the applicable guideline sentencing range,
whereas § IB 1.4 (Information to be Used in Imposing Sentence) governs the range of information that
the court may consider in adjudging sentence once the guideline sentencing range has been
determined. Conduct that is not formally charged or is not an element of the offense of conviction
may enter into the determination of the applicable guideline sentencing range. The range of
information that may be considered at sentencing is broader than the range of information upon
which the applicable sentencing range is determined.
Subsection (a) establishes a rule of construction by specifying, in the absence of more explicit
instructions in the context of a specific guideline, the range of conduct that is relevant to determining
the applicable offense level (except for the determination of the applicable offense guideline, which
is governed by § IB 1.2 (a)). No such rule of construction is necessary with respect to Chapters Four
and Five because the guidelines in those Chapters are explicit as to the specific factors to be
considered.
Subsection (a) (2) provides for consideration of a broader range of conduct with respect to one
class of offenses, primarily certain property, tax, fraud and drug offenses for which the guidelines
depend substantially on quantity, than with respect to other offenses such as assault, robbery and
burglary. The distinction is made on the basis of §3D1.2(d), which provides for grouping together
(i.e.. treating as a single count) all counts charging offenses of a type covered by this subsection.
23 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 24]]
However, the applicability of subsection (a) (2) does not depend upon whether multiple counts are
alleged. Thus, in an embezzlement case, for example, embezzled funds that may not be specified in
any count of conviction are nonetheless included in determining the offense level if they were part
of the same course of conduct or part of the same scheme or plan as the count of conviction.
Similarly, in a drug distribution case, quantities and types of drugs not specified in the count of
conviction are to be included in determining the offense level if they were part of the same course
of conduct or part of a common scheme or plan as the count of conviction. On the other hand, in
a robbery case in which the defendant robbed two banks, the amount of money taken in one robbery
would not be taken into account in determining the guideline range for the other robbery, even if both
robberies were part of a single course of conduct or the same scheme or plan. (This is true whether
the defendant is convicted of one or both robberies.)
Subsections (a)(l) and (a)(2) adopt different rules because offenses of the character dealt with
in subsection (a)(2) (le^ to which §3D1.2(d) applies) often involve a pattern of misconduct that
cannot readily be broken into discrete, identifiable units that are meaningful for purposes of
sentencing. For example, a pattern of embezzlement may consist of several acts of taking that cannot
separately be identified, even though the overall conduct is clear. In addition, the distinctions that
the law makes as to what constitutes separate counts or offenses often turn on technical elements that
are not especially meaningful for purposes of sentencing. Thus, in a mail fraud case, the scheme is
an element of the offense and each mailing may be the basis for a separate count; in an
embezzlement case, each taking may provide a basis for a separate count. Another consideration is
that in a pattern of small thefts, for example, it is important to take into account the full range of
related conduct. Relying on the entire range of conduct, regardless of the number of counts that are
alleged or on which a conviction is obtained, appears to be the most reasonable approach to writing
workable guidelines for these offenses. Conversely, when §3D1.2(d) does not apply, so that
convictions on multiple counts are considered separately in determining the guideline sentencing
range, the guidelines prohibit aggregation of quantities from other counts in order to prevent "double
counting" of the conduct and harm from each count of conviction. Continuing offenses present
similar practical problems. The reference to §3D1.2(d), which provides for grouping of multiple
counts arising out of a continuing offense when the offense guideline takes the continuing nature into
account, also prevents double counting.
Subsection (a) (4) requires consideration of any other information specified in the applicable
guideline. For example, §2A1.4 (Involuntary Manslaughter) specifies consideration of the defendant's
state of mind; §2K1.4 (Arson; Property Damage By Use of Explosives) specifies consideration of the
risk of harm created.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 3);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 76-78 and 303); November 1, 1990 (see Appendix C, amendment 309);
November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 389); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 439).
§1B1.4. Information to be Used in Imposing Sentence (Selecting a Point Within the Guideline
Range or Departing from the Guidelines)
In determining the sentence to impose within the guideline range, or whether a
departure from the guidelines is warranted, the court may consider, without limitation,
any information concerning the background, character and conduct of the defendant,
unless otherwise prohibited by law. See 18 U.S.C. § 3661.
24 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 25]]
Commentary
Background: This section distinguishes between factors that determine the applicable guideline
sentencing range (§1B1.3) and information that a court may consider in imposing sentence within
that range. The section is based on 18 U.S.C. § 3661, which recodifies 18 U.S.C. § 3577. The
recodification of this 1970 statute in 1984 with an effective date of 1987 (99 Stat. 1728), makes it
clear that Congress intended that no limitation would be placed on the information that a court may
consider in imposing an appropriate sentence under the future guideline sentencing system. A court
is not precluded from considering information that the guidelines do not take into account. For
example, if the defendant committed two robberies, but as part of a plea negotiation entered a guilty
plea to only one, the robbery that was not taken into account by the guidelines would provide a
reason for sentencing at the top of the guideline range. In addition, information that does not enter
into the determination of the applicable guideline sentencing range may be considered in determining
whether and to what extent to depart from the guidelines. Some policy statements do, however,
express a Commission policy that certain factors should not be considered for any purpose, or should
be considered only for limited purposes. See, e.g.. Chapter Five, Part H (Specific Offender
Characteristics).
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective January 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 4);
November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendment 303).
§1B1.5. Interpretation of References to Other Offense Guidelines
(a) A cross reference (an instruction to apply another offense guideline) refers to
the entire offense guideline (Le,., the base offense level, specific offense
characteristics, cross references, and special instructions).
(b) (1) An instruction to use the offense level from another offense guideline
refers to the offense level from the entire offense guideline (Le., the
base offense level, specific offense characteristics, cross references, and
special instructions), except as provided in subdivision (2) below.
(2) An instruction to use a particular subsection or table from another
offense guideline refers only to the particular subsection or table
referenced, and not to the entire offense guideline.
(c) If the offense level is determined by a reference to another guideline under
subsection (a) or (b)(l) above, the adjustments in Chapter Three
(Adjustments) also are determined in respect to the referenced offense
guideline, except as otherwise expressly provided.
(d) A reference to another guideline under subsection (a) or (b)(l) above may
direct that it be applied only if it results in the greater offense level. In such
case, the greater offense level means the greater final offense level (Le., the
greater offense level taking into account both the Chapter Two offense level
and any applicable Chapter Three adjustments).
25 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 26]]
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. References to other offense guidelines are most frequently designated "Cross References," but
may also appear in the portion of the guideline entitled "Base Offense Level" (eg^
§§2D1.2(a)(l), (2), and 2Hll(a)(2), or "Specific Offense Characteristics" (e& §2A4.1(b)(7)).
These references may be to a specific guideline, or may be more general (e&j to the guideline
for the "underlying offense"). Such references incorporate the specific offense characteristics,
cross references, and special instructions as well as the base offense level. For example, if the
guideline reads "2 plus the offense level from §2A2.2 (Aggravated Assault)," the user would
determine the offense level from §2A2.2, including any applicable adjustments for planning,
weapon use, degree of injury and motive, and then increase by 2 levels.
A reference may also be to a specific subsection of another guideline; ej^ the reference in
§2DL10(a)(l) to "3 plus the offense level from the Drug Quantity Table in §2DU". In such
case, only the specific subsection of that other guideline is used.
2. A reference to another guideline may direct that such reference is to be used only if it results
in a greater offense level. In such cases, the greater offense level means the greater final
offense level (Le^ the greater offense level taking into account both the Chapter Two offense
level and any applicable Chapter Three adjustments). Although the offense guideline that
results in the greater offense level under Chapter Two will most frequently result in the greater
final offense level, this will not always be the case. If, for example, a role or abuse of trust
adjustment applies to the cross-referenced offense guideline, but not to the guideline initially
applied, the greater Chapter Two offense level may not necessarily result in a greater final
offense level.
3. A reference may direct that, if the conduct involved another offense, the offense guideline for
such other offense is to be applied. Wfiere there is more than one such other offense, the most
serious such offense (or group of closely-related offenses in the case of offenses that would be
grouped together under §3D1.2(d)) is to be used. For example, if a defendant convicted of
possession of a firearm by a felon, to which §2K2.1 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or
Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited Transactions Involving Firearms or
Ammunition) applies, is found to have possessed that firearm during commission of a series
of offenses, the cross reference at §2K2.1(c) is applied to the offense resulting in the greatest
offense level.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987. Amended effective November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendments 79,
80, and 302); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 429); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 440).
§1B1.6. Structure of the Guidelines
The guidelines are presented in numbered chapters divided into alphabetical parts.
The parts are divided into subparts and individual guidelines. Each guideline is
identified by three numbers and a letter corresponding to the chapter, part, subpart
and individual guideline.
26 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 27]]
The first number is the chapter, the letter represents the part of the chapter, the
second number is the subpart, and the final number is the guideline. Section 2B1.1,
for example, is the first guideline in the first subpart in Part B of Chapter Two. Or,
§3A1.2 is the second guideline in the first subpart in Part A of Chapter Three. Policy
statements are similarly identified.
To illustrate:
Chapter
Subpart
§ 3 A 1. 2
Guideline
Part
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987.
§1B1.7. Significance of Commentary
The Commentary that accompanies the guideline sections may serve a number of
purposes. First, it may interpret the guideline or explain how it is to be applied.
Failure to follow such commentary could constitute an incorrect application of the
guidelines, subjecting the sentence to possible reversal on appeal. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3742. Second, the commentary may suggest circumstances which, in the view of the
Commission, may warrant departure from the guidelines. Such commentary is to be
treated as the legal equivalent of a policy statement. Finally, the commentary may
provide background information, including factors considered in promulgating the
guideline or reasons underlying promulgation of the guideline. As with a policy
statement, such commentary may provide guidance in assessing the reasonableness of
any departure from the guidelines.
Commentary
Portions of this document not labeled as guidelines or commentary also express the policy of
the Commission or provide guidance as to the interpretation and application of the guidelines. These
are to be construed as commentary and thus have the force of policy statements.
In stating that failure to follow certain commentary "could constitute an incorrect application
of the guidelines," the Commission simply means that in seeking to understand the meaning of the
guidelines courts likely will look to the commentary for guidance as an indication of the intent of
27 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 28]]
those who wrote them. In such instances, the courts will treat the commentary much like legislative
history or other legal material that helps determine the intent of a drafter.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1987.
§1B1.8. Use of Certain Information
(a) Where a defendant agrees to cooperate with the government by providing
information concerning unlawful activities of others, and as part of that
cooperation agreement the government agrees that self-incriminating
information provided pursuant to the agreement will not be used against the
defendant, then such information shall not be used in determining the
applicable guideline range, except to the extent provided in the agreement.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be applied to restrict the use of
information:
(1) known to the government prior to entering into the cooperation
agreement;
(2) concerning the existence of prior convictions and sentences in
determining §4A1.1 (Criminal History Category) and §4B1.1 (Career
Offender);
(3) in a prosecution for perjury or giving a false statement;
(4) in the event there is a breach of the cooperation agreement by the
defendant; or
(5) in determining whether, or to what extent, a downward departure from
the guidelines is warranted pursuant to a government motion under
§5K1.1 (Substantial Assistance to Authorities).
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. This provision does not authorize the government to withhold information from the court but
provides that self-incriminating information obtained under a cooperation agreement is not to
be used to determine the defendant's guideline range. Under this provision, for example, if a
defendant is arrested in possession of a kilogram of cocaine and, pursuant to an agreement to
provide information concerning the unlawful activities of co-conspirators, admits that he
assisted in the importation of an additional three kilograms of cocaine, a fact not previously
known to the government, this admission would not be used to increase his applicable guideline
range, except to the extent provided in the agreement. Although the guideline itself affects only
the determination of the guideline range, the policy of the Commission, as a corollary, is that
information prohibited from being used to determine the applicable guideline range shall not
be used to increase the defendant's sentence above the applicable guideline range by upward
departure. In contrast, subsection (b)(5) provides that consideration of such information is
appropriate in determining whether, and to what extent, a downward departure is warranted
pursuant to a government motion under §5K1.1 (Substantial Assistance to Authorities); ej^ a
28 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 29]]
court may refuse to depart below the applicable guideline range on the basis of such
information.
2. Subsection (b)(2) prohibits any cooperation agreement from restricting the use of information
as to the existence of prior convictions and sentences in determining adjustments under §4All
(Criminal History Category) and §4B1.1 (Career Offender). The Probation Service generally
will secure information relevant to the defendant's criminal history independent of information
the defendant provides as part of his cooperation agreement.
3. On occasion the defendant will provide incriminating information to the government during plea
negotiation sessions before a cooperation agreement has been reached. In the event no
agreement is reached, use of such information in a sentencing proceeding is restricted by Rule
ll(e)(6) (Inadmissibility of Pleas, Plea Discussions, and Related Statements) of the Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure and Rule 410 (Inadmissibility of Pleas, Plea Discussions, and
Related Statements) of the Rules of Evidence.
4. As with the statutory provisions governing use immunity, 18 U.S.C. § 6002, this guideline does
not apply to information used against the defendant in a prosecution for perjury, giving a false
statement, or in the event the defendant otherwise fails to comply with the cooperation
agreement.
5. This guideline limits the use of certain incriminating information furnished by a defendant in
the context of a defendant-government agreement for the defendant to provide information
concerning the unlawful activities of other persons. The guideline operates as a limitation on
the use of such incriminating information in determining the applicable guideline range, and
not merely as a restriction of the government's presentation of such information (eg., where the
defendant, subsequent to having entered into a cooperation agreement, provides such
information to the probation officer preparing the presentence report, the use of such
information remains protected by this section).
6. Unless the cooperation agreement relates to the provision of information concerning the
unlawful activities of others, this guideline does not apply (Le^ an agreement by the defendant
simply to detail the extent of his own unlawful activities, not involving an agreement to provide
information concerning the unlawful activity of another person, is not covered by this guideline).
Historical Note: Effective June 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 5). Amended effective November 1, 1990 (see
Appendix C, amendment 308); November 1, 1991 (see Appendix C, amendment 390); November 1, 1992 (see Appendix
C, amendment 441).
§1B1.9. Class B or C Misdemeanors and Infractions
The sentencing guidelines do not apply to any count of conviction that is a Class
B or C misdemeanor or an infraction.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of the guidelines, the court may impose any sentence
authorized by statute for each count that is a Class B or C misdemeanor or an infraction. A
Class B misdemeanor is any offense for which the maximum authorized term of imprisonment
29 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 30]]
is more than thirty days but not more than six months; a Class C misdemeanor is any offense
for which the maximum authorized term of imprisonment is more than five days but not more
than thirty days; an infraction is any offense for which the maximum authorized term of
imprisonment is not more than five days.
2. The guidelines for sentencing on multiple counts do not apply to counts that are Class B or
C misdemeanors or infractions. Sentences for such offenses may be consecutive to or
concurrent with sentences imposed on other counts. In imposing sentence, the court should,
however, consider the relationship between the Class B or C misdemeanor or infraction and
any other offenses of which the defendant is convicted.
Background: For the sake of judicial economy, the Commission has exempted all Class B and C
misdemeanors and infractions from the coverage of the guidelines.
Historical Note: Effective June 15, 1988 (see Appendix C, amendment 6). Amended effective November 1, 1989 (see
Appendix C, amendment 81).
§1B1.1O. Retroactivitv of Amended Guideline Range (Policy Statement)
(a) Where a defendant is serving a term of imprisonment, and the guideline range
applicable to that defendant has subsequently been lowered as a result of an
amendment to the guidelines listed in subsection (d) below, a reduction in the
defendant's term of imprisonment may be considered under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3582(c)(2). If none of the amendments listed in subsection (d) is applicable,
a reduction in the defendant's term of imprisonment under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3582(c)(2) is not consistent with this policy statement.
(b) In determining whether a reduction in sentence is warranted for a defendant
eligible for consideration under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2), the court should
consider the sentence that it would have originally imposed had the guidelines,
as amended, been in effect at that time.
(c) Provided, that a reduction in a defendant's term of imprisonment may, in no
event, exceed the number of months by which the maximum of the guideline
range applicable to the defendant (from Chapter Five, Part A) has been
lowered.
(d) Amendments covered by this policy statement are listed in Appendix C as
follows: 126, 130, 156, 176, 269, 329, 341, 379, 380, 433, and 461.
Commentary
Application Note:
1. Although eligibility for consideration under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2) is triggered only by an
amendment listed in subsection (d) of this section, the amended guideline range referred to in
subsections (b) and (c) of this section is to be determined by applying all amendments to the
guidelines (Le^ as if the defendant was being sentenced under the guidelines currently in effect).
30 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 31]]
Background: Section 3582 (c)(2) of Title 18, United States Code, provides: "[I]n the case of a
defendant who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment based on a sentencing range that has
subsequently been lowered by the Sentencing Commission pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 994(o), upon
motion of the defendant or the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, or on its own motion, the court
may reduce the term of imprisonment, after considering the factors set forth in section 3553(a) to the
extent that they are applicable, if such a reduction is consistent with applicable policy statements
issued by the Sentencing Commission."
This policy statement provides guidance for a court when considering a motion under
18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2) and implements 28 U.S.C. § 994(u), which provides: "If the Commission
reduces the term of imprisonment recommended in the guidelines applicable to a particular offense
or category of offenses, it shall specify in what circumstances and by what amount the sentences of
prisoners serving terms of imprisonment for the offense may be reduced."
Among the factors considered by the Commission in selecting the amendments included in
subsection (d) were the purpose of the amendment, the magnitude of the change in the guideline
range made by the amendment, and the difficulty of applying the amendment retroactively.
The Commission has not included in this policy statement amendments that generally reduce
the maximum of the guideline range by less than six months. This criterion is in accord with the
legislative history of 28 U.S.C. § 994(u) (formerly § 994(t)), which states: "It should be noted that
the Committee does not expect that the Commission will recommend adjusting existing sentences
under the provision when guidelines are simply refined in a way that might cause isolated instances
of existing sentences falling above the old guidelines or when there is only a minor downward
adjustment in the guidelines. The Committee does not believe the courts should be burdened with
adjustments in these cases." S. Rep. 98-225, 98th Cong., 1st Sess. 180 (1983).
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1989 (see Appendix C, amendment 306). Amended effective November 1, 1990
(see Appendix C, amendment 360); November 1, 1991 (see_ Appendix C, amendment 423); November 1, 1992 (see
Appendix C, amendment 469).
§1B1.11. Use of Guidelines Manual in Effect on Date of Sentencing (Policy Statement)
(a) The court shall use the Guidelines Manual in effect on the date that the
defendant is sentenced.
(b) (1) If the court determines that use of the Guidelines Manual in effect on
the date that the defendant is sentenced would violate the ex post facto
clause of the United States Constitution, the court shall use the
Guidelines Manual in effect on the date that the offense of conviction
was committed.
(2) The Guidelines Manual in effect on a particular date shall be applied
in its entirety. The court shall not apply, for example, one guideline
section from one edition of the Guidelines Manual and another
guideline section from a different edition of the Guidelines Manual.
However, if a court applies an earlier edition of the Guidelines Manual,
the court shall consider subsequent amendments, to the extent that such
amendments are clarifying rather than substantive changes.
31 November 1, 1992

[[PDF page 32]]
Commentary
Application Note:
1. Subsection (b)(2) provides that if an earlier edition of the Guidelines Manual is used, it is to
be used in its entirety, except that subsequent clarifying amendments are to be considered.
Example: A defendant is convicted of an antitrust offense committed in November 1989. He
is to be sentenced in December 1992. Effective November 1, 1991, the Commission raised the
base offense level for antitrust offenses. Effective November 1, 1992, the Commission lowered
the guideline range in the Sentencing Table for cases with an offense level of 8 and criminal
history category of I from 2-8 months to 0-6 months. Under the 1992 edition of the Guidelines
Manual (effective November 1, 1992), the defendant has a guideline range of 4-10 months
(final offense level of 9, criminal history category of I). Under the 1989 edition of the
Guidelines Manual (effective November 1, 1989), the defendant has a guideline range of 2-8
months (final offense level of 8, criminal history category of I). If the court determines that
application of the 1992 edition of the Guidelines Manual would violate the ex post facto clause
of the United States Constitution, it shall apply the 1989 edition of the Guidelines Manual in
its entirety. It shall not apply, for example, the offense level of 8 and criminal history category
of I from the 1989 edition of the Guidelines Manual in conjunction with the amended guideline
range of 0-6 months for this offense level and criminal history category from the 1992 edition
of the Guidelines Manual.
Background: Under 18 U.S.C. § 3553, the court is to apply the guidelines and policy statements in
effect at the time of sentencing. Although aware of possible ex post facto clause challenges to
application of the guidelines in effect at the time of sentencing, Congress did not believe that the ex
post facto clause would apply to amended sentencing guidelines. S. Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., 1st
Sess. 77-78 (1983). While the Commission concurs in the policy expressed by Congress, courts to
date generally have held that the ex post facto clause does apply to sentencing guideline amendments
that subject the defendant to increased punishment.
Historical Note: Effective November 1, 1992 (see Appendix C, amendment 442).
32 November 1, 1992