Field et al. v. Mans, 516 U.S. 59 (1995).
LII
Supreme Court
Field et al. v. Mans (94-967), 516 U.S. 59 (1995).
Opinion
[ Souter ]Concurrence
[ Ginsburg ]Syllabus
Dissent
[ Breyer ]HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version
No. 94-967
WILLIAM FIELD and NORINNE FIELD, PETITIONERS v. PHILIP
W. MANS
on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the
first circuit
[November 28, 1995]
Justice Ginsburg
, concurring.
Mans prevailed on the reliance issue before the bankruptcy, district,
and appellate courts on the basis of then governing Circuit precedent.
See In re Burgess, 955 F. 2d 134, 140 (CA1 1992) (creditor required
to prove that its reliance was reasonable). With the Circuit law on reliance
solidly in his favor, Mans understandably did not advance in the lower
courts the argument that the debt was not "obtained by" fraud. When the
"reliance must be reasonable" rule solid in the Circuit was challenged
in this Court, however, Mans raised the causation point as an alternate
justification for the judgment in his favor. See Brief for Respondent 32-33
(argument heading V. reads: "Since the credit here was not `obtained by'
the alleged fraud, petitioners have failed to meet the [causation] requirement
of 523(a)(2)(A)"); Tr. of Oral Arg. 43 ("[U]nder the clear language of
the statute, there has to be an extension of credit in connection with
the fraud. It has to be obtained by the fraud . . . ."). [n.*]
At oral argument, the following exchange between the Court and the Fields'
attorney occurred:
"QUESTION: . . . Suppose the debtor
here had simply transferred th[e] property without saying one word to the
creditor. . . . [W]ould [the debt] then be dischargeable? There would be
no representation at all, just in violation of the agreement the debtor
sells the property . . . . Dischargeable, right?
"MR. SEUFERT: While [those are] not the facts of this case, I would
agree with you, it would be dischargeable." Id., at 8-9.
It bears consideration whether a debt that would have been dischargeable
had the debtor simply transferred the property, in violation of the due
on sale clause with never a word to the creditor, nonetheless should survive
bankruptcy because the debtor wrote to the creditor of the prospect, albeit
not the actuality, of the transfer. Because this Court is not positioned
to provide a first view on questions of this order, I express no opinion
on the appropriate resolution of the unsettled causation ("obtained by")
issue.
Notes
* Mans
appeared pro se in the lower courts; he was represented by counsel
in this Court.