No. 91-329 


IN Tit 
Supreme Court of the Wuited States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1994 
RONALD W. RosENBERGER. ef al 


PHe RECTOR AN VISETORS OF 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA. @F 


Ri / rade hil 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


MicHARL W. McCo 

Al Ie. | 

MAY 
10S. | 

( JIL, aor 

(312) 7O2-3500 
WiCcHARL P. McD 
CENTI | LL, | 


1300 19th Street, NW 
Suite 260 

Washington, D.C. 20036 
(P02) RB5-8-100, ext. 10V 


. 
Cfonnsel tor Petitione) 


( ounse] (1 ie eord 


Po) 


WILSON - Epes Printing Co Inc 789-0096 - WASHINGTON. I 200 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .. ' ii 
ARGUMENT 1 


I. THE FOURTH CIRCUIT CORRECTLY CON- 
CLUDED THAT A PUBLIC UNIVERSITY 
MAY NOT DENY FUNDING TO AN OTHER- 
WISE ELIGIBLE STUDENT PUBLICATION 
ON THE BASIS OF ITS EDITORIAL VIEW- 
POINT ........ 1 


II. THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE DOES NOT 
BAR RELIGIOUS SPEAKERS FROM PUBLIC 
BENEFITS GENERALLY AVAILABLE TO 
A WIDE ARRAY OF BENEFICIARIES ON 
AN EQUAL BASIS, WITHOUT REGARD TO 
RELIGION .......... , 12 


rT eischectncirntocinciicerctunnitteethsisinnenentinnnteintnneaendiannaies 20 


ii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
Abood vy. Detroit Bd. of Educ., 431 U.S. 209 
) | aa Tene cme oe ee 14 


Arrington V. Taylor, 380 F. Supp. 1348 (M.D.N.C. 
1974), aff'd, 526 F.2d 587 (4th Cir. 1975), cert. 


denied, 424 U.S. 918 (1976)  ...........-...cccccccccccecceeee 6 
Board of Education v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226 

CRIT enscascecsnnctnsniriitapditasisbiiainsitialiihiaiiaataai tila liaiia 2,11 
Bowen V. Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589 (1988) ...00.0000000.. 12,13 
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. Fund, 

2 SS 800 5 
Gay & Lesbian Students Ass’n V. Gohn, 850 F.2d 

MR ee en 3,6 
Hazelwood School Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 

GRID snccnsecnavcissetantinhicnsrtesccensiiiaiiandiiitndinsiediatt Readies 2 
Hedges Vv. Wauconda Community School Dist., 9 

if 8 Fee BR ean er ae 5 
Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. 734 (1978) ......02220000...... 19 


Joyner V. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 (4th Cir. 1973)... 3,6 
Keller v. State Bar of California, 496 U.S. 1 


GO cninentiiaiiie 14 
Lamb’s Chapet v. Center Moriches School Dist., 

118 S. Ct. 2141 (1993) ..... 8, 7, 8,11 
Leathers Vv. Medlock, 499 U.S. 439 (1991) -............ 3 
Lemon Vv. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971) ............... 19 
Perry Education Ass’n V. Perry Local Educators 

Ass’n, 460 U.S. 37 (1983) 5 


R.A.V. V. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538 (1992) . 3 
Regan V. Taxation With Representation, 461 U.S. 
540 (19838) .... 4 
Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 178 (1991) ....000000.. 4 
Simon & Schuster v. New York Crime Victims Bd., 
502 U.S. 105 (1991) 3 
5 
4 


Texas Monthly, Inc. Vv. Bullock, 489 U.S. 1 (1989) . 1 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 114 
i, GR, Se Se eetitstntnssccieteciiodiean 


Walz v. Tax Comm’n, 397 U.S. 664 (1970) ............ 15, 16 
Waters v. Churchill, 114 S. Ct. 1878 (1994) .......... 2 


Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981) ........ 6, 11, 16, 17 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
Witters v. Department of Services, 474 U.S. 481 
ESE ee 15, 16, 17 
Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 113 
S. Ct. 2462 (1993) 16 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
42 U.S.C. § 9858k (a) " 19 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Thomas Jefferson, Virginia Bill For Establishing 
Religious Freedom ....................-.----- .. 14,19 


Douglas Laycock, Equal Access and Moments of 
Silence: The Equal Status of Religious Speech 
By Private Speakers, 81 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1 
(1986) 2 
Douglas Laycock, Formal, Substantive, and Disag- 
gregated Neutrality Toward Religion, 39 DePaul 
L. Rev. 993 (1990) i 16 
Note, 108 Harv. L. Rev. 507 (1994) 8 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


ARGUMENT 

Having argued at every stage of this litigation (includ- 
ing its opposition to certiorari) that extending SAF fund- 
ing to Wide Awake magazine would violate the Establish- 
ment Clause, and having prevailed on that argument in 
the court below, the University now abandons the argu- 
ment in its brief on the merits. Resp. Pr. 27 & n.17. The 
University leaves to its assorted amici curiae the task of 
addressing the question on which this Court granted cer- 
tiorari. Instead, the University presents an alternative 
ground for affirmance: that the Fourth Circuit erred in 
holding that its discrimination between religious and 
secular viewpoints “violates the Speech and Press Clause” 
(Pet. App. 34a). We will turn first to the University’s 
argument, and then to the amici’s arguments for affirm- 
ance on the Establishment Clause issue. 


I. THE FOURTH CIRCUIT CORRECTLY CON- 
CLUDED THAT A PUBLIC UNIVERSITY MAY 
NOT DENY FUNDING TO AN OTHERWISE ELIGI- 
BLE STUDENT PUBLICATION ON THE BASIS 
OF ITS EDITORIAL VIEWPOINT 


1. The University begins the “Argument” section of 
its brief with an 11-page attack on a straw man: “The 
First Amendment does not forbid reasonable content dis- 
tinctions in the distribution of public funds.” Resp. Br. 
12. 

In the context of a public university, virtually every 
allocation of funds involves speech. The selection of 
courses for the curriculum, the provision of support 
for research, and the hiring and promotion of pro- 
fessors are obvious examples. If the First Amend- 
ment were construed to demand content-neutrality 
in funding, routine decisions would invite a lawsuit. 


Resp. Br. 14-15. Warming to its theme, the University 
warns that a contrary holding would become “a judicial 
juggernaut” (id. at 16), subjecting “[e]veryday academic 
determinations * * * [to] judicial review” under a “com- 
pelling interest” test. Id. at 15. 


2 


The short answer to this is that petitioners have argued 
no such thing. It is not our position that heightened 
judicial scrutiny should apply to the government's own 
speech—including a university’s curricular decisions. 
Rather, as we explained in our opening brief (at 25-29), 
there is a fundamental distinction, for purposes of both 
the Free Speech and the Religion Clauses, between gov- 
ernment speech (including the University’s curricular de- 
cisions) and private speech. This distinction, ignored by 
the University, is well established in this Court’s prece- 
dents. See Hazelwood School Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 
U.S. 260, 267, 271-72 (1988) (distinguishing between 
student newspapers that are part of the public school cur- 
riculum and private activities of students); Waters v. 
Churchill, 114 S. Ct. 1878, 1886-88 (1994) (explaining 
difference in government’s latitude to control the speech 
of its employees and agents, as opposed to the private 
speech of private individuals); Board of Education v. 
Mergens, 496 U.S. 226, 250 (1990) (distinguishing be- 
tween “government speech endorsing religion, which the 
Establishment Clause forbids, and private speech endors- 
ing religion, which the Free Speech and Free Exercise 
Clauses protect”) (emphasis in original); see generally 
Douglas Laycock, Equal Access and Moments of Silence: 
The Equal Status of Religious Speech By Private Speak- 
ers, 81 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1 (1986). We showed in our 
opening brief (at 27) that under the University’s own 
Guidelines and Contract with CIOs, student groups re- 
ceiving SAF funds are not agents or employces of the 
University, are not part of the curriculum, are not under 
the control of the University, and thus plainly fall on the 
“private” rather than the “governmental” side of this fun- 
damental line. The University does not challenge this 
conclusion and, in light of its own explicit statements and 
policies regarding CIOs (see J.A. 26-29), it cannot. 


Even with regard to government benefits to private 
speakers, it is not our position that all “content discrim- 
ination” triggers strict scrutiny. We do not question the 
discretion of the University, if it chooses, to fund poetry 
magazines and not comic books, science journals and not 


3 

history journals. This case is not about mere content 
discrimination; it is about viewpoint discrimination. Our 
position is that insofar as a public institution undertakes to 
subsidize a particular category of expression (in this case, 
“student news, information, opinion, entertainment, or 
academic communications media groups” (Pet. App. 61a, 
4 4)), it may not single out a particular viewpoint or 
viewpoints within that category for discriminatory ex- 
clusion. 

Indeed, the University does not disagree with us (or the 
Fourth Circuit) about this legal principle, as a careful 
reading of the footnotes in the University’s brief reveals. 
Resp. Br. 16 n.10. The University concedes that it may 
not deny funds to an otherwise eligible student group on 
the basis of “viewpoint discrimination.” Jbid. It endorses 
the holdings of the lower court cases on which we rely: 
Gav & Lesbian Students Ass’n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 
(8th Cir. 1988), and Joyner v. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 
(4th Cir. 1973), which held that a public university could 
not deny funding to a gay rights group (Gohn) or a news- 
paper advocating black separatism (Joyner). 


* We note that the University’s paraphrases of the courts’ hold- 
ings regarding viewpoint discrimination are couched in restrictive 
adjectives and adverbs that do not appear in the cases. It describes 
the discrimination in Gohn as “blatant viewpoint discrimination 
based on discriminatory animus toward homosexuals.” Resp. Br. 
16 n.10. It describes Joyner as “a clear case of ideologically driven 
viewpoint discrimination.” Ibid. To the extent that it is suggesting 
that viewpoint discrimination is permissble unless it is “blatant,” 
“ideologically driven,” or “based on discriminatory animus,” the 
University is mistaken. 


Neither in Lamb’s Chapel nor in any other viewpoint discrimina- 
tion case has this Court insisted on evidence of discriminatory 
animus. See Simon & Schuster v. New York Crime Victims Bd., 
502 U.S. 105, 117 (1991) (plaintiff asserting free speech claim based 
on content or viewpoint discrimination is not required to prove 
“improper censorial motive”) ; accord, Leathers v. Medlock, 499 U.S. 
439, 446 (1991). And subtle as well as “blatant” forms of view- 
point discrimination are unconstitutional. R.A.V. v. City of St. 
Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2588, 2547-48 (1992). 


In its Brief in Opposition at the certiorari stage (at 15), the 
University stated flatly, without qualification, that “public universi- 


4 


Since the University does not seriously dispute the prop- 
osition that viewpoint discrimination is forbidden in the 
context of funding, as well as of facilities (Resp. Br. 16 
n.10), it is unnecessary to respond in detail to its lengthy 
discussion of Regan v. Taxation With Representation, 461 
U.S. 540 (1983), and Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 
(1991). Both cases reaffirm the proposition that the gov- 
ernment may not discriminate on the basis of viewpoint 
in the distribution of public funds; both cases were de- 
cided on the ground that the programs involved did not 
involve viewpoint discrimination. Regan, 461 U.S. at 
548; Rust, 500 U.S. at 193, 194. Indeed, Regan did not 
even involve content-based discrimination, but only 
speaker-based discrimination. Regan, 461 U.S. at 548 
(“the veterans’ organizations that qualify under § 501 
(c)(19) are entitled to receive tax-deductible contribu- 
tions regardless of the content of any speech they may 
use”). Cf. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 
114 S. Ct. 2445, 2466-67 (1994). 


Rust is particularly inapposite to this case. In Rust, 
the government did not distribute subsidies to a broad 
range of private speakers without regard to the content of 
their speech. Rather, the grantees under Title X were 
specifically selected to carry out specific governmental 
services, including support for family planning. This was 
the government’s own message. As we explained in our 
opening brief (at 28), when the government distributes 
funds to grantees for dissemination of the government’s 
message, it is entitled to impose reasonable restrictions 
on the use of those funds, so that its message is not diluted 
or obscured by inconsistent or distracting messages from 
the grantee. This bears no resemblance to the SAF pro- 
gram, in which the University provides a general subsidy 
to a broad range of speakers to promulgate messages of 
their own choosing, and expressly disavows any associa- 
tion with the content of their speech. See J.A. 26. 


ties may not deny funding to student groups or publications on the 
basis of their viewpoint.” Indeed, the University described this 
principle as “obvious.” Jbid. 


5 


In sum, the first section of the University’s brief is 
essentially irrelevant. The parties agree that viewpoint 
discrimination is presumptively invalid in the context of 
government funding of private speech. That is what this 
case is about. 


2. The third section of respondents’ brief (at 29-34) 
adds nothing to this analysis. Even assuming that the 
“public forum” doctrine applies to the free speech issue 
in this case, it is common ground that no matter what 
kind of forum is involved, the government may not en- 
gage in viewpoint-based discrimination. As the Seventh 
Circuit recently explained in Hedges v. Wauconda Com- 
munity School Dist., 9 F.3d 1295, 1297-98 (7th Cir. 
1993), rejecting an argument similar to the University’s: 


The first amendment’s ban on discriminating against 
religious speech does not depend on whether the 
school is a “public forum” and, if so, what kind * * *. 
Even when the government may forbid a category of 
speech outright, it may not discriminate on account 
of the speaker’s viewpoint. Especially not on account 
of a religious subject matter, which the free exercise 
clause of the first amendment singles out for pro-. 
tection. 


Thus, depending on the nature of the forum, the govern- 
ment may be able to limit speech to certain categories, 
but it does not have the authority to discriminate against 
particular viewpoints within those categories. Cornelius 
Vv. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 
811-13 (1985); Perry Education Ass’n v. Perry Local 
Educators Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 49 (1983). 


3. The University’s argument therefore rests entirely 
on the second section of ‘ts brief (at 22-29), which makes 
the rather desperate argument that discrimination against 
publications on the basis of their religious editorial per- 
spective is not viewpoint discriminaton. That argument 
is contrary to both common sense and clear precedent.’ 


2Even if this were “mere” content discrimination, it is far 
from obvious that it is “reasonable” for the University to discrimi- 
nate against religious speech when it allows secular and even anti- 


6 


a. The University’s claim that it is not engaged in 
viewpoint discrimination is, to say the least, counter- 
intuitive. A black separatist newspaper has a constitu- 
tionally protected right to express its views on the subject 
of racism (as held in Joyner, which the University con- 
cedes is correctly decided), but Wide Awake forfeits its 
right to funding if it expresses its views on the same sub- 
ject (see “A Simple Answer to Racism,” Wide Awake, 
Nov./Dec. 1990, at 12). A gay rights group has a con- 
Stitutionally protected right to express its views on a sub- 
ject like “Homosexuals: Can They Change . . . And 
Should They?”, Wide Awake, Mar./Apr. 1991, at 14 (as 
held in Gohn, which the University concedes is correctly 
decided), but Wide Awake does not. If this is not dis- 
crimination on the basis of viewpoint, we do not know 
what is. 


In the Guidelines, the Rector and Visitors determined 
that certain student activities “relate to the educational 
purpose of the University and thus are eligible for fund- 
ing.” Pet. App. 6la. Among these are “student news, 
information, opinion, entertainment, or academic com- 
munications media groups.” IJbid. The University evi- 
dently considers student publications worthy of support 
because the experience of writing and communicating 
ideas is educationally valuable in itself, independent of 
the nature of those ideas, since the University places no 
restrictions on content (other than the “religious activi- 
ties” limitation). Sometimes debate in a college environ- 
ment gets pretty crazy, and the University surely would 
not say that all of the ideas and opinions expressed by 
funded groups are “educational” in the sense of being well- 
reasoned or well-informed. The educational value is in 
“exposing the student body to various points of view on 
significant issues.” Arrington v. Taylor, 380 F. Supp. 
1348, 1362-63 (M.D.N.C. 1974), aff'd, 526 F.2d 587 
(4th Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 424 U.S. 913 (1976). 


religious speech on the same subjects. J.A. 38, 116. See Widmar 
Vv. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 281 (1981) (Stevens, J., concurring). 


T 


Wide Awake is unquestionably a “student news, infor- 
mation, opinion, entertainment, or academic communica- 
tions media group.” It addresses issues not unlike those 
addressed by other student publications: racism, books 
and music, the views and experiences of professors, educa- 
tional issues, homosexuality, eating disorders, fear of fly- 
ing, crisis pregnancies, and the like. There is no reason 
to think that the students who write and edit this publica- 
tion, or those who read it and debate its contents, are 
receiving any less educational benefit than those who 
write, edit, and read publications that have a different 
editorial slant. Some may be better written, more sophisti- 
cated or erudite; some are plainly less so. But the Uni- 
versity does not purport to make the funding decision on 
grounds of journalistic quality. The sole reason for ex- 
clusion of Wide Awake was its religious point of view. 


b. The University does not purport to exclude the 
subject matter of religion from funded publications. (An 
entire issue of one funded magazine, Thoughtlines, was 
devoted to “Faith and Reason.”) The Guideline against 
“religious activities” is framed not in terms of subject 
matter but of opinion or belief. See Pet. App. 66a (“reli- 
gious activit[ies]” are those “which primarily promote[] 
or manifest[{] a particular belief(s) in or about a deity 
or an ultimate reality”). Indeed, if the restriction were 
framed in terms of religious subject matter, it might not 
even apply to Wide Awake. Most of the articles in Wide 
Awake are not about religion, but present a religious 
perspective on a variety of subjects (racism, eating dis- 
orders, etc.). See Pet. Br. 6-7. 


c. The University’s argument that the exclusion of 
religious activities is not viewpoint discrimination is fore- 
closed by this Court’s unanimous decision in Lamb’s 
Chapel v. Center Moriches School Dist., 113 S. Ct. 2141 
(1993), which explicitly held that the exclusion of “reli- 
gious purposes” is “based on viewpoint.” Jd. at 2149. 
See also id. at 2147 (“That all religions and all uses for 
religious purposes are treated alike * * * does not answer 
the critical question whether it discriminates on the basis 


8 


of viewpoint to permit school property to be used for the 
presentation of all views about family issues and child- 
rearing except those dealing with the subject matter from 
a religious standpoint”); ibid. (stating that denial of per- 
mission to exhibit film on ground that “the presentation 
would have been from a religious perspective” is “plainly 
invalid” viewpoint discrimination). The University Guide- 
lines here are identical in form and substance to the regu- 
lations invalidated in Lamb’s Chapel. See Note, 108 
Harv. L. Rev. 507, 510 n.25 (1994) (analyzing this case 
under Lamb’s Chapel). 


In a footnote (at 24 n.13), the University attempts to 
distinguish Lamb’s Chapel on the ground that it “involved 
access to school facilities” rather than funding. See also 
Resp. Br. 14. But that distinction is irrelevant to the 
underlying question of whether the exclusion of religious 
activities constitutes viewpoint discrimination. The Uni- 
versity concedes (id. at 16 n.10) that viewpoint discrimi- 
nation is forbidden in the context of funding as well as 
facilities. The significant holding of Lamb’s Chapel for 
present purposes is that the exclusion of an otherwise 
eligible organization on account of its “religious purpose” 
or “perspective” constitutes viewpoint discrimination. To 
that, the University has no answer. ° 


d. Given the inherent implausibility of the University’s 
argument and its inconsistency with Lamb’s Chapel, one 
would expect the University to provide at least a clear 
logical argument in support of its position. But the only 
argument we can discern is that the prohibition on 
“religious activities” cannot be a viewpoint-based category 
because the various religious faiths do not “embody a 
common view or perspective.” Resp. Br. 23; see also 
ibid. (“Of course, respondents do not deny that religious 
activities encompass particular views and beliefs, * * * 
[b]ut only by retreating to a level of vacuous generality 
can one assert that all religious activities * * * reflect the 
same view or perspective.”) (emphasis in original). 

No one claims that all religions have the “same view 
or perspective.” The genus “religion” obviously has many 


9 


species. But the government may not discriminatorily ex- 
clude groups or families of viewpoints from otherwise 
available general benefits, any more than it could exclude 
a single viewpoint (if there is any such thing as a single 
viewpoint). The term “Marxist” includes such disparate 
perspectives as democratic socialists, Maoists, and Trot- 
skyists—but no one would say that the exclusion of 
“Marxist activities’ would be anything other than view- 
point discrimination. 

e. Finally, the University supports its argument by 
invoking the slippery slope. If viewpoint discrimination 
against religious speakers is impermissible, the University 
says, then various limitations embodied in federal statutes 
would be unconstitutional. Resp. Br. 25-26. Without 
knowing more about these programs, we are not sure 
whether they embody viewpoint discrimination or not. 
The question in each instance is whether the government 
is excluding otherwise eligible participants from a program 
on the basis of their religious orientation, while allowing 
similarly situated participants to espouse secular ideologi- 
cal or philosophical viewpoints. We doubt that the Uni- 
versity’s examples are of that type—but if they are, we 
stick by our argument. 


4. In one important respect, the University’s argument 
is extremely misleading. The Argument section of its 
brief begins with the statement that “[t]his case is not 
specifically about religion” (Resp. Br. 12), notes that 
certain other categories of activity (in addition to “reli- 
gious activities”) are excluded from eligibility for fund- 
ing, and then states that “[t]he same constitutional issue 
would be raised, regardless of whether the activity ex- 
cluded from funding were religious, political, philanthropic, 
or social.” Jd. at 13. This is simply not true. 


Most of the excluded categories have nothing to do with 
viewpoint, or even with speech content. Philanthropic 
organizations and fraternities and sororities are defined 
by what they do and who they are—not by what they 
say. An otherwise eligible student newspaper would not 
lose its funding eligibility because it advocated philan- 


10 


thropy or addressed campus issues from a “Greek” point 
of view. 


The only other provision of the Guidelines that has any 
relation to viewpoint is the prohibition on “political activi- 
ties.” The University conveniently fails to mention that 
the definition of “political activities” in the Guidelines ex- 
pressly precludes application to “any otherwise eligible 
student organization which * * * espouses particular posi- 
tions or ideological viewpoints, including those that may 
be unpopular or are not generally accepted.” Pet. App. 
66a.*° This shows that—contrary to the University’s asser- 
tions—treligious viewpoints are not treated in the same 
way as political viewpoints (let alone “philanthropic” or 
“social” viewpoints). An otherwise eligible student publi- 
cation will be denied funding if its viewpoint is “religious,” 
but not if its viewpoint is “political.” 

Indeed, one way for the University to conform its 
Guidelines to the dictates of the First Amendment (as 
petitioners see them) would be to amend the definition of 
“religious activities” to make it parallel to the definition 
of “political activities,” as follows: 

These restrictions on funding religious activities are 
not intended to preclude funding of any otherwise 
eligible student organization which espouses par- 
ticular positions or religious viewpoints, including 
those that may be unpopular or are not generally 
accepted. 


All we ask is that religious viewpoints be given the same 
treatment as other political, ideological, or philosophical 
points of view. 


5. Toward the end of its brief (at 28), the University 
argues that “the Establishment Clause settles the constitu- 
tional permissibility of financial disengagement from reli- 
gion”—even if it does not require the University to ex- 
clude religious viewpoints. This seems to us an especially 


3 The “political activities” prohibition applies only to lobbying on 
specific legislation and electioneering on behalf of candidates for 
public office. Pet. App. 65a. It does not apply to editorial perspec- 
tives of student publications. 


11 


pernicious notion. Since it would not be cabined by the 
actual dictates of the Establishment Clause, such a prin- 
ciple would allow the government to discriminate against 
religious speakers and citizens virtually at will in any 
matter with “financial” implictions—justifying its discrimi- 
nation by appeal to undefined notions of disestablishment. 
But the Establishment Clause (like the rest of the First 
Amendment) was designed to restrict the powers of gov- 
ernment in the field of religion. It would be ironic indeed 
if it were read as a license to governments to invade what 
would otherwise be the First Amendment rights of reli- 
gious citizens. 

This Court has repeatedly rejected arguments that the 
government should be given latitude to invade free speech 
or free exercise rights in order to “achiev[e] greater separa- 
tion of church and State” than is required by the Estab- 
lishment Clause. Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 276 
(1981). In each of the cases in which the free speech 
rights of religious speakers were pitted against the sup- 
posed strictures of separation between church and state— 
Widmar, Mergens, and Lamb’s Chapel—this Court ex- 
amined whether the exclusion was required by the Estab- 
lishment Clause, and upon concluding that it was not, 
enforced the free speech rights of the religious speakers. 
In no case did the Court suggest that the Establishment 
Clause creates a discretionary zone in which the govern- 
ment is free to discriminate against religious speakers. 

6. We end where the University begins (Resp. Br. 1- 
11): with the funding of the Muslim Students Associa- 
tion, the Jewish Law Students Association, and other 
seemingly religious student activities. Contrary to the 
University’s characterization of the procedural history of 
this case (at 1-5), petitioners’ argument based on these 
facts has never been confined to the Equal Protection 
Clause. Rather, throughout this litigation, we have main- 
tained that each of the relevant constitutional provisions 
(speech, press, free exercise, equal protection, and estab- 
lishment) is offended both by discrimination among reli- 
gious and by discrimination between religion and non- 
religion. Nor have we divided our argument into a “facial 


12 


challenge” and an “as applied” challenge. Rather, our 
contention has been that the line between “religious” and 
other (including “cultural”) activities is inherently arbi- 
trary, that it is highly susceptible to discriminatory appli- 
cation, that its enforcement creates an excessive en- 
tanglement between church and state, and that it has in 
fact produced discrimination among religious groups at 
the University. The only response we have received from 
the lower courts to these arguments is that we have not 
proven “discriminatory intent.” Our response, all along, 
has been that there is no requirement of proof of dis- 
criminatory intent under the claims we have raised. 


We stand by all these arguments. They are fully sup- 
ported by the record. The University struggles mightily 
to show why the funded activities are not as “religious” 
as Wide Awake. See, e.g., Resp. Br. 9 n.4. We see these 
differences as bearing more on style than on religiosity; 
Scottish Presbyterians are not less “religious” than Pente- 
costals just because they are more restrained and taciturn. 
But the point here is not whether the University is right 
or wrong. It is whether such lines can be drawn non- 
arbitrarily, without a degree of surveillance and intrusion 
that violates the principles of neutrality and nonentangle- 
ment. ' 


II. THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE DOES NOT BAR 
RELIGIOUS SPEAKERS FROM PUBLIC BENE- 
FITS GENERALLY AVAILABLE TO A WIDE 
ARRAY OF BENEFICIARIES ON AN EQUAL 
BASIS, WITHOUT REGARD TO RELIGION 


For the most part, the University’s amici on the Estab- 
lishment Clause issue make arguments anticipated and 
answered in our opening brief. The arguments center 
around history, precedent, the meaning of neutrality, and 
the autonomy of religious organizations. Since we dealt 
with precedent at length in the opening brief, we will 
focus here on the other issues.* 


4 We must note, however, that virtually all of respondents’ amici, 
and respondents themselves (Resp. Br. 27 n.17), treat Bowen V. 


13 


1. Amici make a great deal of the controversy over 
religious assessments in Virginia in 1784-85. But they 
fail to note the vast difference in context and principle 
between a proposal to impose a tax “for the support of 
teachers of the Christian religion” and a tax for the sup- 
port of student newspapers and expressive activities of 
every conceivable stripe and opinion.* They do not point 
to a single instance in which a participant in the debates 
during the founding period argued that a generally avail- 
able public benefit should be denied to any person or 
group on account of the religious character of their 
speech. From the proposition that the power of the purse 
must not be used to favor religion it does not follow that 
the power of the purse must be used to disfavor religion. 


It is telling that Jefferson’s statement—‘“to compel a 
man to furnish contributions of money for the propaga- 
tion of opinions which he disbelieves and abhors, is sin- 


Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589 (1988), as the most directly pertinent case. 
The decision in Kendrick is entirely consistent with our understand- 
ing of the Establishment Clause. In Kendrick, the government did 
not distribute funds to a wide range of speakers in order to dissemi- 
nate ideas of their own choosing. Rather, it made a limited number 
of grants (two per state per year) to organizations thought best 
able to convey the government’s own message: namely, the impor- 
tance of adolescent sexual self-discipline. When the government 
itself is speaking (whether directly or through private grantees), 
it is under an obligation not to take sides on religious issues. By 
contrast, when the government is using its resources to facilitate 
a broad and diverse array of private speech, its obligation is 
to allow uninhibited, robust debate without viewpoint-based limi- 
tations. 


5 Several amici (Americans United Br. 14 n.19; see also Bap- 
tist Joint Comm. Br. 7) claim that “Petitioners are incorrect in 
characterizing the Virginia assessment as benefitting religion 
solely. Undesignated tax monies would have gone to fund schools.” 
But since the “schools” referred to in the Act were public schools, 
those who did not pay the religious tithe were, in effect, required 
to pay extra taxes to the government. They did not have the 
option of supporting secular (or indeed, non-Christian) speech of 
their choice. 


14 


ful and tyrannical” ‘—did not distinguish between reli- 
gious and nonreligious opinions. According to Jefferson’s 
principle, it is no less objectionable for the state to force 
dissenting citizens to pay for animal rights, gay rights, or 
Federalist Society advocacy than to force them to pay for 
Wide Awake.’ Thus, there is some logic to the position 
of amicus Pacific Legal Foundation that the entire man- 
datory student activities fee is unconstitutional insofar as 
it compels support for controversial political or religious 
viewpoints. But student activity fee programs of this sort 
have been uniformly upheld on the theory that they are 
not supporting any particular opinions, but instead foster 
the exchange of diverse opinions. See cases cited in our 
opening brief (at 16 n.9). An essential element in this 
rationale is that the program must be genuinely open to 
all perspectives of the student body; the University must 
not skew the debate in any particular direction, whether 
religious or nonreligious. It seems to us that the Jeffer- 
sonian principle is satisfied by funding no one or by 
funding everyone pursuant to neutral criteria, but is vio- 
lated when particular viewpoints are singled out for favor- 
able or disfavorable treatment, as they are here. 


2. This historical argument is directly related to the 
amici’s theoretical argument about the meaning of neu- 
trality. Petitioners and respondents’ amici emphatically 
agree that the government must be neutral toward religion. 
The dividing issue is this: the amici seem to think that 
the meaning of neutrality is determined by the character 
of the public benefit in question, while petitioners main- 
tain that the meaning of neutrality depends upon the 
principle by which the benefit is distributed. 


Thus, we maintain that in determining whether dis- 
tribution of a benefit is “neutral” toward religion, the 


* Virginia Bill For Establishing Religious Freedom, quoted in 
Baptist Joint Comm. Br. 3-4. 


™This Court has frequently cited Jefferson’s statement in the 
context of compelled support for purely secular advocacy. See, e.g., 
Keller v. State Bar of California, 496 U.S. 1, 10 (1990); Abood v. 
Detroit Bd. of Educ., 481 U.S. 209, 234 n.81 (1977). 


15 


court must examine the range of eligible beneficiaries 
under the terms of the program. If the benefit “is con- 
ferred upon—a-wide array of nonsectarian groups as well 
as religious organizations in pursuit of some legitimate 
secular end” (Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock, 489 U.S. 
1, 14-15 (1989)), then the program is neutral; but if 
religious organizations are singled out for special bene- 
fits, or the eligibility criteria are “skewed towards religion” 
(Witters v. Department of Services, 474 U.S. 481, 488 
(1986) ), then the program is not neutral.’ In making this 
determination, it does not matter what the public benefit 
in question may be (tax breaks, police and fire service, 
access to facilities, tuition tax credits, money for voca- 
tional education, bus rides, or whatever). All benefits 
(even meeting rooms) entail some cost to the taxpayer 
and confer some advantage on the user. Nor does it 
matter how “religious” the recipient is, so long as it con- 
forms to the neutral, generally applicable terms of the 
program. Texas Monthly involved periodicals no less 
religious than Wide Awake, and Witters involved a per- 
vasively sectarian school. Walz involved a church. None 
was required to stifle its religious message as a condition 
for eligibility. 

The amici, by contrast, say that the neutrality analysis 
shifts according to the nature of the benefit in question. 
Thus, they agree that for some valuable benefits (tax 
benefits, access to facilities, direct aid to students), the 
question of neutrality is determined by whether religion 
is given special preference. But when it comes to other 
forms of aid (in this case, payments to third parties for 
printing costs), they say that inclusion of religious speak- 
ers would be an unconstitutional “advancement.” This 
line of argument, however, is nothing but incoherent 
baseline-shifting. Relative to government inaction, reli- 
gious activities are “advanced” whenever they are per- 
mitted to share in the fruits of public benefits. But rela- 


8If a program is not neutral toward religion in this sense, it 
may nonetheless be constitutional as a permissible accommodation 
of religion. Texas Monthly, 489 U.S. at 15; 18 n.8. 


16 


tive to the treatment of other speakers, religious speakers 
are disadvantaged if they are excluded from benefits that 
are extended to their secular competitors in the market- 
place of ideas. See Douglas Laycock, Formal, Substan- 
tive, and Disaggregated Neutrality Toward Religion, 39 
DePaul L. Rev. 993, 1005-06 (1990). To shift back and 
forth between these two baselines is a sure recipe for in- 
consistency, arbitrariness, and incoherence. 


None of the amici provide any principled reason, 
grounded in the purposes of the Establishment Clause, for 
shifting baselines according to the form of aid. One group 
of amici distinguishes between “equal access” and “equal 
advancement.” Baptist Joint Comm. Br. 18. This is 
purely semantical. Tax benefits and free facilities “ad 
vance” the group’s objectives, no less effectively than 
cash. Why is property tax exemption “access” instead of 
“advancement”? Other briefs rely on nebulous formal- 
isms, labelling various forms of aid “passive,” “affirm- 
ative,” “indirect,” “incidental,” or the like. Americans 
United Br. 20-21; ACLU Br. 22-23. These all seem to 
be variations on the theme that form should dominate 
over substance.’ 


® The emptiness of these categories is dramatically illustrated by 
the historical positions of these amici, who—making arguments not 
much different from those they make in this case—in past cases 
have argued that religious individuals and groups should be ex- 
cluded from the very forms of aid that they now claim are subject 
to a constitutional rule of equal access. For example, amicus ACLU 
opposed the constitutionality of neutral property tax exemptions in 
Walz; amici American Jewish Congress and Anti-Defamation 
League opposed equal access to university facilities in Widmar; 
amici National School Boards Ass’n, Council on Religious Freedom, 
and ACLU opposed neutral provision of sign language interpreters 
in Zobrest; and amici Americans United, ACLU, and Anti- 
Defamation League opposed equal tuition for vocational education 
in Witters. The lines they draw with such confidence today were 
different yesterday and may be different tomorrow. The only con- 
sistency is that religious speakers and groups end up with less than 
the full and equal rights accorded to their secular fellow citizens. 


17 


Amici do not define these terms, or explain how they 
differentiate this case from others. For example, the Uni- 
versity’s amici are united in the view that the SAF pro- 
gram is “direct” aid, while the program in Witters was 
“indirect.” E.g., ACLU Br. 21-22; Council on Religious 
Freedom Br. 10. But in both cases, money was provided 
to eligible persons (there blind persons, here student 
groups) to pay for specified expenditures (there tuition, 
here printing costs) for legitimate state purposes (there 
vocational education, here student newspapers) without 
regard to the religious, philosophical, or ideological orien- 
tation chosen by the recipients. In neither case is the 
government responsible for the decision to adopt a reli- 
gious perspective: that decision was left to the individ- 
ual recipients (in Witters) and the editors of the various 
funded journals (here). In both cases, aid is “indirect” 
or “incidental” in the sense that any benefit to religion 
occurs not through the direct decisions of government but 
through the independent choices of private persons. The 
University is “directly” aiding student journalism, and only 
“indirectly” aiding religion.”® 

The problem goes beyond mere analytical confusion. 
The empty formalism of amici’s line between money and 
services or facilities would have the practical consequence 
of enabling recalcitrant institutions to frustrate students’ 
constitutional rights by manipulating the forms of aid. 
For example, a university could charge all groups a fee for 
use of empty classrooms, while appropriating money from 
the resulting fund to reimburse qualified student organiza- 
tions for this cost. Under amici’s reasoning, religious stu- 
dent groups would be ineligible for the reimbursement, 
since it would be in the form of a “cash subsidy.” In 
structuring its student benefits in this fashion, the univer- 
sity could effectively negate the students’ equal access 
rights under Widmar. Although we do not suspect these 


10 Aid in both cases is also “indirect” in a more formalistic sense: 
in neither case was money transferred directly from the government 
to a religious institution. In Witters, it was given to the student, 
and here it is paid directly to the printer. 


18 


respondents of bad faith, we note that precisely the same 
results have been achieved in this case. If the University 
provided in-house printing facilities for student publica- 
tions Wide Awake would be entitled to equal access; but 
because this benefit takes the form of a “cash subsidy” for 
the purchase of printing services from an outside printer, 
petitioners are excluded. Constitutional rights should not 
turn on such distinctions. 


3. Finally, respondents’ amici warn that inclusion in 
government benefits could subvert the autonomy of reli- 
gious organizations: “What government funds, govern- 
ment may control.” Baptist Joint Comm. Br. 8. Again, 
petitioners entirely share the concern that the govern- 
ment’s power of the purse not be allowed to undermine 
the independence of religious activity or to distort reli- 
gious practice. But again, we part company on the ques- 
tion of how best to achieve the agreed-upon goal.” Re- 
spondents’ amici commit the logical fallacy of focusing 
solely on the potential danger to religious autonomy from 
one course of action (inclusion in a neutral subsidy) 
without comparing it to the severe and demonstrable dan- 
ger to religious autonomy presented by the alternative. 


Under the Guidelines, a religiously oriented student 
group can obtain necessary funding for its activities only 
by changing its religious practices. Black Voices, the gos- 
pel music group, was told to stop “praying at practices 
and encouraging members to be more of a model of faith” 
if it wanted to continue to be eligible for funding (J.A. 
73). To its credit, the group declined, and forfeited the 
money. According to the University’s brief (at 10), 
Al-Salam, the publication of the Muslim Students Asso- 
ciation, was warned that the religious content of its first 
issue might endanger its funding, and in response “the 
students published a second and very different issue” of 
the magazine. Resp. Br. 10. The second issue was exor- 
cised of its references to the Koran, Islamic theology, and 


11 Moreover, if the payment of Wide Awake’s printing costs 
threatens to subvert its autonomy, the only parties with standing to 
raise that claim are the petitioners. 


19 


" spirituality; these were replaced by Middle Eastern recipes 


and discussions of world events from a secular perspec- 
tive. The publication became more secular and less dis- 


: tinctive: the students of the University of Virginia were 
- deprived of what had beer. ‘n the first issue, an introduc- 


tion to the rich connections between Islamic religion and 
culture. We assume Wide Awake could get funding if it 
removed the cross from its logo, excised all Biblical 
references, secularized its rhetoric, and became more like 
every other magazine on campus. But it is difficult to 
see how self-censorship of this sort advances the inde- 
pendence of the religious sector or the pluralism and 
diversity of American life. 


Self-censorship and reduction in diversity are the pre- 
dictable consequences of the Lemon-Hunt approach to the 
Establishment Clause, which resnondents’ amici defend. 
Under this doctrine, a group can receive its share of pub- 
lic benefits only if it is not “pervasively sectarian” and if 
its activities are not “specifically religious.” This creates 
a strong financial incentive for religiously oriented organ- 
izations to secularize themselves and to soften their re- 
ligious witness. Thus (to use one of the examples invoked 
by the Baptist Joint Committee), an otherwise eligible 
child care facility must refrain from “any sectarian pur- 
pose or activity” if it wishes to receive federal funds. 
Child Care and Development Block Grant Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 9858k(a). This means that it must eliminate prayers 
before snack, and the reading of Bible stories. Can it 
seriously be contended that this protects the independence 
and autonomy of religiously affiliated child care providers 
or the families they serve? 


Jefferson noted that when the government targets aid 
to religion, it “tends also to corrupt the principles of that 
very religion it is meant to encourage, by bribing * * * 
those who will externally profess and conform to it.” Bill 
for Establishing Religious Freedom, quoted at Baptist 
Joint Comm. Br. 6. To exclude religion from other- 
wise available benefits has precisely the same effect, in 
reverse: it “corrupt[s] the principles” of potential re- 


20 


cipients by “bribing” those who will “externally conform” 
to the requirement of secularism. The constitutional rule 
for which the amici argue creates an obvious incentive 
for religiously oriented speakers and groups to relinquish, 
disguise, or downplay their distinctive religious character. 
It is hard to square this result with amici’s professed con- 
cern “to protect religion from the harm that occurs when 
the gears of church and state are allowed to mesh.” Bap- 
tist Joint Comm. Br. 5. If we want to avoid creating 
incentives for individuals and groups to bend their prin- 
ciples in response to government funding programs 
(whether in a religious or a secular direction), the best 
course is to insist that government benefits be extended 
on the basis of neutral, objective criteria, without regard 
to the philosophical, ideological, or religious character of 
their speech. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons and those stated in our opening brief, 
the judgment of the Court of Appeals should be reversed, 
and the case should be remanded with instructions to the 
courts below to grant petitioners’ motion for summary 
judgment. 

Respectfully submitted, 


MICHAEL W. MCCONNELL * 
ALAN E. UNTEREINER 
MAYER, BROWN & PLATT 
190 S. LaSalle Street 
Chicago, IL 606038 

(8312) 702-8306 


MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 
CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
1300 19th Street, N.W. 

Suite 260 

Washington, D.C. 200386 

(202) 833-8400, ext. 102 
Counsel for Petitioners 


* Counsel of Record 


