FILED 
(\) 94 329 AUG 2 219% 


No, OFFICE OE THE CLERK 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, et al., 
Petitioners, 


V. 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 


Respondents. 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


MICHAEL W. MCCONNELL * MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 


MAYER, BROWN & PLATT CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
190 South LaSalle Street 1300 19th Street, N.W., 260 
Chicago, IL 60603 Washington, D.C. 20036 

(312) 702-3306 (202) 833-8400, ext. 102 


* Counsel of Record 


WILSON - EPES PRINTING Co., INC. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the Establishment Clause compels a state uni- 
versity to exclude an otherwise eligible student publica- 
tion from participation in the student activities fund, 
solely on the basis of its religious viewpoint, where such 
exclusion would violate the Speech and Press Clauses if 
the viewpoint of the publication were nonreligious. 


(i) 


eee ee eee ee eee ae. ee 


ii 
LIST OF PARTIES 


Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 14.1(b), the parties 
to this proceeding are: 


Petitioners: 


Ronald W. Rosenberger, as a member of Wide 
Awake Productions and as Editor-in-Chief of Wide 
Awake magazine; * Gregory W. Mourad; and Robert 
J. Prince.” 


Respondents: 


The Rector and Visitors of the University of Vir- 
ginia; Edward E. Elson; W.L. Lyons Brown, Jr.; 
Robert G. Butcher, Jr.; N. Thomas Connally, M.D.; 
Hovey S. Dabney; Waller H. Horsley; J. Thomas 
Hulvey, M.D.; Evans B. Jessee; Patricia M. Kluge; 
Arnold H. Leon: Leigh B. Middleditch, Jr.; Elizabeth 
D. Morie; Freddie W. Nicholas, Sr.; S. Buford Scott; 
Jessie B. Wilson, III; Thomas E. Worrell, Jr.; Adam 
S. Arthur; Alexander G. Gilliam, Jr.* ; and Ronald 
J. Stump.* 


1 Wide Awake Productions is an unincorporated Contracted In- 
dependent Organization of the University of Virginia which pub- 
lishes Wide Awake magazine. It has no parent companies or sub- 
sidiaries. 


2 Petitioners Rosenberger, Mourad and Prince sued below both 
on their behalf and on behalf of other students at the University 
of Virginia similarly situated. 


% Petitioners sued the foregoing individual] respondents in their 
official capacities as members of the Rector and Visitors of the 
University of Virginia. 


* Petitioners sued respondent Stump in his capacity as Associate 
Dean of Students of the University of Virginia and Chairperson 
of the Student Activities Committee of the University of Virginia. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED ..................0..00..c.-cccecseessecenceees 
TIED stits snnstanenncsscsecccosccecnccencecccscessvecweosneseenes 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .....................0--ccecceecseeeeeesees 
TT 
ai ccna eistenrintenseemctareenecssesesenesceeecoqcote 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND UNIVER- 
SITY GUIDELINES INVOLVED ................................ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE ..........................:.2000c00000- 
A. The Student Activities Fund ................................ 
B. Wide Awake Productions ...........................-.:.-0--+ 
C. The University’s Refusal To Fund Wide Awake.. 
D. Proceedings in District Court .............................. 
E. Proceedings in the Court of Appeals .................... 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION ........... 


A. THE COURTS ARE DIVIDED OVER THE 
SUPPOSED CONFLICT BETWEEN THE 
ESTABLISHMENT AND FREE SPEECH 
ee 


B. THE COURTS ARE DIVIDED OVER THE 
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF NEUTRAL BENE- 
FITS TO RELIGION. .............22..--.--cceccseceeececeesenesh 


IIIT caiticdasesenssicseccinstenenmersersasensnccesresccsocecescevecesstencs 


(iii) 


ee ee eae, teen 


15 


19 


26 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
Aguilar v. Felton, 473 U.S. 402 (1985) 2.0000. 22 
Americans United for Separation of Church and 

State v. City of Grand Rapids, 980 F.2d 1538 

(REY CE AE En eee 19 
Bishop v. Aronov, 926 F.2d 1066 (11th Cir. 1991).. 18 
Bd. of Educ. of Kiryas Joel v. Grumet, 114 S. Ct. 

EE EIU, sicisinensinsttiticiteitiiinastiad inaaiiatli dala 13, 16, 25 
Bd. of Educ. v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226 (1999) ......... passim 
Bowen v. Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589 (1982) 000000000... 25 
Brooks v. Auburn Univ., 412 F.2d 1171 (5th Cir. 

SE ceccnessciebitbtitacsenathiindicliditmicia ibaa talent ee 15 
Chabad-Lubavitch of Georgia v. Miller, 5 F.3d 1383 

GR RR ee en ae are 19 
Carroll v. Blinken, 957 F.2d 991 (2d Cir. 1992)... 15 
Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hia- 

— *: | &. & 4. es ae 14 
Committee for Public Educ. v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 

RRR Ra Se Eh 2 IB Fa Se a 22 
Doe v. Small, 964 F.2d 611 (7th Cir. 1992) (en 

ERECTED «OPN a NINE Nm SAORI RO 19 
Everson v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1 (1947) ..... 16 
Fairfax County School Bd. v. Fairfax Covenant 

Church, 17 F.3d 703 (4th Cir. 1994) .000000000000.... 18 
Galda v. Rutgers, 772 F.2d 1060 (3d Cir. 1985)... 15 
Gay & Lesbian Students Ass’n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 

A Ge Sk I  itincciidiithictrstiantntitescciatinnties 15 
Good News/Good Sports Club v. School Dist. of 

Ladue, No. 93-2148, 1994 WL 328572 (8th Cir. 

| NE a Nee Ee ae 18, 20 
Guidry v. Calcasieu Parish School Ba., 9 Relig. 

Freedom Rptr. 118 (E.D. La. 1989), aff’d sub 

nom. Guidry v. Broussard, 897 F.2d 181 (5th 

6 RI ene te) A Sal eri 18 
Hedges v. Wauconda Community School Dist., 9 

eB By, Be Ae | SeRRck nanan 19 
Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. 734 (1978) -...................... 21 
Joyner v. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 (4th Cir. 1973).. 15 
Kaplan v. City of Burlington, 891 F.2d 1024 (2d 

GF erp acncccnennndiiiiciiaMacscincibanndcdadasedinnautitudtindies 18 


Vv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


Page 
Kreisner v. City of San Diego, 1 F.3d 775 (9th 

ERE RC ee en ee 19 
Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches School Dist., 

KD CSS ee La waren 21, 22 
Larson v. Regents of the Univ. of Nebraska, 189 

Neb. 688 (1973) ............ SSRN Tt a Es I esa 15 
Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228 (1982) -.................. 16 
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 408 U.S. 602 (1971) -.......... 11, 12, 21 
Lee v. Weisman, 112 S. Ct. 2649 (1992) _.... ae 25 
Mueller v. Alien, 463 U.S. 388 (19838) ..................... 21 
McCreary v. Stone, 739 F.2d 716 (2d Cir. 1984), 

aff'd by an equally divided court sub nom, Vil- 

lage of Scarsdale v. McCreary, 471 U.S. 83 

ae 19 
McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 618 (1978) -.................. 19 
Roberts v. Madigan, 921 F.2d 1047 (10th Cir. 

REESE ASSO emia sR SS 18 
School Dist. of Grand Rapids v. Ball, 473 U. S. 373 

ciation 22 
Smith v. County of Albemarle, 895 F.2d 953 (4th 

EGER REE IEEE ee aS ADRS Se Ae on EE 18 
Smith v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 4 Cal. 

(eR RR SSE CERNE pros Aree ee ew aeRO 15 
Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Pullocl:, 489 U.S. 1 (1989) . 21, 22, 

25 
Tipton v. Univ. of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 922 (9th Cir. 

RETA gee SES SOC Narn tess a a 17, 18 
Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976) ............. 14 
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981) _....2.02..... passim 
Witters v. Washington Dep’t of Services, 474 U.S. 

RES ESET ae ee Se 21, 22 
Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 113 S. Ct. 

a satninnesmunbniens 21, 24 

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS 
EE, SE 9 
Va. Code Ann. § 23-69 et seq. (1950) 22.0000... 3 
pS SE ESS ee 9 
TT en 2 
42 U.S.C. § 1983 9 


vi 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


OTHER MATERIALS Page 


Note, Mandatory Student Fees to Support Political 
Speech at Public Universities, 103 Yale L.J. 
EE CIEE wiistiivicdtnsniciincisitchaisiacicsecieldbiiutedbleiesienth.:. 15 


iT 
Supreme Cnet of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, ef al., 
. Petitioners, 
THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et ai., 
Respondents. 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Petitioners Ronald W. Rosenberger, Wide Awake Pro- 
ductions, Wide Awake Magazine, Gregory W. Mourad, 
and Robert J. Prince respectfully petition for a writ of 
certiorari to review the decision of the Court of Appeals 
in this case. 

OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the Court of Appeals (Pet. App. 1a- 
42a) is reported at 18 F.3d 269. The opinion of the 
District Court (Pet. App. 43a-58a) is reported at 795 


F. Supp. 175. 
JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the Court of Appeals was entered on 
March 14, 1994. A timely petition for rehearing with a 
suggestion for rehearing in banc was denied on May 23, 


2 : 


1994. See Pet. App. 59a-60a. This Court has jurisdic- 
tion pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND 
UNIVERSITY GUIDELINES INVOLVED 


In addition to the First and Fourteenth Amendments 
to the United States Constitution, this case involves the 
Student Activity Fee Statement of Purpose and Funding 
Guidelines of the University of Virginia, which are set 
forth in full at Pet. App. 61a-67a. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This case involves the refusal of the University of 
Virginia to subsidize the printing costs of a student pub- 
lication, called Wide Awake, solely and expressly because 
the viewpoint articulated by the publication is religious. 
The court below agreed with the students that the Univer- 
sity regulation forbidding funding of religious activities 
“places a presumptively unconstitutional condition upon 
access to government benefits in violation of the Free 
Speech and Press Clause of the First Amendment,” but 
held that this presumptively unconstitutional discrimina- 
tion is required by the Establishment Clause. Pet. App. 
39a. The facts are uncontested. 


A. The Student Activities Fund 


Through its Student Activities Fund (“SAF” or “Fund”), 
the University of Virginia supports a “wide variety of 
student organizations, activities, and publications” (Pet. 
App. 2a). In academic year 1990-91 (the year this 
case arose), the University provided funds to 118 student 
groups, including some 15 student-written and -edited 
newspapers and magazines, representing a broad range of 
interests and perspectives. Id. at 4a. The Fund is fi- 
nanced by a mandatory student activities fee of $14 per 
semester, paid by each full-time student. Petitioners, like 
other students, are required to contribute to this fund. 


3 


Respondents, the Rector and Visitors of the University, 
exercise legal control and authority over the operation 
of the Fund. Pet. App. 3a; see Va. Code Ann. § 23-69, 
et seq. (1950). Respondents have delegated authority to 
allocate SAF monies to the Student Council, an elected 
student body, subject to review by the University’s Stu- 
dent Activities Committee, chaired by a designee of the 
Vice President for Student Affairs. The decisions of these 
bodies must be made in accordance with Guidelines es- 
tablished by respondents, which are reproduced in the 
appendix to this petition, at Pet. App. 61a-67a. This case 
is a constitutional challenge to one provision of those 
Guidelines. 


To qualify for funding, a student group must first attain 
the status of a “Contracted Independent Organization” 
(“CIO”). CIO status is available to any group that is 
composed in its majority of students, is managed by offi- 
cers who are full-time students, keeps an updated copy of 
its constitution on file with the University, and signs an 
anti-discrimination disclaimer. Pet. App. 2a. CIOs are 
given access to University facilities, including meeting 
rooms and computer terminals, as well as the right to 
apply for student activity funds. The standard CIO agree- 
ment states that benefits provided to the group by the 
University “should not be misinterpreted as meaning that 
those organizations are part of or controlled by the Uni- 
versity, that the University is responsible for the organiza- 
tions’ contract or other acts or omissions, or that the 
University approves of the organizations’ goals or activi- 
ties.” C.A. App. 68, see Pet. App. 2a-3a. 


The Guidelines specify certain categories of student ac- 
tivity that are eligible for funding, as well as certain ac- 
tivities and types of organizations that are excluded from 
eligibility. Among the categories of student activity that 
“(t]he Rector and Visitors have determined [to be] re- 
late[d] to the educational purpose of the University and 
thus . . . eligible for funding,” are “student news, informa- 
tion, opinion, entertainment, or academic communications 


4 


media groups.” Pet. App. 61a. The Guidelines prohibit 
the funding of religious organizations, fraternities, sorori- 
ties, honor societies, political organizations, and organiza- 
tions whose membership is exclusionary. A “religious or- 
ganization” is defined as “an organization whose purpose 
is to practice a devotion to an acknowledged ultimate 
reality or deity.” Jd. at 66a. The Guidelines also pro- 
hibit funding for the following purposes: payment of 
honoraria or similar fees, religious activities, social enter- 
tainment or related expenses, philanthropic contributions 
and activities, political activities, or activities that would 
jeopardize the University’s tax exempt status. Id. at 62a- 
63a. A “religious activity” is defined as “an activity 
which primarily promotes or manifests a particular be- 
lief(s) in or about a deity or an ultimate reality.” 7d. 
at 66a. 


Once an activity is deemed eligible for funding, the 
Guidelines prescribe the following criteria for allocating 
funds among eligible organizations: the size of the group, 
the University-wide benefit of the group’s activities, and 
the group’s financial self-sufficiency. Pet. App. 63a; 4a 
& n.2. After an organization is approved for funding, 
it submits expense vouchers to the Fund, which are paid 
only upon a determination that the particular expense is 
permitted. Funds do not go directly to the group. Pet. 
App. 4a. 


During the academic years 1990-91, 343 student or- 
ganizations qualified as CIOs, of which 135 applied for, 
and 118 received, student activity funds. Pet. App. 4a. 
Among the funded organizations were 15 publications, 
representing a wide range of differing perspectives on 
issues of concern to the student body. These included 
The Declaration, Dialogue Magazine, The Journal of 
Law and Politics, Loki Science Magazine, Oculus, Seasons, 
Thoughtlines, The University Journal, The Virginia Ad- 
vocate, the Virginia Environmental Law Journal, The 
Virginia Literary Review, and The Yellow Journal. Pet. 
App. 4a n. 3. The record shows that the University funds 
student organizations that “express a variety of ideological 


5 


viewpoints, including but not limited to viewpoints which 
are inconsistent with or aniagonistic to various religious 
beliefs.” C.A. App. 59, § 16. 


Among the funded organizations were the Muslim Stu- 
dents Association, the Jewish Law Students Association, 
and the C.S. Lewis Society. Pet. App. 4a. The Muslim 
Students Association Constitution states it has the purpose 
of “promot[ing] a better understanding of Islam to the 
University Communty.” C.A. App. 119. Using SAF 
funds, it publishes a magazine entitled Al-Salam, which, 
according to the group’s application, is intended to “focus” 
on “Muslim attitudes and reactions to current world is- 
sues” (Application § 2(a)(iii)), and contains, among 
other things, discussions of Islamic doctrine.t The Jewish 
Law Students Association By-laws state that its purposes 
are “[t]o encourage Jewish law students to participate in 
Jewish activities” and to “be a focal point for Jewish ac- 
tivities at the Law School.” C.A. App. 125. The Con- 
stitution of the C.S. Lewis Society states that the purpose 
of the organization is to “promote interest in, and dis- 
cussion of, various literary, moral, and philosophical 
topics, with a particular emphasis on the work of the 
‘Oxford Christians.” C.A. App. 131. The University 
has stated that these organizations were funded not as 
“religious activities,” but as “cultural activities.” C.A. 
Br. Univ. 16. 


B. Wide Awake Productions 


In September, 1990, petitioner Ronald W. Rosenberger, 
an undergraduate student at the University of Virginia, 
joined with other University of Virginia students to form 
Wide Awake Productions. Wide Awake Productions is an 
unincorporated association with the stated purposes of 
(1) “publish[ing] a magazine of philosophical and reli- 
gious expression,” (2) “facilitat{ing] discussion which 
fosters an atmosphere of sensitivity to and tolerance of 


1 A copy of this magazine, as well as one other funded publication, 
were lodged with the Court of Appeals. 


6 


Christian viewpoints,” and (3) “provid{ing] a unifying 
focus for Christians of multicultural backgrounds.” C.A. 
App. 95, Pet. App. 5a. Wide Awake Productions publishes 
Wide Awake: A Christian Perspective at the University 
of Virginia, a nonprofit journal written and edited by stu- 
dent members of the organization. According to the edi- 
tor’s statement in the first issue, the magazine was started 
when the founders “realized that none of the fifteen stu- 
dent-run publications at the University provided a forum 
for Christian expression, and we decided to fill that void.” 
C.A. App. 70. Wide Awake is not affiliated with any 
religious institution or denomination, and it allows any 
University student to join, without regard to sex, race, 
color, or religion. Pet. App. 6a. 


As of June, 1992, the group had published three issues 
of the magazine, which are distributed free of charge to 
about 5,000 students on the campus of the University of 
Virginia. These issues form part of the record in this 
case.” As described in the editor’s statement in the first 
issue, Wide Awake “offers a Christian perspective on both 
personal and community issues, especially those relevant 
to college students at the University of Virginia.” Wide 
Awake, Nov./Dec. 1990, at 2. The lead cover story in 
the first issue was on the subject of racism. Other articles 
dealt with such subjects as fear of airplane travel, crisis 
pregnancy, C.S. Lewis’ ideas about evil and free will, a 
lengthy interview with a professor of economics at the 
University, and a commentary on Biblical passages re- 
garding the abundant life. The featured article in the 
second issue was entitled “Homosexuals: Can They 
Change . . . and Should They?” It also included an in- 
terview with a professor of mathematics at the University 
and articles about the “Price of Freedom,” the importance 
of foreign missions, and the meaning of a passage in the 
Gospel of John. Wide Awake Mar./Apr. 1991. The 


2 There is no suggestion of mootness. Wide Awake Productions 
still exists and still seeks to participate in the Student Activities 
Fund. 


7 


third issue contained articles on eating disorders (entitled 
“From Calorie to Calvary”), a popular Christian musician, 
papal teaching on Marxism and the free market, an Au- 
gustian perspective on university pedogogy, and an alum- 
nus’ experiences as a missionary in Moldavia. Wide 
Awake, Sept./Oct. 1991. All of the issues contained book 
and music reviews and essays about aspects of student 
life; one included original poetry. 


Petitioners do not dispute that Wide Awake constitutes 
a “religious activity” within the meaning of the Guide- 
lines. Pet. App. 7a. As the Court of Appeals noted, 
the magazine is marked by “unflagging invocation of reli- 
gious, specifically Christian themes” and “[t]he journal’s 
pages are pervasively devoted to providing a ‘Christian 
perspective’ in printer’s ink at the University of Virginia.” 
Id. 


C. The University’s Refusal To Fund Wide Awake 


Soon after its founding, Wide Awake Productions at- 
tained CIO status. It is undisputed that it conformed to 
all applicable, content-neutral funding eligibility require- 
ments, as set out in the Guidelines, other than the prohibi- 
tion relating to “religious activities.” Specifically, Wide 
Awake falls within the category of a “student news, in- 
formation, opinion, entertainment, or academic communi- 
cations media group[],” one of the categories of student 
activity eligible for funding. In January, 1991, the or- 
ganization submitted an application for funding in the 
amount of $5,862, to cover publishing costs. 


On February 26, after examining the content of the 
first issue of the magazine, the Appropriations Committee 
of the Student Council denied petitioners’ request. There 
is no dispute that the Appropriations Committee’s deci- 
sion was based solely on the content of the publication. 
Petitioners were sent a letter explaining the basis for the 
decision: 

In reviewing the request by Wide Awake Produc- 
tions, the . . . Committee determined your organiza- 


8 


tion’s request could not be funded as it is a religious 
activity. This determination was made after review- 
ing your first issue of Wide Awake. In particular, 
the committee noted in your Editor’s Letter that the 
publication was ‘a forum for Christian expression’ 
and a means ‘to challenge Christians (in how) to 
live.’ | 


Pet. App. 8a-9a. As the letter indicates, the sole basis for 
denial was that Wide Awake is a “religious activity.” At 
no point has the University claimed that Wide Awake 
Productions has failed to satisfy any other prerequisite for 
eligibility for funding. 


Wide Awake appealed the denial to the full Student 
Council on March 3, 1991. It contended that it met all 
applicable funding guidelines and that the Appropriations 
Committee’s denial of funding on the basis of the maga- 
zine’s religious perspective violated the Constitution. The 
Student Council denied the appeal and affirmed the Com- 
mittee’s decision without further comment. C.A. App. 
101. 


Wide Awake then appealed to the Student Activities 
Committee, a University committee. On April 15, 1991, 
in a letter signed by respondent Ronald J. Stump, Asso- 
ciate Dean of Students, the Committee affirmed the denial 
of funding. Stump wrote: 


After reviewing your organization’s constitution, cop- 
ies of the magazine’s first two editions, and the argu- 
ments presented at last week’s appeal by Wide 
Awake Productions and by [the] Student Council, the 
Committee determined that the Wide Awake maga- 
zine could not be funded as it is a religious activity. 
In effect, the Student Activities Committee fully sup- 
ports the decision and reasoning provided to you in 
the February 26 letter from [the Appropriations 
Committee]. 


Pet. App. 9a-10a. This exhausted all internal avenues of 
appeal within the University. 


mo 


te UE one eee 


nt 


“9 
D. Proceedings in District Court 


Wide Awake Productions, Wide Awake, and three of 
its editors and members then filed suit in federal district 
court, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, challenging the 
University’s denial of funding on the basis of the religious 
viewpoint of their publication. They claimed, inter alia, 
that the University’s categorical exclusion of otherwise 
eligible student publications, solely on the basis of reli- 
gious perspective, violated their rights to freedom of 
speech and press, to free exercise of religion, and to equal 
protection of the law.* They sought declaratory and in- 
junctive relief prohibiting the University from denying 
funding on the basis of the content or viewpoint of their 
publication, and compensatory damages of at least $5,862, 
the printing costs of the first issue. Respondents filed an 
answer maintaining, among other things, that the Uni- 
versity’s issuance and implementation of the Guidelines 
is within its broad discretion to allocate funds among stu- 
dent activities, and in the alternative that the University 
is legally prohibited, under the Establishment Clause, from 
providing financial assistance to “religious activities” such 
as Wide Awake magazine. C.A. App. 50. The parties 
filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and agreed, 
with minor exceptions,* that there were no disputed issues 
of material fact and that the case was ripe for summary 
disposition. 


On May 20, 1992, the district court granted respond- 
ents’ motion for summary judgment. The court held, 
inter alia, that application of the Guideline barring any 


3 Petitioners also raised issues under Article I of the Constitu- 
tion of Virginia and the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom, Va. 
Code Ann. §§ 57-1 to -2, but did not pursue those state law claims 
on appeal. Pet. App. 10a and 15a. 


4 Those exceptions had to do with whether, in addition to denying 
funding, the University refused Wide Awake access to certain Uni- 
versity facilities. The district court ruled against Wide Awake on 
this claim (Pet. App. 53a n.8), and petitioners did not pursue it on 
appeal. 


10 


funding of “religious activities” did not result in view- 
point or content discrimination against petitioners’ speech. 
Pet. App. 54a. While declining to decide whether the 
Establishment Clause would force the University to deny 
funding for petitioners’ magazine, the court found that the 
University’s “fear” of violating the Establishment Clause 
was a sufficient justification for the Guideline: 


[E]ven if the plaintiffs were correct in their assertion 
that funding Wide Awake would not violate Federal 
or State law, it is not the province of this court to 
second guess the legal judgments made by the Uni- 
versity. So long as the University’s Establishment 
Clause fears are reasonable, the Guideline restric- 
tions must stand. Given the complexity of the law 
in this regard, this court has little trouble in finding 
that the Guideline restriction is a reasonable limit to 
access to funds. Further, the restriction is a reason- 
able response by the University to prevent excessive 
entanglement with religion. 


Pet. App. 54a. The district court rejected petitioners’ free 
exercise claim on the ground that it did not appear to the 
court that “any burden of constitutional magnitude” had 
been imposed on them, and that even if there were a 
burden on free exercise rights, it would be justified by 
the compelling state interest of avoiding violation of the 
Establishment Clause (Pet. App. 57a).° The court re- 
jected petitioners’ equal protection claim on the ground 
that petitioners had made no showing of discriminatory 
intent. 


E. Proceedings in the Court of Appeals 


The Court of Appeals reversed the district court’s hold- 
ing that the Guideline against funding “religious activi- 
ties” does not discriminate on the basis of the content and 


5 At this point in the opinion, the district court did not explain 
why it concluded that funding the magazine would violate the 
Establishment Clause. Earlier in the opinion, it had declined to 
decide that question. Compare Pet. App. 54a with id. at 57a. 


11 


viewpoint of the publication; but it affirmed the judgment 
on the ground that the University has a compelling state 
interest in avoiding a violation of the Establishment 
Clause. 


The Court of Appeals explained that in “forbidding 
funding for speech that meets the definition of ‘religious 
activity,’ but not for speech of other types, the SAF guide- 
lines discriminate among speech on the basis of its con- 
tent.” Pet. App. 26a. This, the court held, is “presump- 
tively unconstitutional.” Jd. at 39a. Although the gov- 
ernment has no affirmative duty to subsidize exercise of a 
constitutional right, it may not “penalize exercise of con- 
Stitutional rights by withholding from their possessors an 
otherwise discretionary benefit.” Jd. at 25a. The Guide- 
line, however, “constitutes precisely such a penalty, be- 
cause it restrains Wide Awake Productions from gaining 
access altogether to a funding source generally available 
to CIOs not engaged in religious expression.” It “thus 
creates an uneven playing field on which the advantage 
is tilted towards CIOs engaged in wholly secular modes 
of expression.” Jd. at 26a. Absent “considerations of 
equal constitutional dignity,” the Court of Appeals ex- 
plained, the Guideline violates the constitutional principle 
that “when funds are made available to CIOs generally, 


they must be distributed in a viewpoint-neutral manner.” 
Id. at 25a. 


The court found, however, that the University’s dis- 
crimination against religious speech is justified by its 
“compelling interest in maintaining strict separation of 
church and state,” which is “derive[d]” from the Estab- 
lishment Clause. Pet. App. 26a-27a; 39a. Applying the 
three-part test of Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 612- 
13 (1971), the court concluded that inclusion of student 
publications within the program funded by the Student 
Activities Fund would violate the “effects” and “entangle- 
ment” tests. The court found that inclusion of “a publica- 
tion so clearly engaged in the propagation of particular 
religious doctrines” would constitute a “patent Establish- 


12 


ment Clause violation.” Pet. App. 35a. “It would be 
difficult to view awarding SAF monies to Wide Awake as 
anything but state sponsorship—and therefore advance- 
ment—of religious belief.” Jd. On the other hand, the 
court was “unpersuaded that the primary effect of the 
guidelines restrictions, involving as they do only the di- 
rect allocation of public monies, wceuld be to inhibit 
religion.” Pet. App. 34a. 


Moreover, it was the “entanglement” part of the Lemon 
test that the court found to be “most plainly implicated 
by this case.” Pet. App. 35a. The court acknowledged 
that state universities “may not discriminate against [re- 
ligious groups] based on the content of their speech” 
when “university facilities” are involved, but opined that 
“(direct monetary subsidization of religious organiza- 
tions and projects . . . is a beast of an entirely different 
color.” Id. at 37a (emphasis in original). According to 
the court, “providing SAF monies to defray the publica- 
tion costs of Wide Awake inevitably would advance 
Wide Awake’s Christian mission.” Jd. It would “send 
an unmistakably clear signal that the University of Vir- 
ginia supports Christian values and wishes to promote the 
wide promulgation of such values.” Pet. App. 38a. More- 
over, “[t]he possibility of a continuing annual appropria- 
tion for the benefit of a single religion carries the poten- 
tial for seriously divisive political consequences at the Uni- 
versity of Virginia,” which the court stated is “a factor 
of recurring significance in the Supreme Court's juris- 
prudence surrounding Lemon’s ‘excessive entanglement’ 
prong.” Pet. App. 37a. 


In sum, the Court of Appeals held: (1) that the Free 
Speech and Press Clauses “presumptively” forbid discrim- 
ination against an otherwise eligible publication on the 
basis of its religious viewpoint, (2) that the Establish- 
ment Clause requires such discrimination, and—implicitly 
—(3) that the Establishment Clause trumps the Free 
Speech and Press Clauses. The court also affirmed the 
lower court’s disposition of petitioners’ equal protection 
claims. 


a 


13 


Petitioners filed a petition for rehearing with sugges- 
tion for rehearing in banc. The petition was denied on 
May 23, 1994, Judges Widener, Niemeyer, and Luttig 
dissenting. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


Last Term, Justice O’Connor stated that this Court 
“should, in a proper case,” reconsider decisions that re- 
quire discrimination against “religion, religious ideas, re- 
ligious people, or religious schools,” and thus “bring our 
Establishment Clause jurisprudence back to what I think 
is the proper track—government impartiality, not ani- 
mosity, towards religion.” Board of Education of Kiryas 
Joel v. Grumet, 114 S. Ct. 2481, 2498 (1994) (O’Connor, 
J., concurring). See also id. at 2505 (Kennedy, J., con- 
curring); id. at 2515 (Scalia, J., dissenting). This case 
provides an ideal opportunity for that reconsideration. 


The University of Virginia provides funding on a neu- 
tral basis to student activities representing a wide range 
of opinions—118 organizations in all, including 15 news- 
papers and magazines. Included among these funded ac- 
tivities are “viewpoints which are inconsistent with or 
antagonistic to various religious beliefs.” C.A. App. 59, 
{ 16. It is not disputed that, but for its religious character, 
petitioners’ magazine, Wide Awake, would be eligible for 
funding under the Guidelines as a “student news, infor- 
mation, opinion, entertainment, or academic communica- 
tions media group[].” It addresses many of the same sub- 
jects (including racism, homosexuality, music, books, and 
interviews with professors) addressed by other student 
media. But the University refuses to consider Wide 
Awake for funding, solely because it presents a religious 
perspective to the students at the University. The Court 
of Appeals recognized that this explicit discrimination on 
the basis of viewpoint would violate the Free Speech and 
Press Clauses if the viewpoint expressed were nonreligious 
(Pet. App. 26a; 39a); but it held that the Establishment 


14 


Clause compels the very discrimination that the other por- 
tions of the First Amendment prohibit. 


The decision below thus raises two interrelated consti- 
tutional questions. First is the relationship between the 
Establishment Clause and the Free Speech and Press 
Clauses of the First Amendment: Does the Establish- 
ment Clause permit (and even require) discrimination 
against religious speech that would be unconstitutional in 
the case of controversial political, philosophical, or other 
nonreligious perspectives? The second involves the mean- 
ing of the Establishment Clause itself: Does the exten- 
sion of generally available benefits to religious speakers, 
on neutral terms, along with a broad array of nonreli- 
gious speakers, violate the Establishment Clause? On 
both of these issues, as we will show below, the lower 


courts are in disarray.® 


® Petitioners raised their constitutional claim under the Free 
Exercise and Equal Protection Clauses as well as the Free Speech 
and Press Clauses, and continue to do so. The Court of Appeals did 
not address petitioners’ free exercise argument, which is based on 
the University’s discrimination against religion. See Church of the 
Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah, 113 8. Ct. 2217 (1993). In- 
stead the court found—inexplicably—that it had been abandoned. 
Pet. App. 16a n.23. However, it was expressly preserved on ap- 
peal. C.A. Br. Pitfs at 18 n.3. The court rejected petitioners’ equal 
protection claim on the ground that petitioners did not allege 
discriminatory intent. Pet. App. 41a. However, since the students’ 
claim is based on unequal treatment pursuant to an expressly 
discriminatory classification (not on the differential impact of a 
facially neutral classification), there is no requirement of a separate 
allegation regarding the defendants’ intent. Cf. Washington v. 
Davis 426 U.S. 229, 240-241 (1976) (requiring proof of discrimina- 
tory intent only in the context of a facially nondiscriminatory gov- 
ernmental policy). If this Court affirms the lower court’s Speech and 
Press holdings, and reverses its Establishment holding, it will not 
be necessary to address these other claims separately. In peti- 
tioners’ view, each of the relevant constitutional provisions requires 
the same outcome: the neutral] treatment of religious speech. Al- 
though this Petition will focus on the Speech and Press Clauses, 
petitioners wish to preserve each of their constitutional claims. 


15 


A. THE COURTS ARE DIVIDED OVER THE SUP- 
POSED CONFLICT BETWEEN THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT AND FREE SPEECH CLAUSES 


It is well established that public universities may not 
deny funding to student groups or publications on the 
basis of their viewpoint. The leading case is Gay & Les- 
bian Students Ass'n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 (8th Cir. 
1988), in which the University of Arkansas refused to 
allow a student gay rights group to receive funds from 
the student activities fund. The Eighth Circuit held this 
denial of funding unconstitutional, reasoning that “a 
group has no right to funding; but when funds are made 
available, they must be distributed in a viewpoint-neutral 
manner.” Jd. at 366. See also Brooks v. Auburn Uni- 
versity, 412 F.2d 1171 (Sth Cir. 1969) (denial of fund- 
ing to an anti-war speaker overturned); Joyner v. Whit- 
ing, 477 F.2d 456, 460 (4th Cir. 1973) (denial of 
funding to a racist student publication overturned).” 


Under these precedents, if petitioners produced a mag- 
azine addressing such issues as racism, homosexuality, and 
international events—all subjects of major articles in the 


7 By the same token, courts have generally rejected the argu- 
ment that the funding of ccntroversial speakers or activities out of 
mandatory student activities funds violates the First Amendment 
rights of dissenting students, so long as the fund supports a “broad 
spectrum of university life and reasonable representation of the 
various aspects of student thought and action.” Larson v. Regents 
of the University of Nebraska, 189 Neb. 688, 691 (1973). Accord, 
inter alia, Smith v. Regents of the University of California, 4 Cal. 
4th 843, 860, 16 Cal. Rptr. 181, 844 P.2d 500, cert. denied, 114 
S. Ct. 181 (1993); Carroll v. Blinken, 957 F.2d 991 (2d Cir.), 
cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 300 (1992); Galda v. Rutgers, 772 F.2d 
1060 (3d Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1065 (1986); see 
generally Note, Mandatory Student Fees to Support Political Speech 
at Public Universities, 103 Yale L.J. 2009 (1994). Some of these 
decisions have permitted dissenting students to demand refunds 
of portions of the student activities fee that are used to support 
the expression of ideological viewpoints with which they disagree. 
That issue is not raised in this case. 


16 


first three issues of Wide Awake—from a gay rights, anti- 
war, oi racist point of view instead of their actual Bibli- 
cal Christian perspective, the University would unques- 
tionably be required to extend them neutral treatment. 
But because petitioners’ speech is religious, according to 
the University and the Fourth Circuit, a policy of dis- 
criminatory exclusion is not only permitted but required. 
“Because the First Amendment forbids government to 
promulgate policies ‘respecting an establishment of reli- 
gion,’” according to the court, “government is left no 
choice but to forswear financial support of the myriad 
forms of religious endeavor in which a student organiza- 
tion might engage.” Pet. App. 38a.° 


This decision puts the Establishment Clause on a colli- 
sion course with the rest of the First Amendment. As 
the court below candidly admitted, the University’s policy 
“creates an uneven playing field on which the advantage 
is tilted toward . . . wholly secular modes of expression,” 
(Pet. App. 26a), and it “[p]enalizes exercise of constitu- 
tional rights” by religious students (id. at 25a). It strips 
religious speakers of the constitutional protection ac- 
cord.d to secular perspectives and points of view. It con- 
dones discrimination against—not neutrality toward— 


8 In fact, as the record shows, the University is not consistent in 
its treatment of “religious endeavor” but discriminates among the 
various religious viewpoints represented at the University of Vir- 
ginia. For example, it funds the Muslim Students Association 
(including its magazine Al-Salam) and the Jewish Law Students 
Association. The University has defended this discrimination on 
the ground that these are “cultural” rather than religious groups 
(C.A. Br. Univ. 16). This appears to be a euphemism for 
“minority groups.” Petitioners have absolutely no objection to the 
funding of these other organizations; we are delighted that they 
are permitted to participate in the SAF and believe that they 
enrich the life of the University community. But serious Christians 
are a minority at the University, too, and add to the diversity of 
opinions. The government simply may not allocate its funds so 
as to favor or disfavor one religion over another. Everson v. Board 
of Education, 330 U.S. 1, 15 (1947); see Larsen v. Valente, 456 U.S. 
228, 244 (1982); Kiryas Joel, supra. 


. ORI eS nt te 


17 


religion. But this, the Court held, is what the Establish- 
ment Clause requires. 


Unfortunately, the decision below is not aberrational. 
Indeed, last February the Ninth Circuit held, in reason- 
ing similar to that of the district court below, that the 
University of Hawaii properly excluded religious student 
groups from eligibility for student activity funds. Tipton 
v. University of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 922 (9th Cir. 1994). 
Even before these decisions, lawyers and administrators 
of public universities all too often assumed that the Con- 
stitution compels (or at least permits) viewpoint discrim- 
ination against religious student speakers. These two re- 
cent decisions by federal appellate courts will undoubtedly 
reinforce and exacerbate that misimpression. If not re- 
viewed and corrected by this Court, the free speech rights 
of religious students at public universities all over the 
nation could be imperiled. 


Even in the narrow context of public university student 
activities funds, this case deserves the Court’s urgent at- 
tention. The question arises at every public university 
that has a student activities fund and that has students 
who wish to engage in religiously-oriented speech activi- 
ties—which is to say, at virtually every public university. 
Whether a university is now excluding religious expres- 
sion and thus violating free speech rights (the approach 
taken by respondents), or whether it is including religious 
expression and thus facing potential Establishment Clause 
lawsuits, this is a constitutional issue that will not go 
away.’ University students and administrators alike would 
gain by authoritative resolution of this recurring and con- 
tentious issue. 


In recent litigation, the University of Hawaii at Manoa was 
first sued by the ACLU demanding that it exclude religious stu- 
dent groups from its student activities funding. After entering into 
a consent decree to the satisfaction of the ACLU and enforcing it 
against religious students, the University was then sued by the 
excluded students. See Tipton v. University of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 
922 (9th Cir. 1994). 


18 


The supposed conflict between Establishment Clause 
doctrine and the viewpoint-neutral principles of the Free 
Speech and Press Clauses has divided the courts of ap- 
peals in a wide variety of factual contexts. Some courts, 
like the Fourth Circuit below, hold that the Establishment 
Clause either permits or compels discrimination against 
religious speakers that would be unconstitutional if their 
viewpoint were nonreligious." Other courts, in conflict 
with the decision below, hold either that the Establish- 
ment Clause does not override free speech rights, or that 
the Establishment Clause is not violated by treating re- 
ligious speakers in the same way that nonreligious speak- 
ers are treated.*' Almost all of these decisions were them- 


1 See, e.g., Tipton, supra, 15 F.3d at 926 (upholding denial of 
student activity funds by a public university to a religious student 
group); Kaplan v. City of Burlington, 891 F.2d 1024, 1029 (2d 
Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 496 U.S. 926 (1990) (prohibiting display 
of a religious symbol on public property that is “indisputably a 
traditional public forum,” noting that under a contrary analysis 
“nublic forum doctrine would swallow up the Establishment 
Clause”); Smith v. County of Albemarle, 895 F.2d 953, 959-60 
(4th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 823 (1990) (holding that a dis- 
play conveying an endorsement of religion must be barred from 
“an otherwise available public forum”); Bishop v. Aronov, 926 
F.2d 1066, 1077 (11th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 3026 
(1992) (holding that Establishment Clause would override the 
academic freedom of a public university professor to express re- 
ligious opinions in the classroom); Roberts v. Madigan, 921 F.2d 
1047 (10th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 3025 (1992) (re- 
solving “tension” between a public school teacher’s “right of ex- 
pression” and a possible endorsement of religion by forbidding 
him to read silently from his Bible in the classroom); Guidry v. 
Calcasieu Parish School Bd., 9 Relig. Freedom Rptr. 118 (E.D. La. 
1989), aff'd sub nom. Guidry v. Broussard, 897 F.2d 181 (5th Cir. 
1990) (forbidding class valedictorian from expressing religious 
views in graduation speech). 


11 See, e.g., Good News/Good Sports Club v. School District of 
Ladue, No. 93-2148, 1994 WL 328572 (8th Cir. 1994) (allowing 
student religious club access to neutral forum does not violate 
Establishment Clause); Fairfax County School Bd. v. Fairfax 
Covenant Church, 17 F.3d 703 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 
2166 (1994) (holding that a church may not be charged a higher 
rental fur use of a public facility than is charged to a nonreligious 


eee 


19 


selves split, with distinguished judges on both sides. Thus, 
in addition to its immediate practical importance to pub- 
lic university administrators and students, this case pro- 
vides an opportunity for this Court to address and clarify 
recurring issues of First Amendment law that now per- 
plex and divide the lower courts. 


We urge this Court to take this opportunity to make 
clear, in no uncertain terms, that the Establishment 
Clause does not provide a legitimate (let alone a com- 
pelling) justification for denial of what would otherwise 
be the First Amendment rights of private speakers to be 
free of viewpoint discrimination. In the words of retired 
Justice William J. Brennan, the Establishment Clause 
must not be used “as a sword to justify repression of re- 
ligion or its adherents from any aspect of public life.” 
McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 618, 641 (1978) (Brennan, 
J., concurring). 


B. THE COURTS ARE DIVIDED OVER THE CONSTI- 
TUTIONALITY OF NEUTRAL BENEFITS TO RE- 
LIGION 


In addition to the conflict between the Establishment 
Clause and the other provisions of the First Amendment, 
the decision below raises issues under the Establishment 
Clause itself. The Court of Appeals held that neutral 


organization) ; Hedges v. Wauconda Community School District, 
9 F.3d 1295 (7th Cir. 1993) (holding the Establishment Clause 
does not justify restraints on student distribution of written 
materials at public school); Chabad-Lubavitch of Georgia v. 
Miller, 5 F.3d 1383, 1394-95 (11th Cir. 1993) (holding, in con- 
text of a private menorah display in the state capital, that “[i]n 
a true public forum, . . . the Establishment Clause cannot be used 
as a justification for content-based restrictions on religious speech”) ; 
Kreisner v. City of San Diego, 1 F.3d 775 (9th Cir. 1998), cert. 
denied, 114 S. Ct. 690 (1994) (holding that private groups may 
display a religious symbol in a public forum); Americans United 
for Separation of Church and State v. City of Grand Rapids, 980 
F.2d 1538 (6th Cir. 1992) (same); Doe v. Small, 964 F.2d 611 
(7th Cir. 1992) (en banc) (same); McCreary v. Stone, 739 F.2d 
716 (2d Cir. 1984), aff'd by an equally divided court sub nom. 
Village of Scarsdale v. McCreary, 471 U.S. 83 (1985) (same). 


20 


funding of Wide Awake would both “advance” religion 
and bring about an excessive “entanglement” between 
government and religion. The court explained that “it 
would be difficult to view awarding SAF monies to Wide 
Awake as anything but state sponsorship—and therefore 
advancement—of religious belief.” Pet. App. 35a. Not- 
ing that the publication “indefatigably” promotes Chris- 
tian ideas and beliefs, the court stated that “[u]sing pub- 
lic funds to support a publication so clearly engaged in 
the propagation of particular religious doctrines would 
constitute a patent Establishment Clause violation.” /d. 


This approach conflicts with decisions holding that the 
equal participation of religious speakers in the benefits 
of a neutral government program is not an establishment 
of religion.” The principal difference is one of analytical 
focus. The Fourth Circuit focused specifically on the 
religious activity in question, and asked whether aid to 
that activity would advance religion. See Pet. App. 37a 
(referring to “a continuing annual appropriation for the 
benefit of a single religion”). By contrast, courts uphold- 
ing the participation of religious speakers in public fora 
or other neutral benefits programs examine the pro- 
gram as a whole, and ask whether the government un- 
constitutionally advances religion by subsidizing a wide 
range of expressive activities, of which religion is only 
one. See e.g., Good News/Good Sports Club, supra, at 
*9. (“The primary or principal effect of the 1986 Use 
Policy was not the advancement of religion; rather, the 
primary effect was to establish a neutral forum for com- 
munity and student groups to engage in the exchange of 
ideas.” ); see also other cases cited in note 11, supra. 


In addition to conflicting with other lower court deci- 
sions, the decision below conflicts in principle with recent 
opinions of this Court holding that the extension of bene- 
fits to a broad class of recipients, religious as well as non- 
religious, on a neutral basis, does not violate the Estab- 


12 See cases cited in note 11, supra. 


21 


lishment Clause. See Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches 
School District, 113 §. Ct. 2141 (1993); Zobrest v. Cata- 
lina Foothills School District, 113 §. Ct. 2462 (1993); 
Board of Education v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226 (1990): 
Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock, 489 U.S. 1 (1989); Wit- 
ters v. Washington Dep’t of Services, 474 U.S. 481 
(1986); Mueller v. Allen, 463 U.S. 388 (1983); Wid- 
mar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981). In each of these 
cases, the Court rejected the argument that the Estab- 
lishment Clause compels the government to exclude re- 
ligious speakers or organizations from generally available 
benefits that are extended neutrally, without regard to 
religion. As stated in Texas Monthly, “Insofar as [a] 
Subsidy is conferred upon a wide array of nonsectarian 
groups as well as religious organizations in pursuit of 
some legitimate secular end, the fact that religious groups 
benefit incidentally does not deprive the subsidy of the 
secular purpose and primary. effect mandated by the Es- 
tablishment Clause.” Jd. at 14-15. See also Zobrest, 113 
S. Ct. at 2467; Lamb’s Chapel, 113 S. Ct. at 2148; 
Mergens, 496 U.S. at 252; Witters, 474 U.S. at 487-88. 
Certiorari is warranted to review this conflict between the 
decision below and this Court’s most recent opinions on 
the issue of benefits to religion. 


In all candor, however, we must acknowledge that the 
decision below, while in conflict with the recent trend 
of decisions by this Court, finds support in older cases 
that have never been overruled or adequately distin- 
guished. Instead of emphasizing neutrality toward reli- 
gion, many of the older cases held that public resources 
must never be used to defray the costs of specifically 
religious speech, instruction, or activity. See Hunt v. 
McNair, 413 U.S. 734, 743 (1973) (quoted by the 
court below at Pet. App. 35a) (“Aid normally may be 
thought to have a primary effect of advancing religion . . . 
when it funds a specifically religious activity in an other- 
wise substantially secular setting”); Lemon v. Kurtzman, 
403 U.S. 602, 619 (1971) (“The State must be certain, 
given the Religion Clauses, that subsidized teachers do 


22 


not inculcate religion.”). See also Aguilar v. F elton, 473 
U.S. 402 (1985); School District of Grand Rapids v. 
Ball, 473 U.S. 373 (1985); and Committee for Public 
Education v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 756 (1973). 


Much of the confusion and inconsistency in Establish- 
ment Clause jurisprudence comes from vacillation between 
these two conflicting lines of cases. Thus, according to the 
court below, the First Amendment requires neutrality with 
respect to access to public facilities (Pet. App. 36a-37a) 
and tax benefits (id. at 30a n.31), but discrimination with 
respect to “direct monetary subsidization” (id. at 37a; 
see id. at 30a n.31). The court offers no reason for this 
bifurcation of Establishment Clause doctrine. Apparently, 
its purpose is to distinguish Widmar v. Vincent, supra 
(forbidding discrimination against religious student groups 
in the use of public university facilities, and rejecting 
the argument that the Establishment Clause requires such 
discrimination), and Texas Monthly, supra, 489 USS. at 
14-15 (allowing tax subsidy of religious publication if it 
is extended neutrally). Even as a means of distinguish- 
ing inconvenient precedents, the court’s attempt fails, since 
Witters v. Washington Dep’t of Services, supra, 474 U.S. 
at 487-88, expressly upheld the provision of cash money 
for religious teaching in a religious institution, so long as 
the aid is “ ‘made available generally without regard to 
the sectarian-non-sectarian, or public-nonpublic nature of 
the institution benefitted,’ and is in no way skewed to- 
wards religion” (quoting Nyquist, supra, 413 U.S. at 
782-83 n.38). 


More importantly, the arguments made by the Uni- 
versity and the Fourth Circuit in this case are virtually 
identical to the arguments made by parties in Lamb s 
Chapel, Mergens, Witters, and Widmar, objecting to 
neutral treatment of religious groups in the cases involv- 
ing public facilities and tax benefits. In each of these 
cases, this Court rejected the argument for discrimination 
against religious speakers and institutions, and it should 
do so here as well. Here, as in those cases, the claim that 


23 


equal access to public benefits “advances” religion (Pet. 
App. 35a) rings hollow when the same benefits are ex- 
tended neutrally to all organizations, religious as well as 
secular, on a neutral basis; and the claim that such neutral 
treatment conveys an “endorsement” of the recipient’s 
religion (id. at 38a) is similarly unfounded. Indeed, by 
its funding of Islamic and Jewish activities, as well as both 
conservative and liberal student publications, the Univer- 
sity demonstrates that no endorsement of the underlying 
philosophy of funded groups is intended or understood. By 
funding some 118 student organizations, of various and 
conflicting viewpoints, the University conveys only the 
“message” that it supports a robust exchange of ideas, 
and “advances” only the rights of students to speak their 
own minds and to hear a diverse range of opinion.’ As 
this Court observed in Mergens: “the broad spectrum of 
Officially recognized student clubs . . ., and the fact that 

. Students are free to initiate and organize additional 
student clubs, counteract any possible message of official 
endorsement or preference for religion or a particular re- 
ligious belief.” Mergens, 496 U.S. at 252 (citations 
omitted). This is particularly true in a University setting, 
involving a student group tied to no particular church or 
religious denomination, where the “aid” goes directly to 
printers and suppliers rather than to the general coffers 
of the group. 


18 Although it labeled the argument “entanglement,” the Court 
of Appeals relied heavily on the claim that funding Wide Awake 
would convey an “endorsement” of its religious view. See Pet. 
App. 38a (“for the University to subsidize its publication would, 
we believe, send an unmistakably clear signal that the University 
of Virginia supports Christian values and wishes to promote the 
wide promulgation of such values”). We contend this analysis is 
wrong. 


14The University’s standard CIO agreement states that the flow 
of benefits to a group “should not be misinterpreted as meaning 
. . . that the University approves of the organizations’ goals or 
activities,” C.A. App. 68; see Pet. App. 2a-3a (emphasis added). 


24 


Moreover, the Fourth Circuit’s conclusion that inclu- 
sion of religiously oriented speech would “entangle” the 
government with religion (Pet. App. 36a-37a) is back- 
wards. If the University wishes to bar all religious eX- 
pression from funded student activities, it will be required 
to undertake the very monitoring and interference that the 
“entanglement” test is designed to ward against. See 
Mergens, 496 U.S. at 253; Widmar, 454 US. at 272 n.11. 


The supposed distinction between equal access to public 
facilities and tax benefits, on the one hand, and “direct 
monetary subsidization,” on the other, bears no relation 
to the purposes and principles of the First Amendment. 
Access to facilities can be no less valuable to the group 
than any other form of assistance, and—assuming en- 
dorsement is the issue—might well convey more of an 
impression of “symbolic union” than mere money. See 
Zobrest, 113 S. Ct. at 2474 (Blackmun, J., dissenting). 
If the University had its own printing office, Wide Awake 
would be entitled to equal access under the decision 
below. It is hard to see why paying the costs of outside 
printing requires the opposite result. 


We contend that the distinction between forms of aid 
is symptomatic of the two inconsistent understandings of 
the demands of the Establishment Clause in the context 
of generally available subsidy programs. The unconstitu- 
tional “advancement of religion” can be judged either 
against a baseline of neutral treatment or against a base- 
line of “no aid to religion”; but it makes no sense to 
move from one baseline to another in response to ad- 
ventitious differences in factual surroundings or the forms 
of aid. At best, this doctrinal doublemindedness creates 
confusion and inconsistency in lower court judgments; 
more troubling, as in this case, it allows government of- 
ficials and lower courts the discretion to choose between 
equal treatment of religion and discrimination. 


The time has come to clarify this area of the law. If cer- 
tiorari is granted in this case, petitioners will argue for 


25 


extension of the neutrality principle to all forms of gen- 
erally available government assistance, so as to reconcile 
the conflict perceived by the Fourth Circuit between the 
Establishment Clause and the rest of the First Amend- 
ment. In our view, the government may not favor religion 
over nonreligion, except where appropriate as an accom- 
modation of the free exercise of religion (see Texas 
Monthly, supra) and government agents or mouthpieces 
may not themselves engage in or promote religion (see 
Bowen v. Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589 (1988));* but reli- 
gious individuals and institutions may share in government 
benefits extended to a wide array of beneficiaries on a 
nondiscriminatory basis."* “The Religion Clauses prohibit 
the government from favoring religion, but they provide 
no warrant for discriminating against religion.” Kiryas 
Joel, 114 S. Ct. at 2498 (O’Connor, J., concurring); ac- 
cord, id. at 2502 (Kennedy, J., concurring); id. at 2510 
(Scalia, J., dissenting); Lee v. Weisman, 112 S. Ct. 2649, 
2678 n.8 (1992) (Souter, J., concurring). 


The issue is thus starkly presented: Does the Establish- 
ment Clause compel the government to exclude a religious 
publication from generally available benefits, solely on the 
basis of its religious viewpoint, where such discrimination 
would violate the Speech and Press Clauses if the view- 
point of the publication were nonreligious? 


In Kendrick, grantees were given government money spe- 
cifically for the purpose of communicating the government’s de- 
sired message of adolescent sexual self-discipline, and Establish- 
ment Clause strictures applicable to government speech therefore 
applied to them. In this case, by contrast, the various student groups 
are responsible for their own expression, and the University of 
Virginia does not attempt to tell them what to say (except when 
their perspective is religious). 


16In situations where religious voices would be dominant, re- 
strictions may be needed; but in this case religious groups consti- 
tute only a handful of eligible organizations. See Widmar, 454 
U.S. at 275. 


26 


CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 

Respectfully submitted, 
MICHAEL W. MCCONNELL * MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 
MAYER, BROWN & PLATT CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
190 South LaSalle Street 1300 19th Street, N.W., 260 
Chicago, IL 60603 Washington, D.C. 20036 
(312) 702-3306 (202) 833-8400, ext. 102 


* Counsel of Record 


APPENDICES 


la 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOURTH CIRCUIT 


No. 92-1736 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, as a member of Wide Awake 
Productions; WIDE AWAKE PRODUCTIONS; WIDE 
AWAKE MAGAZINE; GREGORY W. MOURAD; ROBERT J. 


PRINCE, Plaintiffs-A ppellants, 


Vv. 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIR- 
GINIA; EDWARD E. ELSON; W.L. LYONS BROWN, JrR.; 
ROBERT G. BUTCHER, JR.; N. THOMAS CONNALLY; 
Hovey S. DABNEY; WALLER H. Horsey; J. THOMAS 
HuLVEY; EvANS B. JESSEE; PATRICIA M. KLUGE; 
ARNOLD H. LEON; LEIGH B. MIDDLEDITCH, JR.; ELIZzA- 
BETH D. Moritz; FREDDIE W. NICHOLAS, SR.; S. 
BuForD Scott; JEssE B. WILSON, III; THOMAS E. 
WoRRELL, Jr.; ADAM S. ARTHUR; ALEXANDER G. 
GILLIAM, JR.; RONALD J. STUMP, 

Defendants-A ppellees. 


Argued Nov. 30, 1992 
Decided March 14, 1994 


Before ERVIN, Chief Judge, WILLIAMS, Circuit 
Judge, and SPROUSE, Senior Circuit Judge. 


2a 
OPINION 


ERVIN, Chief Judge: 


We must decide whether a state university’s refusal to 
disburse monies from its student activities fund for the 
benefit of a student-run religious publication violates the 
First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. 
We hold that it does not. 


I 


A 


The University of Virginia collects a mandatory stu- 
dent activities fee of fourteen dollars per semester, to- 
gether with tuition payments, from each of its full-time 
students. The proceeds of the collection are deposited in 
the University’s Student Activities Fund (“SAF”), which 
is used to support the wide variety of student organiza- 
tions, activities, and publications that function at the 


University. 


To qualify for student-activity-fee funds, a student 
group first must attain the status of a “Contracted Inde- 
pendent Organization” (“CIO”) at the University. CIO 
status is available to any group that is composed in its 
majority of students, is managed by officers who are full- 
time students, keeps an updated copy of its constitution on 
file with the University, and signs an anti-discrimination 
disclaimer. CIOs are given access to University facilities, 
including meeting rooms and computer terminals, as well 
as the right to apply for student-activity-fee funds. The 
standard CIO agreement executed between qualified stu- 
dent groups and the University states that benefits pro- 
vided to the groups by the University 


should not be misinterpreted as meaning that those 
organizations are part of or controlled by the Uni- 
versity, that the University is responsible for the 


3a 


organizations’ contracts or other acts or omissions, 
or that the University approves of the organizations’ 
goals or activities. 


As the corporate body responsible under state law for 
governing the institution,’ the Rector and Visitors of the 
University of Virginia (“Rector and Visitors”) wield ulti- 
mate decisionmaking powcr over the operation of the 
SAF. The Rector and Visitors have delegated responsi- 
bility for allocating SAF monies to the University’s Stu- 
dent Council. A CIO secking an SAF grant must submit 
a detailed application for funding to the Appropriations 
Committee, a subcommittee of the full Student Council, 
which approves or denies the request. Appeal from a 
denial of funding by the Appropriations Committee may 
be taken to the full Student Council. Upon the Council's 
affirmance of the Appropriations Committee’s decision, a 
second appeal may be argued before the University’s Stu- 
dent Activities Committee, a faculty body chaired by a 
designee of the Vice President for Student Affairs. 


The decisions of each of these authorities with respect 
to awards of SAF monies must be taken in compliance 
with certain guidelines promulgated by the Rector and 
Visitors. The guidelines, adopted in 1970, charge the 
Student Council with administering the SAF “in a manner 
consistent with the educational purpose of the University 
as well as with State and Federal law.” Tic guidelines 
prohibit several categories of student organizations from 
obtaining SAF funds, according to the nature of the or- 
ganization and the purpose for which the funds would be 
used. Although they may attain CIO status, fraternities 
and sororities, political and religious organizations, and 
groups whose mem’ ership policies are exclusionary in na- 
ture are ineligible for SAF funding. The following ex- 


1 See Va.Code Ann. §§ 23-69 to -85 (Michie 1985 & Supp.1993) 
(delegating to the Rector and Visitors responsibility for governing 


the affairs of the University, and setting forth procedures and 
policies for the execution of this duty). 


4a 


penditures and activities also are excluded by the guide- 
lines: (1) honoraria or similar fees; (2) religious activi- 
ties; (3) social entertainment and related expenses; (4) 
philanthropic contributions and activities; and (5) politi- 


cal activities.” 


Once a student organization atiains CIO status and be- 
comes eligible for funding, the guidelines prescribe the 
following criteria for allocating SAF monies among CIOs: 
(1) the size of the group; (2) the University-wide benefits 
conferred by the group’s activities; and (3) the group's 
financial self-sufficiency. After a student organization 1s 
approved for funding, it submits expense vouchers to the 
SAF, which are paid only upon a determination that a 
particular expense is fundable under the guidelines. SAF 
monies are not paid to the group, but are disbursed di- 
rectly to the group’s creditors to discharge the fundable 


expense. 


For the academic year 1990-91, 343 student organiza- 
tions qualified as CIOs. Of these 343 groups, 135 applied 
for SAF funding, and 118 were awarded SAF monies. 
Numbered among the funded organizations were fifteen 
student publications; * also included were the Muslim Stu- 
dents Association, the Jewish Law Students Association, 


and the C.S. Lewis Society. 


2 This case involves a challenge to the University’s refusal to 
fund a student organization engaged in religious expression. Ac-. 
cordingly, we note that the guidelines offer definitions of the 
phrases “religious organization” and “religious activity.” A “re- 
ligious organization” is defined as “an organization whose purpose 
is to practice a devotion to an acknowledged ultimate reality or 
deity.” The guidelines define a “religious activity” as “an activity 
which primarily promotes or manifests a particular belief(s) in 
or about a deity or an ultimate reality.” 


3 These included, inter alia, Declaration, Dialogue Magazine, the 
Journal of Law and Politics, Loki Science Magazine, Oculus, Sea- 
sons, Thoughtlines, the University Journal, the Virginia Advocate, 
the Virginia Environmental Law Journal, the Virginia Literary 
Review, and the Yellow Journal. 


ee mea Ocgeone teense 


Sa 


B 


In September 1990 Ronald W. Rosenberger, an under- 
graduate at the University, joined with other University 
students to found Wide Awake Productions. According 
to its constitution, Wide Awake Productions is an unin- 
corporated association with the stated purposes of (1) 
“publishing a magazine of philosophical and religious ex- 
pression”; (2) “facilitating discussion which fosters an 
atmosphere of sensitivity to and tolerance of Christian 
viewpoints”; and (3) “providing a unifying focus for 
Christians of multicultural backgrounds.” Wide Awake 
Productions publishes Wide Awake: A Christian Perspec- 
tive at the University of Virginia (“Wide Awake’), a 
nonprofit journal written and edited by the student mem- 
bers of Wide Awake Productions. As stated by Rosen- 
berger, who serves as editor-in-chief of Wide Awake, the 
journal * was launched when the members of Wide Awake 
Productions “realized that none of the fiftcen student-run 


* We note that the editors of Wide Awake would reject our use 
of the noun “journal” to describe their publication: 


We .. . chose to call our magazine a perspective instead of a 
journal or viewpoint. The word perspective embraces the idea of 
viewing a situation from a particular angle (in this case a Christian 
angle), rather than viewing a situation with a particular conclu- 
sion in mind (as a politically partisan magazine would do). Our 
perspective is a starting point, not a finish line. 


Wide Awake: A Christian Perspective at the University of Vir- 
ginia [hereinafter Wide Awake], Mar.-Apr. 1991, at 4. We employ 
the nomenclature “journal” herein not to cast doubt upon the 
editors’ preference, but purely as a generic appellation; thus, for 
our purposes a “journal” is simply “[a] periodical containing arti- 
cles of interest to a particular group... . .” Webster’s II New 
Riverside University Dictionary 656 (1988); “a periodical publi- 
cation dealing with matters of current interest .. . .,” Webster’s 
Third New International Dictionary 1221 (1976). This usage 
comports with the editors’ own description of Wide Awake as “a 
collection of articles exploring from within a Christian framework 
various issues, both of widespread general interest and of par- 
ticular interest to Christians.” Wide Awake, Mar./Apr. 1991, at 4. 


bia | 


6a 


publications at the University provided a forum for Chris- 
tian expression,” and decided to fill this perceived void. 
See “Letter from the Editor,” Wide Awake: A Christian 
Perspective at the University of Virginia, Nov.-Dec. 1990, 
at 2. Wide Awake and Wide Awake Productions are not 
affiliated with any religious institution, and allow any Uni- 
versity student to join without regard to sex, race, religion, 
or color. 


At the time notice of the instant appeal was filed, three 
issues of Wide Awake had been published, with approxi- 
mately 5,000 copies of each issue being distributed free 
of charge to persons on the University campus. Accord- 
ing to editor Rosenberger’s comments in the first issue, 
Wide Awake’s mission is twofold: “to challenge Chris- 
tians to live, in word and deed, according to the faith 
they proclaim[,] and to encourage students to consider 
what a personal relationship with Jesus Christ means.” 
Id. In furtherance of this mission, Wide Awake “offers a 
Christian perspective on both personal and community 
issues, especially those relevant to college students at the 
University of Virginia.” /d. 


The content of the three issues of Wide Awake pub- 
lished thus far forms part of the record in this case. The 
first issue’s cover story, “Eracing Mistakes,” offered Chris- 
tian solutions for the enduring calamity of racism, see id. 
at 1, 12-14; other articles treated such diverse issues as 
“crisis pregnancy,” Oxford Christian apologeticist C.S. 
Lewis’s ideas about evil and free will, “beating stress,” 
and “praying with a thankful heart,” all written from an 
avowedly Christian stance. See id. at 4-5, 6-8, 15, 21. 
The featured contribution in the second issue, “Out of 
the Closet and Into the Light,” addressed the question 
“How should the Church respond to homosexuals . . . 
and vice versa?” See id., Mar./Apr.1991, at 1, 14-17. 
The second issue also included an interview with a Chris- 
tian professor of mathematics at the University, an article 
on Christian missionary work throughout the world, and 


ee ee ee 


7a 


two commentaries offering spiritual guidance (titled re- 
spectively “God’s Word: A Spiritual Advantage,” and 
“On Your Own: Hope and Spirit”). See id. at 5-7, 11- 
13, 20-21. The third issue contained articles about a 
University graudate’s experiences as a missionary in 
Moldavia, eating disorders (titled “From Calorie to Cal- 
vary”), and a Christian musician (“Keith Green: Piano 
Man for Christ”). See id., Sep.-Oct. 1991, at 5-7, 12-14, 
18-20. Columns in all three issues reviewed newly re- 
leased recordings of music of religious disposition.® 


The plaintiffs do not dispute that in publishing Wide 
Awake they are engaged in a “religious activit[y]” as the 
SAF guidelines define the phrase.* Indeed, after reading 
its contents dispassionately, we are compelled to mark 
Wide Awake’s unflagging* invocation of religious, spe- 
cifically Christian, themes. The journal’s pages are per- 
vasively devoted to providing a “Christian perspective” 
in printer’s ink at the University of Virginia. Wide 
Awake’s editorial stance extends to its advertising sales: 
by the public release of the third issue represented in the 
record (dated September/October 1991), roughly eighty 
percent of the journal’s five commercial and notice col- 
umns were given over to Christian churches or to busi- 


5 See Michelle Carpick, “All Aboard,” in Wide Awake, Nov.-Dec. 
1990, at 16-17 (reviewing Annie Herring’s album Waiting for My 
Ride to Come); Michelle Carpick, “Heart Toward Heaven,” Wide 
Awake, Sept.-Oct. 1991, at 21 (reviewing Kim Hill’s album Brave 
Heart); Fred Hopkins, “A Choice Cut,” Wide Awake, Mar.-Apr. 
1991, at 19 (reviewing Chosen, a newly released album by the 
“alternative” rock band The Violet Burning). 


6 See supra note 2. 


7 Careful perusal of Wide Awake’s three published issues suggests 
one exception to this generalization: a contribution titled “The 
Economics of Compassion,” which examined Pope John Paul II’s 
1991 encyclical Centesimus Annus. The article discusses in a non- 
didactic manner the encyclical’s “ringing denunciation of socialism” 
and its “support of the free market.” See Greg Mourad, “The 
Economics of Compassion,” Wide Awake, Sept.-Oct. 1991, at 8-11. 


8a 


ness entities purveying goods and services of Christian 
bent. Even Wide Awake’s physical appearance draws 
attention to its religious posture: the Christian symbol 
of the Cross lying in a dark oval field, is printed at the 
top of each page; another Cross marks the end of each 


contribution. 


Wide Awake Productions attained CIO status shortly 
after its founding. Commensurate with this status, as the 
plaintiffs acknowledge, the University openly accords 
Wide Awake Productions the same access to University 
facilities as other CIOs. Such access includes = ah 

niversity property for the group’s meetings, functions, 
a i yy + * status affords the members of Wide 
Awake Productions liberal recourse to University com- 
puter terminals, printers, and other equipment employed 
in the preparation of manuscripts for publication. 


In January 1991, Ronald W. Rosenberger, on behalf 
of Wide Awake Productions, submitted an application 
for SAF funding to the Appropriations Committee of the 
Student Council in the amount of $5,862.00, to cover 
publishing costs for Wide Awake. On February 26 of 
that year the Appropriations Committee denied Rosen- 


berger’s application, stating: 


In reviewing the request by Wide Awake Produc- 
tions, the . . . Committee determined your organiza- 
tion’s request could not be funded as it is a religious 
activity. This determination was made after review- 
ing your first issue of Wide Awake. In particular, 


8 These included notices and advertisements for the nega 
Fellowship Church in Vienna, Virginia (noting times of age ” 
Sunday services) ; The Christian Bookstore in ae e = 
ginia (promoting sales of the NIV Study Bible) ; h : n A 
Christian Study (location unspecified) (inviting full-time - 
versity of Virginia students to attend free of charge Se A 
lecture and discussion series titled “Thinking Christianly”’) Lo 
Trinity Presbyterian Church (location unspecified) (noting ' a 
of scheduled Sunday services). See Wide Awake, Sept./Oct. ; 


at 4, 10, 11, 21. 


9a 


the committee noted in your Editor’s Letter that the 
publication was “a forum for Christian expression” 


and a means “to challenge Christians (in how) to 
ae 


Please be aware that this decision simply denies 
Student Activity Fee funding for your publication. 
Wide Awake Productions may still print and dis- 
tribute issues on Grounds.® 


The members of Wide Awake Productions promptly ap- 
pealed the decision to the full Student Council on March 
3, 1991, contending that their organization has satisfied 
all applicable SAF funding guidelines and that the Ap- 
propriations Committee’s denial of funding violated the 
Constitution of the United States. The Student Council 


affirmed the Appropriations Committee’s decision without 
comment. 


Wide Awake Productions then appealed the Student 
Council’s ruling to the University’s Student Activities 
Committee. On April 16, 1991, Associate Dean of Stu- 
dents Ronald J. Stump informed Rosenberger of the 
Student Activities Committee’s decision to affirm the 
funding denial. Stump wrote: 


After reviewing your organization’s constitution, 
copies of the magazine’s first two editions, and the 
arguments presented at last week’s appeal by Wide 
Awake Productions and by [the] Student Council, 
the Committee determined that the Wide Awake 
magazine could not be funded as it is a religious 
activity. In effect, the Student Activities Committee 
fully supports the decision and reasoning provided to 
you in the February 26 letter from [the Appropria- 
tions Committee]. As noted in [that] letter, Wide 


® The letter communicating the Appropriations Committee’s de- 
cision to Rosenberger was sent over the signature of Cynthia J. 
Wilbricht, the Student Council’s Vice President for Student Or- 
ganizations. 


i | 


10a 


Awake Productions may still print and distribute 
copies of the magazine and as a CIO has full and 
equal access to other University facilities and serv- 


ices. 


The Student Activities Committee’s repudiation exhausted 
all internal avenues of appeal within the University for 
the institution’s denial of SAF funding to Wide Awake 


Productions. 
C 


On July 11, 1991, the members of Wide Awake Pro- 
ductions brought this action against the Rector and Visi- 
tors and Dean Stump pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983.” 
The plaintiffs’ complaint set forth three challenges to the 
SAF guidelines’ exclusion of “religious activities,” includ- 
ing the publication of Wide Awake, from eligibility for 
funding consideration, each predicated upon provisions of 
the Constitution of the United States. To each of the 
plaintiffs’ federal constitutional claims were appended al- 
ternative and supplemental claims seeking recovery under 
the provisions of Article I of the Constitution of Vir- 
ginia " and, in the case of Count Two, under the Virginia 
Act for Religious Freedom, Va.Code Ann. §§ 57-1 to -2 
(Michie 1985 & Supp.1993). The plaintiffs did not chal- 
lenge directly the University’s refusal to fund Wide Awake 
Productions, except insofar as the adverse funding deci- 


10 42 U.S.C. § 1988 reads in pertinent part: 


Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, custom, or usage of any State... subjects, or 
causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or 
other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the depriva- 
tion of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the 
Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an 
action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for 


redress. 
11 Article I of the Virginia Constitution comprises that charter’s 


Declaration of Rights. See Va. Const. pmbl.; I A.E. Dick Howard, 
Commentaries on the Constitution of Virginia 27-318 (1974). 


lla 


sions flowed directly from the requirements of ide- 
lines themselves.” ; — 


Count One, the complaint’s most comprehensive theory 
of recovery, alleged that the guidelines’ proscription of 
SAF funding for the publication costs of Wide Awake 
violated the Free Speech and Press Clause of the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
Article I, Section 12 of the Virginia Constitution ™ (1) 
by unlawfully depriving the members of Wide Awake 
Productions of government benefits solely because of the 
content and viewpoint of their speech in Wide Awake; 
and (2) by illegally excluding the members of Wide 
Awake Productions from the “limited public forum” cre- 
ated by the Rector and Visitors’ establishment of the 
SAF and promulgation of the funding guidelines. Count 
One also contended that the guidelines’ “definitions for 
allocating SAF funds to CIOs” are unconstitutionally 
vague because persons of ordinary intelligence must guess 
at their meaning, and unlawfully overbroad because they 
impinge constitutionally protected activity. 


Count Two of the complaint maintained that the guide- 
lines’ denial of SAF funding to “religious activities” vio- 
lated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to 
the Federal Constitution,” Article I, Section 16 of the 


12 The complaint did not challenge any of the University’s pro- 
cedures for administering the SAF, nor the discretionary authority 
vested by the Rector and Visitors in official student and University 
governing bodies with respect to SAF funding decisions. 


18 See U.S. Const. amend. I, cl. 3 (“Congress shall make no 
law ... abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press”... .). 


; 14 Article I, Section 12 of the Virginia Constitution provides 
inter alia that “any citizen may freely speak, write, and publish 
his sentiments on all subjects,” and that “the General Assembly 
shall not pass any law abridging the freedom of speech or of the 
press... .” Va. Const. art. I, § 12, cls. 2, 3. 


18 See U.S. Const. amend, I, cl. 2 (“Congress shall make no law 
. .. prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]” ... .). 


12a 


irsinia Constitution,” and the Virginia Act for Re- 
Me Freedom, Va.Code Ann. §§ 57-1 to -2 (Michie 
1985 & Supp.1993)," by discriminating in the granting 
of a government benefit based upon (1) the religious con- 
tent of the expression in Wide Awake; and (2) the Aca 
ligious beliefs, character, or affiliation of the mem . 
of Wide Awake Productions. Count Two also "er 
to the Rector and Visitors “conduct constitut[ing] a os 
ure to give reasonable accommodation to the plaintiffs 


religious belicfs.” 


Count Three of the complaint alleged that the guide- 
lines’ prohibition against subsidizing “religious prey ee 
coupled with the Rector and Visitors’ denial of SAF funds 
to Wide Awake Productions, violated the Equal he 
tion Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federa 
Constitution ® and the Anti-Discrimination Clause of Ar- 


16 Article I, Section 16 of the Virginia Constitution provides 
inter alia that “all men are equally entitled to the free a 
of religion, according to the dictates of conscience,” and t oe 
Virginia General Assembly “shall not... confer any pec om 
privileges or advantages on any sect or denomination. .. . . 
Const. art. I, § 16, cls. 2, 6. 


i hose who would force 
17 After a lengthy preamble denouncing t ho 
their religion upon others, the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom 


provides in pertinent part: 
“Be it enacted by the General Assembly, That no man shall be 
compelled to frequent or support any religious — = 
or ministry whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, res = q 
molested, or burthened, in his body or goods, nor shall rs Al 
wise suffer on account of his religious opinions or belief; : 
that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to main- 
tain, their opinions in matters of religion, and that the a 
shall in no wise diminish, enlarge or affect their civil capaci- 


ties.” 
Va.Code Ann. § 57-1 (Michie 1985 & Supp. 1993). 


” te shall... 
18 U.S. Const. amend. XIV, §1, cl. 4 ( No Sta 
Pr any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of 


the laws.”’). 


13a 


ticle I, Section 11 of the Virginia Constitution.” Spe- 
cifically, Count Three contended (1) that the guidelines 
“den[ied] plaintiffs the benefits to which other students 
and CIOs are entitled” by unconstitutionally discriminat- 
ing against Wide Awake Productions on the basis of the 
content or viewpoint of its members’ speech and associa- 
tion; and (2) that the guidelines unconstitutionally dis- 
criminated against the plaintiffs’ religious speech “by de- 
nying [them] the benefits that other students and CIOs 
engaged in religious speech and activities receive and have 
received. . . .”. This viewpoint- and religious-based dis- 
crimination, Count Three maintained, was not justified by 
a compelling state interest, nor was it narrowly tailored 
to achieve whatever minimal interest the Rector and Visi- 
tors may have in refusing to fund student “religious ac- 
tivit[ies].” 


The plaintiffs sought redress for their alleged injuries 
in the form of (1) a declaratory judgment that the guide- 
lines’ prohibition against the funding of “religious activi- 
ties” violated their rights under the United States Con- 
stitution, the Virginia Constitution, and the Virginia Act 
for Religious Freedom; (2) a permanent order enjoining 
the Rector and Visitors from promulgating any proscrip- 
tion against the funding of Wide Awake Productions on 
the basis of the content or viewpoint of its members’ 
speech in Wide Awake; (3) compensatory damages of at 
least $5,862.00, the sum of SAF funds unconstitutionally 
denied Wide Awake Productions; and (4) an order award- 
ing Wide Awake Productions reasonable costs and attor- 
neys’ fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1988.” 


” Article I, Section 11 of the Virginia Constitution, provides 
inter alia “[t]hat the right to be free from any government dis- 
crimination upon the basis of religious conviction, race, color, sex, 
or national origin shall not be abridged, except that the mere sepa- 
ration of the sexes shall not be considered discrimination.” Va. 
Const. art. I, § 11, cl. 3. 


20 42 U.S.C. § 1988 provides that 


[ijn any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of sec- 
tion[] .. . 1983 . . . of this title, . . . the court, in its discre- 


: 


14a 


Agreeing that there were no material facts at a. 
both parties sought summary judgment as a matter 0 
law. After hearing oral argument on their opposing mo- 
tions, the district court granted summary judgment in 
favor of the Rector and Visitors on each count of the 
plaintiffs’ complaint, concluding (1) that the SAF was 
not a “limited public forum;” (2) that application of the 
funding guidelines did not result in viewpoint or con- 
tent discrimination against the speech of Wide Awake 
Productions; and (3) that the denial of funding did not 
burden the plaintiffs’ free exercise of religion. See Rosen- 
berger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 795 F.Supp. 
175, 178-83 (W.D.Va.1992) (mem.). The court also 
held that the plaintiffs’ equal protection challer ge to the 
guidelines failed because the members of Wice Awake 
Productions had not adduced evidence of the Rector and 
Visitors’ discriminatory intent. Although the district 
court did not scrutinize the complaint’s allegations that the 
guidelines violated the Virginia Constitution and the Vir- 
ginia Act for Religious Freedom, it held that the restric- 
tions on funding for “religious activities” did not “impose 
an impermissible burden on the plaintiffs’ exercise of their 
rights as guaranteed by . . . the State Constitution[], or 
the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom.” /d. at 17. 


This appeal followed. 
II 


Before addressing the substance of the plaintiffs’ assign- 
ments of error, we wish to make clear what precisely is 
at issue in this appeal. The complaint alleges that the 
Rector and Visitors have violated rights guaranteed the 
plaintiffs by the Constitution of the United States, the 
Constitution of Virginia, and the Virginia Act for Re- 
ligious Freedom. Two of these sources derive from the 


tion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the United 
States, a reasonable attorney’s fee as part of the costs. 


Id. 


a 


15a 


substantive law of the Commonwealth of Virginia. As 
such, they comprise fonts of individual liberties independ- 
ent of the Federal Constitution, and are therefore sus- 
ceptible of autonomous interpretation by the courts of 
the Commonwealth.” Although the district court em- 
braced these pendent state-law claims in its favorable 
grant of summary judgment to the Rector and Visitors,” 
they were not controverted by the parties at the sum- 
mary judgment hearing, and were not subjected to inde- 
pendent scrutiny on their merits below. We have no ob- 
jective basis, therefore, upon which to assume that any 
interpretation of the Virginia Constitution or the Virginia 
Act for Religious Freedom contributed separately to the 
judgment from which this appeal was taken. The parties 
have not attempted to resuscitate them in their briefs 
or at oral argument. To bring grounds for relief to the 
attention of an appellate tribunal, the Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure oblige the parties to offer a written 


argument . . . contain[ing] [their] contentions .. . 
with respect to the issues presented, and the reasons 
therefor, with citations to the authorities . . . and 
parts of the record relied on. 


Fed.R.App.P. 28(a)(5), (b). We observe that none of 
the briefs filed by either party in this court contains “con- 
tentions” about the application of the Virginia Constitu- 
tion’s Declaration of Rights or the Virginia Act for Re- 
ligious Freedom to the instant case, or “citations to... . 
authorities” that might illuminate the special rights the 
State charter and religious-freedom statute are said to 


21 See, e.g., William J. Brennan, Jr., State Constitutions and the 


Protection of Individual Rights, 90 Harv.L.Rev. 489, 491, 498-504 
(1977). 


22 See Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 795 
F.Supp. 175, 183 (W.D.Va.1992) (mem.) (holding that funding 
restrictions on “religious activities” do not impermissibly burden 
rights guaranteed by the Constitution of Virginia or the Virginia 
Act for Religious Freedom). 


a 


16a 


guarantee. We therefore are compelled to conclude that 
the parties have failed to appeal the district courts grant 
of summary judgment with respect to these state-law 
theories of recovery. Failure of this nature constitutes 
abandonment of the claims, and precludes us from con- 
sidering them further herein. See Shopco Distrib. Co. v. 
Commanding Gen., 885 F.2d 167, 170 n. 3 (4th Cir. 
1989) (noting that failure to comply with terms of former 
version of Fed.R.App.P. 28(a)(5) constitutes waiver of 
asserted claims). 


Therefore, the scope of our inquiry is confined to such 
of the plaintiffs’ assignments of error as rest upon the 
Constitution of the United States. These are two. First, 
the plaintiffs contend that the guidelines’ proscription of 
SAF funding for “religious activities” violates the Free 
Speech and Press Clause of the First Amendment (1) by 
depriving them of government benefits based solely on 
the content and viewpoint of their speech in Wide Awake, 
and (2) by excluding them from the “limited public 
forum” represented by the SAF. Second, the plaintiffs 
argue that the guidelines’ funding restrictions discrimi- 
nate against them in contravention of the Equal Protec- 
tion Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (1) by deny- 
ing them benefits which other CIOs engaged in religious 
speech and activities have received, and (2) because the 
restrictions serve no compelling state interest, and are not 
narrowly tailored to satisfy whatever minimal interest the 
Rector and Visitors may have in denying funding to “re- 
ligious activit[ies].” In the discussion that follows, we 


23In granting the University’s motion for summary judgment, 
the caatea come A ruled that the denial of funding to Wide Awake 
Productions did not unconstitutionally burden the plaintiffs free 
exercise of religion. See Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. 
of Va., 795 F.Supp. 175, 178-83 (W.D.Va.1992) (mem.). Because 
the plaintiffs failed to assign error to this holding on appeal, it 
meets the same fate as the plaintiffs’ state-law claims: we con- 
sider it abandoned, and decline to address it herein. See Fed.R. 
App.P. 28(a) (5); Shopco Distrib. Co., 885 F.2d at 170 n. 3. 


17a 


address these two claims in turn, reviewing the legal 
conclusions on which the district court granted summary 
judgment de novo. See, e.g., Brock v. Entre Computer 
Ctrs., Inc., 933 F.2d 1253, 1259 (4th Cir.1991). 


Il 


First, we examine the plaintiffs’ contention that the 
guidelines’ proscription of SAF funding for “religious ac- 
tivities” violates the Free Speech and Press Clause of the 
First Amendment by depriving the members of Wide 
Awake Productions of government benefits based solely 
on the content and viewpoint oi their speech in Wide 
Awake. 


A 


Because our decision rests ultimately upon our under- 
standing of the language of the First Amendment, we 
here undertake cursory review of certain principles of 
constitutional interpretation that guide our deliberations. 


Like our cultural and ideological ancestors the Magna 
Carta (1215) and the English Bill of Rights (1688), the 
first ten amendments to the Federal Constitution represent 
what Justice Story called “a solemn recognition of limi- 
tations upon the power of parliament; that is, a declara- 
tion, that parliament ought not to abolish, or restrict” cer- 
tain fundamental rights of the person. III Joseph Story, 
Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States 
§ 980, at 695 (1833). Taken as a whole, the provisions 
of the Bill of Rights form a stout bulwark against gov- 
ernment encroachment upon the fundamental liberties of 
every person within the jurisdiction of the United States. 
The amendments weigh as a counterpoise to the specifi- 
cally enumerated powers granted by the people of the 
several states to their national government in the first 
three Articles of the Federal Constitution. 


By its terms the Free Speech and Press Clause of the 
First Amendment reflects the limiting purpose of the 


18a 


Bill of Rights. The Clause pronounces the federal legis- 
lature’s impotence to curb any individual’s freedom to 
express verbally her views upon any subject; it states 
that Congress shall “make no law . . . abridging the free- 
dom of speech, or of the press.” U.S. Const. amend. I, 
cl. 3 (emphasis added). While the First Amendment thus 
represents a guarantee that freedom will be preserved in 
the face of legislative ambition, it goes no further. Al- 
though the Amendment preserves inviolate the individual's 
right to speak, it sustains speech itself only indirectly. 
The Speech and Press Clause cannot be metamorphosed 
into a promise that the federal government will purchase 
a bullhorn, paper, and ink for the convenience of every 
garruious member of the American populace. The Con- 
stitution does not guarantee the American people the 
means of self-expression; it simply pledges that Congress 
(and, through application of the Fourteenth Amendment, 
the states **) will not enact laws or regulations restrain- 
ing at its inception a person’s right freely to speak her 
views and to disseminate them by every means at her dis- 
posal. A century and six decades after the publication 
of his commentaries on our national charter, Justice 
Story’s expression of this principle retains all its peerless 
power: 


That this amendment was intended to secure to every 
citizen an absolute right to speak, or write, or print, 
whatever he might please, without any responsibility, 
public or private, therefor, is a supposition too wild 


24The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment has 
been held to protect from infringement by the states all of the 
First Amendment liberties potentially at issue in this case: the 
freedoms of speech, Fiske v. Kansas, 274 U.S. 380, 387, 47 S.Ct. 
655, 657, 71 L.Ed. 1108 (1927); Gitlow v. New York, 268 US. 
652, 666, 45 S.Ct. 625, 629-30, 69 L.Ed. 1138 (1925); press, Near 
v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U.S. 697, 722-23, 51 S.Ct. 625, 
633-34, 75 L.Ed. 1357 (1981); free exercise of religion, Cantwell 
v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 308, 60 S.Ct. 900, 903, 84 L.Ed. 1213 
(1940); and non-establishment of religion, Everson v. Board of 
Educ., 330 U.S. 1, 15-16, 67 S.Ct. 504, 511-512, 91 L.Ed. 711 (1947). 


19a 


to be indulged by any rational man. . . . It is plain, 
then, that the language of the amendment imports 
no more, than that every many shall have a right to 
speak, write, and print his opinions upon any subject 
whatsoever, without prior restraint. . . . 


Story, supra, § 993, at 703-04. 
B 


With these interpretative precepts firmly in hand, we 
turn to the assignment of error lodged by the plaintiffs. 


The plaintiffs do not suggest that the Rector and Visi- 
tors have restrained them from speaking, writing, or print- 
ing commentary upon religious themes, or indeed upon 
any other subject, on the campus or within the purview 
of the University of Virginia. As they freely admit, Wide 
Awake Productions is afforded the full benefits of CIO 
status by the University. Its members are granted the 
same access to meeting rooms on University grounds as 
other ClOs, and are given generous run of University 
property for their work and programs. The University 
affords Wide Awake Productions liberal recourse to its 
computer terminals, printers, and other equipment used 
to prepare manuscripts for publication. With the Univer- 
sity’s full consent, the plaintiffs have thus far distributed 
several thousand copies of Wide Awake on University 
grounds. The plaintiffs do not, indeed cannot, suggest, 
therefore, that the Rector and Visitors have placed a 
per se unconstitutional prior restraint upon their freedom 
actually to speak or to publish their views by denying 
them equal access to University facilities. Cf. Widmar 
v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 277, 102 S.Ct. 269, 278. 70 
L.Ed.2d 440 (1981) (discussing erection of prior restraint 
against student organization’s use of state university prop- 


erty); Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 180, 92 S.Ct. 2338, 
2345, 33 L.Ed.2d 266 (1972) (same). 


20a 


Nor is the plaintiffs’ complaint simply that the Rector 
and Visitors have refused to pay for the publication of 
their speech with treasure from the University fisc. If 
such were the nature of this dispute, we might leave the 
field of independent analysis fallow. For there is no ques- 
tion that the Commonwealth of Virginia, like any pri- 
vate owner of property, may preserve the land and chat- 
tels under its control for the use to which they are dedi- 
cated, and decline to lend them for other purposes. F.g., 
Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free Sch. Dist., 
US. : , 113 S.Ct. 2141, 2146, 124 L.Ed. 
2d 352 (1993): Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense 
& Educ. Fund. Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 800, 105 S.Ct. 3439, 
3447-3448, 87 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985); Perry Educ. Ass'n 
vy. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 46, 103 
S.Ct. 948, 955, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983). As agents of 
the Commonwealth, the Rector and Visitors need not sub- 
sidize extracurricular student activities in any form. 
Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 182 n. 8, 92 S.Ct. 2338, 
2346 n. 8, 33 L.Ed.2d 266 (1972). Having undertaken 
such subsidies, they need not have promulgated criteria by 
which the Student Council could differentiate between 
competing funding requests. Nor are the Rector and 
Visitors under any affirmative obligation to ensure that 
University students’ expressive activities are funded. In 
language redolent of Justice Story’s pointed commentary 
on the Speech and Press Clause, the Supreme Court has 
rejected the notion that the rights of freedom of speech 
and freedom of the press “are somehow not fully realized 
unless they are subsidized by the state.” Regan v. Taxa- 
tion with Representation, 461 U.S. 540, 546, 103 S.Ct. 
1997, 2001, 76 L.Ed.2d 129 (1983). 


The Student Council’s exercise of discretion in with- 
holding SAF monies from Wide Awake Productions is 
not, therefore, the basis of the plaintiffs’ complaint. The 
plaintiffs contend, instead, that once the Rector and Visi- 
tors have chosen to promulgate guidelines governing the 


21a 


allocation of funds that support student speech among 
competing student interests, such guidelines cannot con- 
dition funding awards on the content or viewpoint of a 
prospective recipient’s speech. The Rector and Visitors 
have violated the First Amendment, the plaintiffs main- 
tain, by denying them the benefit of a University-funded 
SAF grant on grounds that their publication of Wide 
Awake constitutes a “religious activit{y]”** within the 
meaning of the guidelines. Such discrimination contra- 
venes the First Amendment, they assert, because it im- 
plicitly condemns the content ard viewpoint of their 
speech in Wide Awake. This conteni and viewpoint dis- 
crimination imposes a prior restraint upon the ability of 
Wide Awake Productions to enjoy government largesse 

and, the plaintiffs contend, must therefore be struck down. 


*5 The guidelines draw a distinction between “religious organi- 
zations” and “religious activities.” “Religious organizations” are 
student groups whose whole or primary purpose is to practice de- 
votion to an ultimate reality or deity; such groups are wholly 
barred from receiving SAF funds. “Religious activities,” on the 
other hand, are forms of conduct or behavior that cannot, com- 
mensurate with the guidelines, be subsidized with SAF monies. 
The result of the guidelines’ identification of these two categories, 
however, is the total proscription of SAF funding for all forms 
of religious endeavor by CiOs at the University. 


When the Student Council’s Appropriations Committee, and later 
the Student Activities Committee, informed Ronald W. Rosen- 
berger that Wide Awake Productions would not be the recipient of 
SAF funds, they referred to the publication of Wide Awake as a 
“religious activity.” It has not been suggested that the defendants 
rejected the funding request because Wide Awake Productions 
constitutes a “religious organization.” Hence we assume with the 
parties that the denial of funding rested on a determination that 
Wide Awake was “an activity .. . primarily promot[ing] or mani- 


t d 


22a 


Cc 


Having identified the constitutional character of 
plaintiffs’ first assignment of error, we proceed to see 
its resolution. 


The notion that, whenever a government benefit or priv- 
ilege might be withheld altogether, it may be i 
whatever conditions government chooses to impose, has 
been thoroughly repudiated by the Supreme Court since 
the middle of this century. See, e.g., Sherbert v. or 
374 U.S. 398, 405, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1794-1795, 10 —_ 
2d 965 (1963); Speiser v. Randall, 357 U.S. 513, = 
526, 78 S.Ct. 1332, 1338, 1342, 2 L.Ed.2d 1460 (1958); 
see also Laurence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law 
§ 11-5, at 781-84 (2d ed. 1988) (discussing elusive oe 
tinction between withholding a government subsidy for an : 
imposing a penalty upon exercise of a constitutiona 
right). Unconstitutional conditions, which make vo pl 
ment of a government benefit contingent on sacrifice O = 
independent constitutional right, are prima facie invalid. 
si if the government could deny a benefit to a person 

because of his constitutionally protected speech ines 
his exercise of th{at] freedom[] would in effect be 
penalized and inhibited. This would allow the gov- 
ernment to “produce a result which [it] could not 
command directly.” Such interference with constitu- 


tional rights is impermissible. 


y. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593, 597, 92 S.Ct. 2694, 
2697. 33 L.Ed.2d 570 (1972) (quoting Speiser, 357 US. 
at 526, 78 S.Ct. at 1342). Whether a condition is un- 
constitutional depends on whether the government ~s 
properly demand sacrifice of the particular right assert 
in the context of its exercise. FCC v. League of Women 
Voters, 468 U.S. 364, 380, 395, 104 S.Ct. 3106, 3117, 


3125, 82 L.Ed.2d 278 (1984). 


We must decide whether the guidelines’ prohibition 
against funding “religious activities” imposes an uncon- 


23a 


stitutional condition upon receipt of the government bene- 
fit inherent in an award of SAF monies by infringing the 
plaintiffs’ claimed First Amendment right to indulge reli- 
gious expression. This decision harbors a two-part in- 
quiry. First, we must determine whether the publication 
of Wide Awake constitutes “speech” protected by the 
Speech and Press Clause of the First Amendment. If we 
so decide, we then must ask whether the Rector and Visi- 
tors are imposing an unconstitutional condition upon the 
exercise of the plaintiffs’ protected speech; that is, we must 
determine whether the Rector and Visitors are demanding 
that the members of Wide Awake Productions cease pub- 
lishing religious speech in Wide Awake before they may 
become eligible * for an award of SAF funds. 


1. 


With respect to the first part of this inquiry, we easily 
conclude that the plaintiffs’ publication of religious speech 
in Wide Awake falls within the protective ambit of the 


26 The parties wrangle at considerable length over the question 
whether Wide Awake Productions ever was “eligible” for SAF 
funding at all. The plaintiffs contend that attainment of CIO 
status by Wide Awake Productions made the organization “eligible” 
to receive SAF monies. The Rector and Visitors argue that Wide 
Awake Productions never was “eligible” for funding because its 
central purpose—publication of Wide Awake—constituted a “re- 
ligious activity.” We need not address the merits of these opposing 
positions, because we reject forthwith the Rector and Visitors’ 
suggestion that they be given unlimited discretion to determine 
the “eligibility” of student groups for SAF funding to the extent 
such discretion derogates the provisions of the Bill of Rights. The 
duty of upholding (and therefore of not wounding indirectly) the 
Federal Constitution devolves upon the Rector and Visitors as 
a matter of law; as agents of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the 
Rector and Visitors are bound to observe the strictures of the 
First Amendment, and may not issue regulations transgressing 
its bounds. As we note elsewhere herein, once SAF funds are made 
available to student groups at the University, they must be dis- 
tributed in a viewpoint-neutral manner, absent the showing of a 
compelling state interest. 


24a 


Speech and Press Clause. There is no question that dis- 
cussions of religion are, as they long have been, a form 
of speech protected by the First Amendment. See, é.2., 
Heffron v. International Soc’y for Krishna Consciousness, 
Inc., 452 U.S. 640, 647, 101 S.Ct. 2559, 2563-2564, 
69 L.Ed.2d 298 (1981); Saia v. New York, 334 USS. 
558, 561-62, 68 S.Ct. 1148, 1150-51, 92 L.Ed. 1574 
(1948). Although the Rector and Visitors’ prohibition 
of SAF funding for “religious activities” is not directed 
exclusively at religious speech, the phrase “religious ac- 
tivitiy]” as defined in the guidelines necessarily encom- 
passes speech that “primarily promotes or manifests a 
particular belief[] in or about a deity or an ultimate 
reality.” The word “activity” is defined as “an occupa- 
tion, ‘pursuit, or recreation in which a person 1s active, 
Webster's Third New International Dictionary 22 (1976). 


There can be no doubt that the publication of a 
journal of religious expression is precisely such an occu- 
pation, pursuit, or recreation. 


2. 


Having answered the first prong of the inquiry affirma- 
tively, we address the second prong: Have the Rector 
and Visitors effectively demanded that the members of 
Wide Awake Productions cease publishing religious com- 
mentary in Wide Awake before they may become “eligi- 
ble” fer an award of SAF funds? We conclude that they 


have. 


The guidelines lay upon the Student Council an affirm- 
ative obligation not to fund religious activit[ies]. This ob- 
ligation means that religious expression, such as that in Wide 
Awake, is never allowed to compete for funds with other 
forms of speech that might be indulged by University 
students. Even if a student organization achieves CIO 
status, to the extent that its pursuits and functions consist 
of religious speech, the organization's funding requests 


25a 


will be summarily rejected by the Student Council. In 
effect, then, the Rector and Visitors’ restriction has oper- 
ated to erect a prior restraint on University subsidization 
of all forms of religious expression in which a CIO might 
engage. While we acknowledge that a CIO has no right 
to funding by the Rector and Visitors, see, e.¢., Lamb's 
Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free Sch. Dist., 
US. . , 113 S.Ct. 2141, 2146, 124 L.Ed.2d 
352 (1993), when funds are made available to CIOs 
generally, they must be distributed in a viewpoint-neutral 
manner, absent considerations of equal constitutional dig- 
nity. See Board of Educ. v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226, 248. 
110 S.Ct. 2356, 2370-71, 110 L.Ed.2d 191 (1990) 
(plurality opinion); Grand Rapids Sch. Dist. v. Ball, 473 
U.S. 373, 382, 105 S.Ct. 3216, 3221-22, 87 L.Ed.2d 
267 (1985); Roemer v. Board of Pub. Works, 426 US. 
736, 746, 96 S.Ct. 2337, 2344-45, 49 L.Ed.2d 179 
(1976) (plurality opinion); Everson v. Board of Educ.., 
330 U.S. 1, 18, 67 S.Ct. 504, 513, 91 L.Ed. 711 (1947). 
Although government need not subsidize exercise of a 
constitutional right, the lack of an affirmative duty of 
financial support does not mean that government may, 
in general, penalize exercise of constitutional rights by 
withholding from their possessors an otherwise discre- 
tionary benefit. 


We conclude that the Rector and Visitors’ erection 
of a prior restraint against University funding of such 
“religious activities” as the publication of religious ex- 
pression in Wide Awake constitutes precisely such a 
penalty, because it restrains Wide Awake Productions 
from gaining access altogether to a funding source gen- 
erally available to CIOs not engaged in religious expres- 
sion.” This prior restraint ultimately forces the members 


27 We do not address the guidelines’ prohibition of SAF funding 
for such organizations as fraternities and sororities or for such 
activities as social entertainment or philanthropic contributions. 
Those excluded categories are not at issue in the instant case. 
See supra note 2 and accompanying text. 


—— 


bi 


26a 


i Productions—unlike their non-sectarian 
co. er Ph seek financial sustenance for their 
speech from coffers outside the University. The Rector 
and Visitors’ funding proscription thus creates an un- 
even playing field on which the advantage is tilted to- 
wards CIOs engaged in wholly secular modes of expres- 


sion. 


We hold, therefore, that the Rector and Visitors wit 
conditioned the plaintiffs’ receipt of government bene- 
fits upon their foregoing constitutionally protected re- 


ligious expression. " 


chine and forbidding funding for speech that 
oa ~ definition of “religious activity,” but not for 
speech of other types, the SAF guidelines discriminate 
among speech on the basis of its content. oT 
Writers’ Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221, 229- “ 
107 S.Ct. 1722, 1727-28, 95 L.Ed.2d 06 egg 7k Pi 
order to justify differential treatment of wre igh ge ity 
based on the content of the speech involved, “the State 
must show that its regulation is necessary to serve a = 
pelling state interest and is narrowly drawn to ac _ 
that end.” Jd. at 231, 107 S.Ct. at 1729; see also non 
mar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 270, 102 S.Ct. 269, pia 
70 L.Ed.2d 440 (1981); Carey v. Brown, 447 +e ve 
461. 464-65, 100 S.Ct. 2286, 2990, 2292-93, 65 a po 
263 (1980): Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, : 
S.Ct. 2338, 2347-48, 33 L.Ed.2d 266 (1972). It is to 


this inquiry that we now turn. 
In defense of the guidelines’ prohibition, the Rector 


and Visitors claim a compelling interest in maintaining 
strict separation of church and state.“ They derive this 


d Visitors cite a 

28In defense of their position, the Rector an 
number of recent decisions by the a ag rape ng arama 
i levan e . 
tion, none of these cases are re > 

t length. For thoroug 
d we find it unnecessary to discuss them a 

an sake, however, we observe that Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 178, 


27a 


interest from the Establishment Clause of the First 
Amendment, which admonishes Congress ( and, through 
application of the Fourteenth Amendment, the states ~ 
to “make no law respecting an establishment of religion.” 
U.S. Const. amend. I, cl. 1. The Rector and Visitors 
argue that they cannot fund “religious activities” without 
violating the Establishment Clause. 


We agree with the Rector and Visitors that their inter- 
est as state officials in complying with federal constitu- 
tional obligations, including avoiding the creation of an 
“establishment” of religion at the University of Virginia, 
may be characterized as compelling. See Widmar, 454 


111 S.Ct. 1759, 114 L.Ed.2d 233 (1991), on which the Rector and 
Visitors lay great emphasis, did not involve the erection of a prior 
restraint on abortion counseling by recipents of family planning 
funds under Title X of the Public Health Service Act. 42 U.S.C. 
§§ 300 to 330a-6a. In Rust, regulations issued by the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services simply limited the ability of Title X 
fund recipients to engage in abortion-related expressive activities. 
Id. at , 111 S.Ct. at 1764. Although, like the SAF funding 
restrictions at issue here, the regulations broadly prohibited Title 
X projects from engaging in activities that “encourage[d], pro- 
mote[d] or advocate[d] abortion as a method of family planning,” 
id. at ——, 111 S.Ct. at 1765, there was no question that the re- 
cipients were recipients-that is, that they already had received 
Title X funding. In his opinion for the Court, Chief Justice Rehn- 
quist emphasized this distinction: 


Petitioners’ reliance on [the Court’s “unconstitutional condi- 
tions” cases] is unavailing . . . because here the government 
is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply in- 
sisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which 
they were authorized. 


Id. at ——, 111 S.Ct. at 1774. Thus, the issue in Rust was not— 
as here—whether the recipients could obtain access to government 
benefits. It was, instead, whether the government could be allowed 
to dictate the use to which already-allocated funds could be dedi- 
caated. 


29 F.g., Everson v. Board of Educ., 330 U.S. 1, 15-16, 67 S.Ct. 
504, 511-512, 91 L.Ed. 711 (1947). 


28a 


U.S. at 271, 102 S.Ct. at 275. It does not follow, how- 
ever, that offering Wide Awake Productions an equal 
opportunity to compete for SAF funds necessarily. would 
be incompatible with the Establishment Clause. /d. 


That government largesse ultimately should redound 
to the benefit of persons engaged in promoting religion 
does not necessarily entail violation of the Establishment 
Clause. If such were the case, “a church could not be 
protected by the police and fire departments, or have its 
public sidewalk kept in repair.” Id. at 274-75, 102 S.Ct. 
at 277. Moreover, such an extreme position is plainly 
contrary to many of the Supreme Court’s decisions up- 
holding government aid to parochial elementary and sec- 
ondary schools. See, e.g., Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills 
Sch. Dist., US. . - , 113 S.Ct. 2462, 
2466-67, 125 L.Ed.2d 1 (1993) (summarizing the 
Court’s Establishment Clause jurisprudence with respect 
to government aid to parochial schools). 


To test the Rector and Visitors’ Establishment Clause 
justification for the guidelines’ funding policy, then, we 
must consider whether awarding SAF monies to the 
members of Wide Awake Productions to defray the pub- 
lication costs of Wide Awake would constitute an “estab- 
lishment of religion” at the University of Virginia. In 
making this determination, we seek enlightenment in the 
Supreme Court’s Establishment Clause jurisprudence. 
That jurisprudence holds that a governmental policy will 
not offend the Establishment Clause if it can pass consti- 
tutional muster under the three-pronged test of Lemon v. 
Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 91 S.Ct. 2105, 29 L.Ed.2d 
745 (1971), which guides “[t]he general nature of our 
inquiry in this area,” Mueller v. Allen, 463 U.S. 388, 
394, 103 S.Ct. 3062, 3066, 77 L.Ed.2d 721 (1983): 


First, the [governmental policy] must have a secular 
legislative purpose; second, its principal or primary 
effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits 


29a 


religion . . .5 finally, the [policy] must not foster an 
excessive government entanglement with religion. 


Lemon, 403 U.S. at 612-13, 91 S.Ct. at 2111-12.” 


In the paragraphs that follow, we consider the Rector 
and Visitors’ Establishment Clause justification for pro- 


%° As we are well-aware, the Supreme Court’s applications of 
Lemon have been characterized by fine distinctions, and have 
aroused considerable controversy among the Justices themselves 
even to the point of frequent suggestion in non-majority opinions 
that Lemon be abandoned. We note, for example, Justice Scalia’s 
recent denunciation of Lemon: 


Like some ghoul in a late-night horror movie that repeatedly 
sits up in its grave and shuffles abroad, after being repeatedly 
killed and buried, Lemon stalks our Establishment Clause ju- 
risprudence once again, frightening the little children... . 


Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free Sch. Dist., ——— 
U.S. . - , 113 S.Ct. 2141, 2149-50, 124 L.Ed.2d 352 
(Scalia, J., dissenting, joined by Kennedy, J.) ; see also e.g., Wal- 
lace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 68-69, 105 S.Ct. 2479, 2495-2497 86 
L.Ed.2d 29 (1985) (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (aree- 
ing that “the standards announced in Lemon should be reexamined 
and refined in order to make them more useful in achieving the 
underlying purpose of the First Amendment”): id. at 91. 105 
S.Ct. at 2508 (White, J., dissenting) (urging “basic reconsider 
ation of our precedents” surrounding the Establishment Clause) : 
id. at 110, 105 S.Ct. at 2517 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (stating 
that the “Lemon test has no. . . grounding in the history of the 
First Amendment” and “has simply not provided adequate stand- 
ards for deciding Establishment Clause cases”). 


Nevertheless, “Lemon, however frightening it might be to some 
has not been overruled.” Lamb’s Chapel, —— U.S. at n. q, 
113 S.Ct. at 2148 n. 7. We are bound to follow the decisions of the 
Supreme Court, not the pronouncements of a single Justice or even 
of a pair of Justices in dissent. As Justice Powell has stated, 

the three-pronged Lemon test .. . is the only coherent [Estab- 

lishment Clause] test a majority of the Court has ever adopted. 

. . . Lemon has never been overruled or its test modified. 
Jaffree, 472 U.S. at 64, 105 S.Ct. at 2494 (Powell, J., concurring) 
(footnote and citations omitted). For purposes of the Establish- 
ment Clause question presented here, therefore, we are bound to 
consider Lemon governing precedent. 


30a 


hibiting SAF funding of “religious activities” in light of 


Lemon: 


31 We reject the plaintiffs’ contention that the Supreme Court’s 
decision in Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock, 489 U.S. 1, 109 S.Ct. 
890, 108 L.Ed.2d 1 (1989) (plurality opinion), controls our analysis 
of the Establishment Clause issue presented by this case, and, 
obviates the need to examine the guidelines’ restrictions in light of 
Lemon v. Kurtzman. Texas Monthly involved a state sales tax 
exemption for “[plJeriodicals that are published or distributed by 
a religious faith and that consist wholly of writings sacred to a 
religious faith.” Texas Monthly, 489 U.S. at 5, 109 S.Ct. at 894. 
The Court held that the exemption was insufficiently broad—that 
is, that it did not reach an adequately wide class of publications— 
to pass Establishment Clause scrutiny. 


If Texas Monthly has application in the instant case, it is only 
as an extra pillar for our initial, but not dispositive, holding that 
the SAF guidelines’ “religious activit[y]” prohibition has erected 
a presumptively unconstitutional prior restraint on the receipt of 
a government benefit. In his opinion for a three-Justice plurality, 
Justice Brennan stated: 


[Wlhen government directs a subsidy exclusively to religious 
organizations that is not required by the Free Exercise Clause 
and that either burdens nonbeneficiaries markedly or cannot 
reasonably be seen as removing a significant state-imposed 
deterrent to free exercise of religion . . ., it “provide[s] un- 
justifiable awards of assistance to religious organizations” and 
cannot but “conve[y] a message of endorsement” to slighted 
members of the community. This is particularly clear where, 
as here, the subsidy is targeted at writings that promulgate 
the teachings of religious faiths. 


Id. at 15, 109 S.Ct. at 899 (quoting Corporation of Presiding 
Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos, 
483 U.S. 327, 348, 107 S.Ct. 2862, 2874-75, 97 L.Ed.2d 273 (1987) 
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment)). As we explain below, 
an award of SAF funds to defray publication costs of Wide Awake 
would “convey a message of endorsement” of Christianity to non- 
Christian members of the University of Virginia community. 
“This is particularly clear,” id., because, as we observe such a sub- 
sidy would be targeted at a publication whose purpose is “to 
encourage students to consider what a personal relationship with 
Jesus Christ means,” Wide Awake, Nov.-Dec. 1990, at 2—a goal 
plainly contemplating the “promulgat[ion]” of Christion teachings. 


That Texas Monthly supports one wing of our analysis does not, 
however, release us from the obligation of testing the Rector and 


3la 


l. 


Lemon’s first prong focuses on the “purpose that ani- 
mated” the Rector and Visitors’ adoption of the SAF 
funding guidelines, Edwards v. Aguillard, 482 U.S. 578, 
585, 107 S.Ct. 2573, 2578, 96 L.Ed.2d 510 (1987), 
and asks whether that purpose was secular. 


The obvious point of departure for analyzing the pur- 
pose of the guidelines is the Rector and Visitors’ com- 
ments at the time of their adoption. Although the guide- 
lines are the result of largely undocumented deliberations 
by the Rector and Visitors, and thus cannot be said to 
possess a “legislative history” as that term usually is un- 
derstood, they do contain a “Student Activity Fee State- 


ment of Purpose” relevant to our deliberations. This 
statement reads: 


The purpose of the student activity fee is to pro- 
vide financial support for student organizations that 
are related to the educational purpose of the Uni- 
versity of Virginia. As a required student fee, the 
monies collected by the University for funding stu- 
dent activities are public funds which must be ad- 
ministered in a manner consistent with the educa- 


tional purpose of the University as well as with state 
and federal law. 


The funding guidelines themselves, which immediately 
follow the “Student Activity Fee Statement of Purpose” 
and are part of the same document, were adopted by the 
Rector and Visitors in an attempt to give practical effect 
to the SAF’s goal of providing financial support for stu- 


Visitors’ asserted state interest in complying with the Establish- 
ment Clause. Indeed, Justice Brennan’s opinion addressed Texas’s 
Establishment Clause defense of its sales tax exemption by holding 
that the exemption lacked sufficient breadth to pass scrutiny under 
Lemon. See Texas Monthly, 489 U.S. at 8-17, 109 S.Ct. at 895-901. 
Because this case involves a direct governmental subsidy of re- 
ligious expression rather than a mere exemption from the pay- 
ment of duties, it is not directly on point with Texas Monthly. 


32a 


dent organizations related to the University’s educational 
purpose. In the third section of the guidelines, titled 
“Student Expenditures and Activities Not Eligible for 
Funding,” the Rector and Visitors proscribed funding of 
“religious activities” on the ground that such activities 
“do not relate to the educational purpose of the Uni- 
versity.” 


These statements make clear that the Rector and Visi- 
tors’ aim in denying SAF funding to “religious activities” 
was to comply with the University of Virginia’s educa- 
tional function—a facially secular legislative purpose.” 
Because religion is taught and studied as a subject of 
formal academic inquiry at the University, however, the 
plaintiffs contend that religious expression forms part of 
the institution’s educational “purpose.” They argue, there- 
fore, that the University, already having admitted re- 
ligious discussion formally into the academic curriculum, 
can have no stake in depriving such discussion of access 
to its coffers, even if the source of the discussion is a 
student organization. 


We disagree. That religion is studied at the University 
does not mean that offering SAF funding to Wide Awake 
would promote the essentially secular “educational pur- 
pose” of the institution, or that such funding necessarily 
would not threaten the Establishment Clause. Since its 
founding ty Thomas Jefferson in the second decade of 
the nineteenth century, the University’s educational pur- 
pose has included teaching and scholarship on a wide 
array of subjects,” including the organized study of re- 


32 Cf., e.g., Bowen v. Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589, 602-04, 108 S.Ct. 
2562, 2570-72, 101 L.Ed.2d 520 (1988) (looking to “the face” of the 
Adolescent Family Life Act to determine whether federal grants 
in the area of premarital adolescent sexual relations and preg- 
nancy authorized by the Act violate the Establishment Clause). 


33 The Code of Virginia sets forth the “branches of learning 
to be taught” at the University as follows: 


[T]he Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, Spanish, Italian, Ger- 
man, and Anglo-Saxon languages; the different branches of 


33a 


ligious systems. As the plaintiffs note, while serving as 
Rector of the University Jefferson explained that no pro- 
fessorship of divinity had been established “in conformity 
with the principles of [the] constitution, which place all 
sects of religion on an equal footing,” but that arrange- 
ments would be made to allow various denominations to 
establish schools “on the confines of the University” and 
to allow them access to University facilities. 19 The 
Writings of Thomas Jefferson 408 (A. Bergh ed., 1905) 
(report to University Visitors dated Oct. 7, 1822). That 
such “schools” were incorporated into the University’s 
intellectual and academic life does not prevent the Rector 
and Visitors from employing funding restrictions to ad- 
vance the “secular purpose” of avoiding an establishment 
of religion at the institution. 


As we see it, it is clear from the SAF’s statement of 
purpose that the funding guidelines were motivated pri- 
marily, if not entirely, by a legitimate secular purpose— 
the advancement of the University of Virginia’s educa- 
tional mission. We do not question the propriety of, nor 
the secular motivation for, the Rector and Visitors’ in- 
terest in preserving University funds for the institution’s 
educational mission. The Rector and Visitors do not 
dispute that, on the whole, religious concerns were not 
the sole motivation behind the guidelines. See Lynch 
v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 680, 104 S.Ct. 1355, 1362, 
79 L.Ed.2d 604 (1984). The record gives us no reason 
to doubt that the Rector and Visitors’ expressed purposes 
are “sincere and not a sham.” Jd. at 687, 104 S.Ct. at 
1366. Therefore, we hold that the guidelines’ proscrip- 
tion against funding of “religious activit[ies]” is not mo- 


mathematics, pure and physical; natural philosophy, chemistry, 
mineralogy, including geology; the principles of agriculture; 
botany, anatomy, surgery and medicine; zoology, history and 
ideology, general grammar, ethics, rhetoric, and belles lettres; 
civil government, political economy, the law of nature and of 
nations and municipal law. 


Va.Code Ann. § 23-63 (1985 & Supp.1992). 


34a 


tivated wholly by an impermissible purpose, and does 
not offend the Establishment Clause. 


2. 


As is usual in Establishment Clause cases, see, eé.g., 
Grand Rapids School Dist. v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373, 383- 
98, 105 S.Ct. 3216, 3222-30, 87 L.Ed.2d 267 (1985), 
the more subtle question is whether the primary effect 
of the guidelines restrictions is to inhibit or advance re- 
ligion. See Lemon, 403 U.S. at 613, 91 S.Ct. at 2111. 


Although we concluded above that the prohibition 
against funding “religious activities” denies religious 
speech the same access to the SAF accorded secular 
speech, and thus violates the Speech and Press Clause, 
whether “religion” is thereby inhibited or advanced is a 
different matter. The Rector and Visitors have not at- 
tempted to ban the publication of Wide Awake; indeed, 
they have supported its religious mission by allowing the 
members of Wide Awake Productions access to University 
meeting and printing facilities equal to that afforded all 
other CIOs. The University permits the plaintiffs to dis- 
tribute Wide Awake on its grounds without limitation. 


Notwithstanding its refusal to subsidize the journal di- 
rectly, the University’s sustenance of religion in these in- 
cidental respects does not, in our view, inhibit religion. 
The University’s policy of allowing the members of Wide 
Awake Productions open access to campus facilities ac- 
cords the plaintiffs ample opportunity to express their 
religious views, and leaves the University community as a 
whole free to read and consider them. The Rector and 
Visitors’ funding policy simply declines to take the addi- 
tional step of actively subscribing University funds to 
Wide Awake’s particular religious perspective. Under 
such circumstances as these, we are unpersuaded that the 
primary effect of the guidelines restrictions, involving as 
they do only the direct allocation of public monies, would 
be to inhibit religion. 


arnt) Pee 


) 
: 
\ 
: 


35a 


On the other hand, it would be difficult to view award- 
ing SAF monies to Wide Awake as anything but state 
sponsorship—and therefore advancement—of religious be- 
lief. As the Constitution of Wide Awake Productions at- 
tests, Wide Awake strives to challenge Christians to live 
according to the faith they espouse, and to encourage 
students at the University to consider “what a personal 
relationship with Jesus Christ means.” Wide Awake, Nov.- 
Dec. 1990, at 2. The journal’s contents—some of which 
are aimed at proselytizing non-Christians—have pursued 
these goals indefatigably throughout the three issues of 
Wide Awake represented in the record. Using public 
funds to support a publication so clearly engaged in the 
propagation of particular religious doctrines would con- 
stitute a patent Establishment Clause violation. In the 
words of Justice Powell: 


Aid normally may be thought to have a primary 
effect of advancing religion when it flows to an in- 
stitution in which religion is so pervasive that a 
substantial portion of its functions are subsumed in 
the religious mission or when it funds a specifically 


religious activity in an otherwise substantially secular 
setting. 


Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. 734, 743, 93 §.Ct. 2868, 2874, 
37 L.Ed.2d 923 (1973) (emphasis added). Here, then. 
we hold that the primary effect of an SAF subsidy of 
Wide Awake’s publication costs would be to advance 
religion. 


3. 


It is the third of the three Lemon criteria—whether the 
guidelines’ prohibition of funding for “religious activities” 
fosters an excessive government entanglement with re- 
ligion—that is most plainly implicated by this case. 
Lemon, 403 U.S. at 613, 91 S.Ct. at 2111. The con- 
stitutional prohibition against excessive church-state en- 
tanglement reflects James Madison’s concern that secular 
and religious authorities must not interfere with each 


36a 


other’s respective spheres of choice and influence. See 
Ill Jonathan Elliott, Debates on the Federal Constitution 
431-32, 729-31 (1891) (remarks of James Madison); 
lilinois ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Educ., 333 US. 
203, 212, 68 S.Ct. 461, 465-66, 92 L.Ed. 649 (1948) .* 
The entanglement principle thus stems ultimately from 
fears, originally propounded by the First Amendment’s 
principal framer, that church-state entanglement might 
Strain the political system, compromise liberty of con- 
science, and, ultimately, “destroy government and down- 
grade religion.” Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421, 431, 82 
S.Ct. 1261, 1267, 8 L.Ed.2d 601 (1961); Laurence 
H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 14-11, at 1226 
(2d ed. 1988) (summarizing the import of church-state 
entanglement). 


The indirect and incidental conferral of a government 
benefit to religious institutions has never been thought a 
sufficient defect to warrant the invalidation of a state 
policy. Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills Sch. Dist., 
US. ‘ - , 113 S.Ct. 2462, 2466-69, 125 
L.Ed.2d 1 (1993); Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 
274-75, 102 S.Ct. 269, 276-77, 70 L.Ed.2d 440 (1981); 
Committee for Public Educ. & Religious Liberty v. Ny- 
quist, 413 U.S. 756, 775, 93 S.Ct. 2955, 2966, 37 L.Ed. 
2d 948 (1973). Indeed, the Supreme Court has sanc- 
tioned awards of direct non-monetary benefits to religious 
groups where government has created open fora to which 
all similarly situated organizations are invited. In Wid- 
mar, for example, the Court held that a state university 
which makes its facilities available to registered student 
groups may not deny equal access to a registered student 
group desiring to use those facilities for religious worship 


%4 But see Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 98-99, 105 S.Ct. 2479, 
2511-2512, 86 L.Ed.2d 29 (1985) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (urg- 
ing that Madison did not attempt to translate Jefferson’s Virginia 
Statute for Religious Freedom into the religion clauses of the 
First Amendment, and criticizing earlier Supreme Court decisions 
for adopting this view). 


a a EO Crh been 


37a 


or discussion. 454 U.S. at 277, 102 S.Ct. at 278. Thus, 
although religious groups may directly benefit from ac- 
cess to university facilities, a state university may not 
discriminate against them based on the content of their 
speech. 


Direct monetary subsidization of religious organizations 
and projects, however, is a beast of an entirely different 
color. A proper respect for the Establishment Clause 
compels the Rector and Visitors to pursue a course of 
“neutrality” toward religion. Yet providing SAF monies 
to defray the publication costs of Wide Awake inevitably 
would advance Wide Awake’s Christian mission: “to en- 
courage students to consider what a personal relationship 
with Jesus Christ means.” Wide Awake, Nov.-Dec. 1990. 
at 2. The potentially divisive political effect of such fund- 
ing is a factor of recurring significance in the Supreme 
Court’s jurisprudence surrounding Lemon’s “excessive en- 
tanglement” prong. As Justice Black emphasized in Ever- 
son v. Board of Education, 330 U.S. 1, 67 S.Ct. 504. 91 
L.Ed. 711 (1947), competition among religious sects for 
political and religious supremacy has occasioned consider- 
able civil strife throughout history, “generated in large 
part” by competing efforts to gain or maintain the sup- 
port of government. Id. at 8-9, 67 S.Ct. at 507-509. As 
we see it, the “potential for political divisiveness related to 
religious belief and practice” would be aggravated if the 
University were to fund the publication of Wide Awake. 
The possibility of a continuing annual appropriation for 
the benefit of a single religion carries the potential for 
seriously divisive political consequences at the University 
of Virginia. The prospect of such divisiveness, as Jus- 
tice Powell has admonished, is a “warning signal” the 
Rector and Visitors would ignore at their, and the Uni- 
er peril. Nyquist, 413 U.S. at 798, 93 S.Ct. at 

78. 


Because Wide Awake is a journal pervasively devoted 
to the discussion and advancement of an avowedly Chris- 
tian theological and personal philosophy, for the Univer- 


38a 


sity to subsidize its publication would, we believe, send 
an unmistakably clear signal that the University of Vir- 
ginia supports Christian values and wishes to promote the 
wide promulgation of such values. Since offering SAF 
funds to the members of Wide Awake Productions would 
excessively entangle the University of Virginia with the 
propagation of the Christian religion, we hold that the 
Rector and Visitors have proved the existence of a com- 
pelling state interest in complying with the Establish- 
ment Clause. This compelling interest justifies the Rector 
and Visitors’ decision to promulgate guidelines excluding 
the membership of Wide Awake Productions from ac- 


cess to SAF monies. 
E 


It remains for us to consider whether the funding guide- 
lines’ proscription against “religious activities” is suffi- 
ciently circumscribed to survive the strictest judicial scru- 
tiny. 


The Supreme Court has held that a government policy 
is “narrowly tailored” if it “targets and eliminates no 
more than the exact source of the ‘evil’ it seeks to rem- 
edy.” Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 485, 108 S.Ct. 
2495, 2503, 101 L.Ed.2d 420 (1988). If the guidelines’ 
“religious activities” proscription had a substantial dele- 
terious effect on the ability of student organizations to 
engage in meaningful religious expression, the plaintiffs’ 
contention that the proscription is not narrowly tailored 
might carry considerable force. Yet it is difficult for us 
to conceive how the Rector and Visitors may avoid of- 
fending the Establishment Clause without extending the 
prohibition on SAF funding to all “religious activities.” 
Because the First Amendment forbids government to 
promulgate policies “respecting an establishment of re- 
ligion,” government is left no choice but to foreswear fi- 
nancial support of the myriad forms of religious endeavor 
in which a student organization might engage. Hence, 
we believe that the guidelines’ declaration that student 
organizations involved in “religious activities” as that 


a 


39a 


phrase is defined * is not “substantially broader than nec- 
essary” to achieve the Rector and Visitors’ legitimate con- 
stitutional ends, City Council v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 
466 U.S. 789, 808, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 2130, 80 L.Ed.2d 
772 (1984), and thus satisfies the requirement of narrow 
tailoring. 

F 


In summary, we conclude that the Rector and Visitors’ 
refusal to permit funding of “religious activities” places 
a presumptively unconstitutional condition upon access to 
government benefits in violation of the Free Speech and 
Press Clause of the First Amendment. We further con- 
clude, however, that the Rector and Visitors have shown 
the existence of a compelling state interest in (1) fore- 
going funding awards that would have the primary effect 
of advancing religion at the University of Virginia, and 
(2) preserving the University of Virginia from an ex- 
cessive entanglement with religion. Finally, the Rector and 
Visitors’ restriction against funding “religious activities” 
is narrowly tailored to achieve this compelling state inter- 
est. Having survived the strictest judicial scrutiny, the 
funding restriction cannot be labelled constitutionally in- 
valid under the Speech and Press Clause. 


IV 


The district court rejected the plaintiffs’ contention that 
the guidelines’ proscription of funding for “religious ac- 
tivities” violates the Free Speech and Press Clause by ex- 
cluding them from the “limited public forum” represented 
by the SAF. After careful and reasoned consideration of 
the governing precedents, see Cornelius v. NAACP Legal 
Defense & Educ. Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 797. 105 
S.Ct. 3439, 3446, 87 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985): Perry Educ. 
Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass’n, 460 US. 37, 44, 
103 S.Ct. 948, 954, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983), the court 
concluded that the Rector and Visitors’ Systematic, pur- 


35 See supra note 2. 


40a 


poseful exclusion of certain student groups from access to 
SAF funds indicated that the Rector and Visitors intended 
the SAF to be a nonpublic forum. See Rosenberger v. 
Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 795 F.Supp. 175, 
178-81 (W.D.Va.1992) (mem.) 


We agree that the Rector and Visitors have not created 
a limited public forum by awarding SAF funds only to 
those student organizations which, in the view of Univer- 
sity authorities, advance the institution’s essentially secular 
educational mission although we do so for a different rea- 
son. As laid out in part III, supra, we believe that the 
proper analysis of this case lies under the line of author- 
ity dealing with content-based discrimination relating to 
government-generated benefits or burdens. The long line 
of public forum cases have taken “forum” in a fairly 
literalistic way involving physical space, and we do not 
see how it advances the jurisprudence to wrench that 
word out of its accepted form to encompass this type of 
case already subject to First Amendment scrutiny. 


Vv 


We finally turn to the plaintiffs’ contention that the 
guidelines’ prohibition against funding of “religious ac- 
tivities” discriminates against them in contravention of the 
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment 
(1) by denying them benefits which other CIOs engaged 
in religious speech and activities have received, and (2) 
because the restrictions serve no compelling state interest, 
and are not narrowly tailored to satisfy whatever interest 
the Rector and Visitors may have in denying funding to 
“religious activit[ies].” 

A 


The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment provides that no state shall “deny to any person 
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” 
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1, cl. 4. The plaintiffs con- 
tend that the Rector and Visitors have infringed their 


4la 


rights under the Equal Protection Clause by awarding 
SAF monies to the Muslim Students Association, the Jew- 
ish Law Students Association, and the C.S. Lewis Society 
while denying funding to Wide Awake Productions. 


To establish an equal protection violation, a plaintiff 
must show discriminatory intent as well as disparate effect. 
See Crawford v. Board of Educ., 458 U.S. 527, 544, 102 
S.Ct. 3211, 3221, 73 L.Ed.2d 948 (1982): Arlington 
Heights v. Metropolitan Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 
265, 97 S.Ct. 555, 563, 50 L.Ed.2d 450 (1977): Wash- 
ington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239, 96 S.Ct. 2040, 2047. 
48 L.Ed.2d 597 (1976); Irby v. Virginia State Bd. of 
Elections, 889 F.2d 1352, 1355 (4th Cir.1989), cert. 
denied, 496 U.S. 906, 110 S.Ct. 2589, 110 L.Ed.2d 270 
(1990). Upon careful review of the summary judgment 
record, the district court found no evidence to indicate 
that the University’s denial of SAF funding to Wide 
Awake Productions was the product of discriminatory in- 
tent. Because this finding is not contested by the plain- 
tiffs on appeal, we are constrained to hold that the dis- 
trict court’s factual findings on the point are not tainted 
with clear error. Moreover, the plaintiffs’ failure to argue 
the existence of discriminatory intent as a matter of law 
on appeal deprives us of jurisdiction to consider the merits 
of their equal protection claim, and compels us to affirm 
the district court’s decision to grant summary judgment 
in favor of the Rector and Visitors. 


B 


For the reasons stated in part III, supra, we already 
have held that the Rector and Visitors’ refusal to fund 
“religious activities” serves the compelling state interest 
of preserving the University of Virginia from an exces- 
sive entanglement with religion, and is narrowly tailored 
to achieve that interest. We therefore need not consider 
this question again for purposes of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment. The Rector and Visitors’ stake in avoiding an ex- 


A2a 


cessive entanglement with religion is equally strong in all 
constitutional contexts, including that of the Equal Pro- 
tection Clause, if, as we hold, no prima facie violation of 
the plaintiffs’ equal protection rights exists. This assign- 
ment of error therefore warrants no further discussion. 


VI 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is hereby 


AFFIRMED. 


43a 
APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
W.D. VIRGINIA 
CHARLOTTESVILLE DIVISION 


Civ. A. No. 91-0036-C 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, aS a member of 
Wide Awake Productions, et al., 
. Plaintiffs, 
THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 
Defendants. 


May 20, 1992 


MEMORANDUM OPINION 


MICHAEL, District Judge. 


In this case, the court is asked to resolve the difficult 
question of whether a “student activities fund,” comprised 
of mandatory student fees, constitutes a limited public 
forum. For the reasons set forth below, the court con- 
cludes that the answer to this riddle is “no.” 


I. 


In September of 1990, plaintiff Ronald W. Rosen- 
berger, an undergraduate student at the University of 
Virginia (the University), joined with other University 
students to form Wide Awake Productions (WAP). WAP 
is an unincorporated association officially recognized by 


44a 


the University as a Contracted Independent Organiza- 
tion (CIO). This recognition is given to all student or- 
ganizations which execute an annual agreement with the 
University and meet certain minimal requirements.’ The 
benefit of becoming a CIO is that such organizations are 
given access to University facilities; i.e. meeting rooms, 
computer terminals, etc. 


WAP publishes Wide Awake Magazine (Wide Awake), 
a non-profit journal written, edited and published by 
the student members of WAP. Mr. Rosenberger serves 
as the magazine’s publisher, while other named plaintiffs 
include members of the management and editorial staff. 
To date, three issues of Wide Awake have been pub- 
lished, with approximately 5,000 copies of each issue 
distributed free of charge to students on the University 


campus. 


In January of 1991, WAP submitted an application 
for funding from the University in the amount of 
$5,862.00 to offset the cost of publishing its magazine. 
Specifically, WAP sought funding from monies deposited 
in the University’s Student Activities Fund (SAF). The 
SAF is funded by a mandatory student activities fee col- 
lected from every full-time student at the University. The 
activity fee is designed to provide financial support for 
student organizations related to the educational purposes 
of the University. 


The defendants in this action, the Rector and Board 
of Visitors of the University (the Board)? have ultimate 


1 There are four general criteria for CIO status: (1) at least 
fifty-one percent of the group’s members must be students; (2) 
the group’s officers must all be full-time, fee-paying students; 
(3) the group must keep an updated copy of its constitution on 
file with the University; and (4) the group must sign an anti- 
discrimination disclaimer. 


2 The individual Board members and Mr. Robert Stump, Asso- 
ciate Dean of Students, are named defendants and are being sued 


in their official capacities. 


». 


45a 


responsibility for the operation of the SAF. The Board 
has delegated the responsibility of allocating SAF funds 
to the University’s Student Council. The Student Council 
disburses SAF funds to those CIOs deemed eligible for 
funding as determined by Guidelines issued by the Board. 
These Guidelines prohibit several categories of student 
organizations from obtaining SAF funds. Ineligible 
groups include fraternities and sororities, political and 
religious organizations, and those groups whose member- 
ship is exclusionary in nature. Further, the following 
expenditures and activities are also excluded by the 
Guidelines: (1) honoraria or similar fees; (2) religious 
activities; (3) social entertainment or related expenses; 
(4) philanthropic contributions and activities; and (5) 
political activities. 


A CIO seeking SAF monies must first submit a re- 
quest for funding to the Student Council Appropriations 
Committee, a subcommittee of the full Student Council, 
As noted earlier, WAP made its first and only request for 
funding in January of 1991. The Chairman of the Stu- 
dent Council denied the funding request because the 
Appropriations Committee determined that publication 
of Wide Awake constituted a “religious activity.” * WAP 
appealed this decision to the full Student Council, which 
affirmed the Appropriation Committee’s denial of funding. 
WAP pursued all internal means of appeal before filing 
suit in this court on July 11, 1991. The plaintiffs allege 
that the denial of SAF benefits violates their rights to 
freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of associa- 
tion, free exercise of religion, and equal protection of the 
laws in violation of the United States Constitution, the 


%Mr. Rosenberger admits that Wide Awake is written from a 
“religious perspective.” Further, Article 1 of WAP’s constitution 
states that the purpose of the organization is to: (1) publish a 
magazine of philosophical and religious expressions; (2) facilitate 
discussion which fosters an atmosphere of sensitivity to and toler- 
ance of Christian viewpoints; and (3) provide a unifying focus 
for Christians of multicultural backgrounds. 


46a 


Virginia Constitution, and the Virginia Act for Religious 
Freedom. Plaintiffs have also set forth a cause of action 
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 1983. 


On November 12, 1991, the plaintiffs filed a motion 
for summary judgment, asking this court for a declaratory 
judgment that the defendants had indeed violated the 
plaintiff's [sic] constitutional rights. The defendants filed a 
cross motion for summary judgment and both sides ap- 
peared before this court for oral argument on these mo- 
tions. Both sides agree, with minor exceptions addressed 
herein, that there are no genuine issues of material fact 
in conflict. Thus, this matter is ripe for disposition.‘ 


II. The Freedom of Speech Claims 


The preliminary question for this court to resolve is 
whether the University’s SAF qualifies as a “limited pub- 
lic forum” as the plaintiffs assert, or whether the SAF 
is in fact a “non-public” forum, as the defendants argue. 
This determination is crucial as it dictates the degree of 
scrutiny to be used by this court in reviewing the Board 
of Visitor Guidelines.® See Perry Educ. Assn. v. Perry 
Local Educators’ Assn., 460 U.S. 37, 44, 103 S.Ct. 948, 
954. 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983) (“The existence of a right 
of access to public property and the standard by which 
limitations upon such a right must be evaluated differ 
depending on the character of the property at issue.”) 


*The defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the plaintiffs’ 
claim for damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 on the grounds that 
such a claim is precluded by the Eleventh Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. The court need not address this issue as it 
has determined inat all of the plaintiffs’ claims must fail, as a 
matter of law. 


5 The plaintiffs have launched a general assault on the propriety 
of certain exclusion in the Guidelines; i.e. those prohibiting the 
funding of religious organizations and activities. Alternatively, 
the plaintiffs set forth an equal protection claim by arguing that 
the Guidelines have not been applied in an even-handed manner. 
The court will address the equal protection issue in part IV of 
this opinion. 


47a 


See also Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educa- 
tional Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 797, 105 S.Ct. 3439, 
3446, 87 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985) (“the extent to which 
the Government may limit access [to a forum] depends 
on whether the forum is public or nonpublic.”) 


The phrase “limited public forum” describes one of 
three categories of fora identified by the Supreme Court 
in Perry, supra. A limited public forum is property 
“which the State has opened for use by the public even 
if it was not required to create the forum in the first 
place.” Perry, 460 U.S. at 45, 103 S.Ct. at 955 citing 
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 102 S.Ct. 269. 70 
L.Ed.2d 440 (1981). A state may only restrict access 
to limited public fora if such a restriction is narrowly 
drawn to effectuate a compelling state interest. Perry, 
460 U.S. at 46, 103 S.Ct. at 955. A different category 
of property consists of public property which is not “by 
tradition or designation a forum for public communica- 
tion.” Jd. Not surprisingly, this type of property is 
labeled “nonpublic.” Access to such a forum can be 
limited by restrictions which are “ ‘reasonable and [are] 
not an effort to suppress expression merely because the 
public officials oppose the speaker’s view.’” Cornelius, 
473 U.S. at 800, 105 S.Ct. at 3448 quoting Perry, 460 
U.S. at 46, 103 S.Ct. at 955. 


It should be apparent from the preceding discussion 
that the label affixed to the University’s SAF (either lim- 
ited public forum or nonpublic forum) will have a rather 
profound impact on whether the Board’s Guidelines will 
be upheld by this court. The plaintiffs rely heavily on 
Gay and Lesbian Students Assn. v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 
(8th Cir.1988) for the proposition that “compulsory stu- 
dent activities fees” constitute a limited public forum. 
In Gohn, the Gay and Lesbian Students Association 
(GLSA) at the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville 
challenged the decision of the Student Senate denying 


* The plaintiffs do not argue that the SAF is a traditional public 
forum. 


48a 


funding to the group. The money was to be paid out of 
funds from “tuition, state tax money, and general fees 
collected from students.” Jd. at 361. In finding that the 
denial of funding violated GLSA’s First Amendment 
rights, the court stated: 


we hold that a public body that chooses to fund 
speech or expression must do so even-handedly, with- 
out discriminating among recipients on the basis of 
their ideology. The University need not supply funds 
to student organizations; but once having decided 
to do so, it is bound by the First Amendment to act 
without regard to the content of the ideas being 
expressed. 


Id. at 362. 


This court does not read Gohn at holding that a stu- 
dent activities fund is a limited public forum. Gohn 
merely stands for the proposition that “content-based dis- 
crimination can be justified only if the government dem- 
onstrates that its regulation is narrowly drawn and is nec- 
essary to effectuate compelling state interests.” Jd. at 367 
citing Widmar, 454 U.S. at 270, 102 S.Ct. at 274. The 
plaintiffs read this citation to Widmar and the mention of 
a “compelling state interest” as a signal that the Eighth 
Circuit considered the student activity fee as creating a 
limited public forum, thus requiring the use of a height- 
ened level of scrutiny. This reading of Gohn stretches 
the Eighth Circuit’s opinion beyond the breaking point. 


The mere mention of heightened scrutiny does not in 
and of itself indicate that the court is dealing with either 
a traditional or a limited public forum. Heightened scru- 
tiny can also be applied even if the forum is character- 
ized as nonpublic. The Supreme Court recognized this 
in Perry by stating: 


Public property which is not by tradition or desig- 
nation a forum for public communication is gov- 
erned by different standards. We have recognized 
that the ‘First Amendment does not guarantee access 


49a 


to property simply because it is owned or controlled 
by the government.’ In addition to time, place, and 
manner regulations, the State may reserve the forum 
for its intended purposes, communicative or other- 
wise, as long as the regulation on speech is reason- 
able and not an effort to suppress expression merely 
because the public officials oppose the speaker’s 
view. 


460 U.S. at 46, 103 S.Ct. at 955 (citations omitted). 


This passage from Perry indicates that viewpoint dis- 
crimination will rarely be tolerated, regardless of whether 
the restriction applies to public, limited or nonpublic 
fora. Further, a careful reading of Gohn indicates that 
the Eighth Circuit considered the student service funds 


as creating a nonpublic forum. Specifically, the court 
noted that: 


We realize that the District Court made no explicit 
finding as to the reason for denial of funding, that 
this is a question of fact, and that appellate courts 
are not fact-finding forums. We think, though, that 
the District Court’s opinion, when read in full and in 
context, includes an implicit finding that funds were 
denied because of distaste for the GLSA’s ideas. 
Otherwise, there would have been no need to resort 
to the legal doctrines (e.g. that there is no “right” 
to public money) used by the Court to justify dis- 
missing the complaint. A finding of fact that funds 
were denied for some content-neutral reason would 
have sufficed completely to dispose of the case. In 
any event, the facts of this case are so obvious that 
a remand for an explicit finding would be a waste 
of time. This record leaves no reasonable doubt that 
funds were denied because of disagreement with 
GLSA’s speech. (emphasis added). 


Gohn, 850 F.2d at 367. Here, the court indicates that 
GLSA would have lost its case had the University of 
Arkansas put forth a content neutral reason for denying 


50a 


funding. This is not the standard used in limited public 
forum cases, but instead is the standard used in non- 
public forum situations. ' 

This court also looks to Cornelius, supra for guidance 
as to whether the SAF qualifies as a public forum. Here, 
the Supreme Court began its forum analysis by noting 
that, “[t]he government does not create a public forum 
by inaction or by permitting limited discourse, but only 
by intentionally opening a nontraditional forum for pub- 
lic discourse.” Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 802, 105 S.Ct. at 
3449 citing Perry, 460 U.S. at 46, 103 S.Ct. at 955. 
(emphasis added). In Cornelius, the Supreme Could held 
that the Federal Government could exclude legal defense 
and political advocacy organizations from participation 
in the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC), a charity 
drive directed at federal employees. The Court held that 
the campaign was a nonpublic forum because: 


[t]he Government’s consistent policy has been to limit 
participation in the CFC to “appropriate” voluntary 
agencies and to require agencies seeking admission 
to obtain permission from federal and local Campaign 
Officials . . . The Civil Service Commission and, 
after 1978, the Office of Personnel Management de- 
veloped extensive criteria to limit access to the Cam- 
paign to those organization considered appropriate. 
Such selective access, unsupported by evidence of a 
purposeful designation for public use, does not create 
a public forum. 


Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 804-5, 105 S.Ct. at 3450 (cita- 
tions omitted). 


In the present situation, the University has limited 
eligibility for SAF monies to those organizations deemed 
“appropriate.” Religious organizations are but one of 
several groups excluded from participation in the SAF 
because the Board of Visitors has decided that such 
groups do not further the educational purposes of the 
University. This exclusion of religious groups and re- 
ligious activities has been in effect since the establish- 


it he 2s 


S5la 


ment of the Guidelines in 1970, and has survived revi- 
sions in 1973, 1978, 1980 and 1991. 


The plaintiffs attempt to counter this fact by arguing 
that “the defendants created the SAF mechanism to en- 
courage the exchange of opinions and viewpoints among 
students at the University of Virginia in furtherance of 
the educational mission of the University.” In support 
of this assertion, the plaintiffs direct the court to the 
page 1 of the Guidelines. The Guidelines, in pertinent 
part, read as follows: 


STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 


The purpose of the student activity fee is to pro- 
vide financial support for student organizations that 
are related to the educational purpose of the Uni- 
versity of Virginia. As a required student fee, the 
monies collected by the University for funding stu- 
dent activities are public funds which must be ad- 
ministered in a manner consistent with the educa- 
tional purpose of the University as well as with state 
and federal law. 


This court does not read this passage to indicate a 
desire on the part of the Board of Visitors to “encourage 
the exchange of opinions and viewpionts.” Rather, the 
Guidelines suggest that the SAF was established to fund 
only those CIOs whose activities contributed to the edu- 
cational focus of the University. The Board of Visitors 
has not opened the SAF coffers to all ClOs;* some 
groups, such as WAP, were excluded simply because the 
Board of Visitors determined that their activities were 
not consistent with the goals of the University. The con- 
sistent, purposeful exclusion of certain groups indicates 
that the SAF is indeed a nonpublic forum. 


™For the academic year 1990-91, 343 student organizations 
qualified as CIOs. Of these 135 applied for SAF funds and 118 
were actually allotted SAF monies. 


52a 


This conclusion is further supported by the Supreme 
Court’s reasoning in Perry, supra. The forum in Perry 
consisted of an interschool mailing system used to fa- 
cilitate communication between various teachers. A 
teacher’s union challenged the local Board of Education’s 
decision denying the union access to the system. The 
plaintiff union argued that the school mail facilities be- 
came a limited public forum because other private, non- 
school-connected groups had previously been given access 
to the system. Perry, 460 U.S. at 47, 103 S.Ct. at 956. 
In rejecting this contention, the Court stated: 


The use of the internal school mail by groups not 
affiliated with the schools is no doubt a relevant 
consideration. If by policy or by practice the Perry 
School District has opened its mail system for in- 
discriminate use by the general public, then PLEA 
could justifiably argue a public forum has been cre- 
ated. This, however, is not the case. As the case 
comes before us, there is no indication in the record 
that the school mailboxes and interschool delivery 
system are open for use by the general public. Per- 
mission to use the system to communicate with 
teachers must be secured from the individual build- 
ing principal. There is no court finding or evidence 
in the record which demonstrates that this permis- 
sion has been granted as a matter of course to all 
who seek to distribute material. We can only con- 
clude that the schools do allow some outside organi- 
zations such as the YMCA, Cub Scouts, and other 
civic and church organizations to use the facilities. 
This type of selective access does not transform gov- 
ernment property into a public forum. 


Id. 


Similarly, the fact that the University has given cer- 
tain CIOs access to SAF funds does not lead to the con- 
clusion that such selective access transforms the SAF 
into a limited public forum. 


53a 


Finally, the plaintiffs [sic] reliance on Widmar is mis- 
placed. The present case might very well be resolved in 
plaintiffs [sic] favor if the University had denied CIO 
status to WAP. The defendants themselves take the posi- 
tion that access to certification as a CIO is a limited public 
forum. This is because only CIO’s have access to Univer- 
sity facilities.° This is a far cry from the present situation 
and is the reason why this court finds Widmar factually 
distinguishable from the case at hand. 


Having concluded that the SAF is a nonpublic forum, 
this court must now determine. whether the Board’s 
Guidelines constitute restrictions which are “reasonable 
and not an effort to suppress expression merely because 
public officials oppose the speaker’ [sic] views.” Perry, 460 
U.S. at 46, 103 S.Ct. at 955. The defendants offer two 
basic rationales for excluding religious organizations such 
as WAP from SAF eligibility. First, the University las 
only limited funds to disburse and must therefore ‘mit 
funding to those activities which it determines advance 
its educational mission. Second, the ineligibility of re- 
ligious organizations and activities is justified based on 
the Federal and State constitutional mandate of state 
neutrality toward religion. 


Although fiscal restraints are pertinent, this court may 
resolve the reasonableness of the Guidelines by reference 
to the University’s second proffered reason. The parties 
devote considerable time in their respective briefs ad- 
dressing the obvious Establishment Clause issues raised 


8 The plaintiffs allege that they have been denied access to cer- 
tain University facilities yet have presented no evidence, beyond Mr. 
Rosenberger’s affidavit, to [sic] support of this claim. For instance, 
there is no assertion that WAP has even attempted to use Uni- 
versity facilities or computers. The defendants have submitted 
the affidavit of Mr. Stump, who swears that “[a]s a CIO, Wide 
Awake has been and is accorded the same access and use of Uni- 
versity facilities as other CIOs.” The court has considered this 
conflicting evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, 
but comes to the conclusion thut WAP has not raised a genuine 
issue of material fact as to this issue. 


54a 


in this case. However, this court need not resolve this 
issue on the facts of this case. For even if the plaintiffs 
were correct in their assertion that funding Wide Awake 
would not violate Federal or State law, it is not the 
province of this court to second guess the legal judg- 
ments made by the University. So long as the Univers- 
ity’s Establishment Clause fears are reasonable, the 
Guideline restriction must stand. Given the complexity 
of the law in this regard, this court has little trouble in 
finding that the Guideline restriction is a reasonable 
limit to access to SAF funds. Further, the restriction is 
a reasonable response by the University to prevent ex- 
cessive entanglement with religion. 


The court also finds that the Guideline limitations do 
not result in viewpoint discrimination against religious 
organizations such as WAP. The plaintiffs seem to argue 
that any across the board restriction applied to a religious 
group results in content based discrimination. This may 
be true in the abstract, but this court, and the University, 
must live in the real world. It could be argued that every 
decision by the University results in viewpoint discrimina- 
tion. On this point, the court finds Justice Stevens’ com- 
ments in his concurring opinion in Widmar to be highly 
relevant. Justice Stevens states that: 


In performing their learning and teaching missions, 
the managers of a university routinely make count- 
less decisions based on the content of communica- 
tive materials. They select books for inclusion in the 
library, they hire professors on the basis of their 
academic philosophies, they select courses for inclu- 
sion in the curriculum, and they reward scholars for 
what they have written. In addition, in encouraging 
students to participate in extracurricular activities, 
they necessarily make decisions concerning the con- 
tent of those activities. 


Widmar, 454 U.S. at 278, 102 S.Ct. at 278. 


In brief, the plaintiffs’ complaints about the Guidelines 
are more properly directed at the wisdom and not the 


55a 


legality of the restrictions. This is because the court finds, 
as a matter of law, that the Board’s Guidelines are reason- 
able and do not violate any of the plaintiffs’ constitutional 


rights.° 
Ill. The Free Exercise of Religion Claims 


The heart of the plaintiffs’ claim is that without SAF 
monies WAP must devote more time to fund raising and 
less time to publishing its religious speech. Thus, the de- 
nial of funding burdens the plaintiffs’ free exercise of re- 
ligion by diverting energy away from WAP’s main goal: 
challenging Christians to live according to their faith. 


Both sides agree that this court’s analysis should begin 
with Dole v. Shenandoah Baptist Church, 899 F.2d 1389 
(4th Cir.) cert. denied, USS. , 111 S.Ct. 131, 
112 L.Ed.2d 99 (1990). Here, the Fourth Circuit stated 
that in reviewing a free exercise claim, a court should: 


. . . examine the burden on the exercise of ... 
[plaintiff's] sincerely held religious beliefs, then de- 
termine whether the state presents a compelling jus- 
tification for imposing this burden, and finally bal- 
ancing the burden on free exercise against the state’s 
. .. [compelling interest]. 


Id. at 1397. 


In the present case, it is difficult for this court to iden- 
tify any burden of constitutional magnitude that has been 
imposed on the plaintiffs. It is logical to assume that pub- 
lishing a magazine is easier if someone else pays the bills. 
However, if this incidental burden was of constitutional 
significance, the free exercise clause would be implicated 
in every funding decision involving a religious organiza- 
tion. A review of the record indicates that WAP is un- 


®In their briefs and in oral argument, the parties did not sepa- 
rately address plaintiffs’ claims under Federal and State law. AIl- 
though the court has focused on Federal Constitutional law, the 
preceding analysis applies to the plaintiffs’ claims based on the 
Virginia Constitution and the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom. 


56a 


able to point to any facts making their burden unique 
from other CIOs which have been denied SAF monies. 
Political groups and fraternities and sororities share a 
common plight with WAP: none of these groups is eli- 
gible for funding. The only distinguishing factor is that 
WAP engages in religious activity. However, WAP has 
not cited this court to any authority indicating that re- 
ligious organizations should receive preferential access to 
a nonpublic forum. 

The plaintiffs’ attempt to bridge this gap in their argu- 
ment by asserting that “freedom of expression may not 
be infringed by denying a privilege.” WAP relies on 
Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 404, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 
1794, 10 L.Ed.2d 965 (1963) to support this position. 
This court does not read Sherbert as broadly as do the 
plaintiffs. In Employment Div., Dept. of Human Re- 
sources v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 883, 110 S.Ct. 1595, 
1602, 108 L.Ed.2d 876 (1990), the Court stated that, 
“[ujnder the Sherbert test, governmental actions that sub- 
stantially burden a religious practice must be justified by 
a compelling governmental interest.” (emphasis added). 
This language itself indicates that a burden must be sub- 
stantial before the court will consider whether the state 
has a compelling reason for the restriction.” The Fourth 
Circuit appears to have adopted this position in Goodall 
v. Stafford County School Board, 930 F.2d 363 (4th 
Cir.) cert. denied USS. , 112 S.Ct. 188, 116 
L.Ed.2d 149 (1991). Here the court stated that 


[w]here the state conditions receipt of an important 
benefit upon conduct proscribed by a religious faith, 
or where it denies such a benefit because of conduct 
mandated by religious belief, thereby putting sub- 
stanial pressure on an adherent to modify his be- 
havior and to violate his beliefs, a burden upon re- 


10The court notes that the plaintiffs have not identified a re- 
ligious practice which is infringed by the Board’s Guidelines. 
Apparently the plaintiffs contend that publishing a religious maga- 
zine is itself a religious practice. 


57a 


ligion exists. While the compulsion may be indirect, 
the infringement upon free exercise is nonetheless 
substantial. 


Goodall, 930 F.2d at 369 quoting Thomas v. Review 
Board of Indiana Employment Security Division, 450 
U.S. 707, 717-18, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 1432, 67 L.Ed.2d 624 
(1981). 


Even if this court were to consider the Board’s Guide- 
lines as imposing a burden on WAP’s free exercise of 
religion, WAP is still bound by the Fourth Circuit’s hold- 
ing in Goodall, supra, that avoidance of a violation of the 
Establishment Clause constitutes a compelling state inter- 
est. Goodall, 930 F.2d at 370. Further, balancing the 
minimal burden on the plaintiffs with the defendants [sic] 
rationale for the Guidelines indicates that the scale must 
come down in favor of the defendants. 


IV. The Equal Protection Claims 


The last issue for the court to resolve in [sic] the plain- 
tiffs’ claims that the Guidelines have been applied in less 
than an even-handed manner. Put somewhat differently, 
the plaintiffs contend that they have been denied equal 
protection of the laws because other “religious groups” 
have been given SAF monies. As evidence of this unequal 
treatment, WAP focuses on the funding decisions make 
[sic] with respect to other CIOs. 


The defendants seek to counter this argument by citing 
this court to Irby v. Virginia State Board of Elections, 
889 F.2d 1352 (4th Cir.1989), cert. denied 496 US. 
906, 110 S.Ct. 2589, 110 L.Ed.2d 270 (1990). Irby 
stands for the proposition that a plaintiff challenging a 
facially neutral statute with an equal protection claim 
must show not only disparate effect, but also discrimi- 
natory intent. Thus, the defendants do not argue that 


11 The court also notes that with few exceptions, Sherbert has 
been limited to those cases involving the denial of unemployment 
compensation benefits. See Smith, supra, 494 U.S. at 883, 110 S.Ct. 
at 1602. 


58a 


the Student Council’s funding decisions are always cor- 
rect. Instead, the defendants argue that there is no evi- 
dence to suggest that the Student Council’s decision to 
deny funding to WAP resulted from discriminatory intent. 


In their reply brief, the plaintiffs do not dispute the 
defendants statement of the law nor the facts of this is- 
sue. The court has reviewed the entire record independ- 
ently, and cannot find any evidence to indicate that the 
decision to deny funding to WAP was based on discrimi- 
natory intent. Accordingly, summary judgment in favor 
of the defendants is appropriate. 


In summary, the court holds that access to the SAF 
is a nonpublic forum upon which the University has im- 
posed reasonable restrictions. These restrictions do not 
impose an impermissible burden on the plaintiffs’ exercise 
of their rights as guaranteed by either the Federal or State 
Constitutions, or the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom. 
Thus, the court denies the plaintiffs’ motion for summary 
judgment and grants the defendants’ cross motion for sum- 
mary judgment. An appropriate order shall this day issue. 


ORDER 


For the reasons set forth in the accompanying memo- 
randum opinion, it is hereby 


ADJUDGED AND ORDERED 
that: 


1. The plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment is de- 
nied; 

2. The defendants’ cross motion for summary judg- 
ment is granted. 


This case shall be dismissed and stricken from the 
docket of the court. The Clerk of the Court is hereby 
directed to send a certified copy of this Order to all 
counsel of record. 


ea ae Ue a Ll are 7 eae, A” 1s 


59a 
APPENDIX C 
Filed May 23, 1994 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


No. 92-1736 
CA-91-36-C 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, as a member of Wide Awake 
Productions; WIDE AWAKE PRODUCTIONS: WIDE AWAKE 
MAGAZINE; GREGORY W. MourAp; RoBERT J. PRINCE, 

Plaintiffs-A ppellants, 


V. 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ViR- 
GINIA; EDWARD E. ELson; W. L. Lyons Brown, Jr.: 
ROBERT G. BUTCHER, JR.: N. THOMAS CONNALLY: 
Hovey S. DABNEY; WALLER H. Horsey: J. THOMAS 
HuLVEY; Evans B. JESSEE; PATRICIA M. KLUGE: ArR- 
NOLD H. LEON; LEIGH B. MIDDLEDITCH, JrR.: ELiza- 
BETH D. MorigE; FREDDIE W. NICHOLAS, SR.: S. Bu- 
FORD ScoTT; JEsseE B. Witson, III: THomas E. 
WorRRELL, Jr.; ADAM S. ARTHUR; ALEXANDER G. 
GILLIAM, JR.; RONALD J. Stump, 

Defendants-A ppellees. 


On Petition for Rehearing with 
Suggestion for Rehearing In Banc 


The appellants filed a petition for rehearing with sug- 
gestion for rehearing in banc. 


ui 


60a 


Judge Widener reqeusted a poll on the suggestion for 
rehearing in banc, and a majority of the judges voted to 
deny rehearing in banc. Judges Widener, Niemeyer and 
Luttig voted to rehear the case in banc, and Judges Ervin, 
Russell, Hall, Phillips, Murnaghan, Wilkins, Hamilton, 
Williams, Michael and Sprouse voted against rehearing in 
banc. 


Judge Wilkinson disqualified himself and did not vote. 


The Court denies the petition for rehearing with sug- 
gestion for rehearing in banc. 


Entered at the direction of Judge Ervin for the Court. 


For the Court, 


/s/ Bert M. Montague 
Clerk 


6la 


APPENDIX D 


STUDENT ACTIVITY. FEE STATEMENT OF 
PURPOSE AND FUNDING GUIDELINES 


PASSED BY ACTION OF THE BOARD OF 
VISITORS ON JANUARY 31, 1991 


STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: 


The purpose of the student activity fee is to provide fi- 
nancial support for student organizations that are re- 
lated to the educational purpose of the University of 
Virginia. As a required student fee, the monies collected 
by the University for funding student activities are pub- 
lic funds which must be administered in a manner con- 
sistent with the educational purpose of the University as 
well as with state and federal law. 


STUDENT ACTIVITIES ELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING: 


The Rector and Visitors have determined that activities 
of the student organizations in the following categories re- 
late to the educational purpose of the University and thus 
are eligible for funding. 


1. Special Status Student Organizations charged by 
the Board of Visitors; 


2. co-curricular organizations which are not admin- 
istered by University departments or units; 


3. club sports; 


4. student news, information, opinion, entertain- 
ment, or academic communications media 


groups; 
cultural organizations; 
fine arts organizations; 
Madison House; 
hobby organizations; 


SF PF 


—. 


62a 


9. non-political groups whose predominate purpose 
is to present speakers on topics of probable gen- 
eral interest to the University; 


10. the Student Legal Services; and 


11. service organizations. 


STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR 
FUNDING: 


The Board of Visitors has determined that fraternities, 
sororities, honor societies, political organizations, religious 
organizations, and special status student organizations 
not charged by the Board of Visitors are ineligible for 
funds from the student activities fees. An organization 
is also ineligible when admission is exclusionary in nature 
and not open to all students or if membership is_restricted 
by reason of age, citizenship, color, disability, gender, 
race, religion, national origin, political affiliation, sexual 
orientation, or status as a disabled veteran or veteran of 
the Vietnam era. Notwithstanding these requirements, a 
student organization may restrict membership based on 
ability to perform the activities related to the organiza- 
tion’s purpose. In determining cases of discrimination, it 
is not sufficient to look merely to the constitution of an 
organization but to its actual practices and operations. 


STUDENT EXPENDITURES AND ACTIVITIES NOT 
ELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING: 


The Board of Visitors has further determined that the 
following expenditures and activities do not relate to the 
educational purpose of the University and thus are not 
eligible for funding: 


1. honoraria or similar fees; 
2. religious activities; 
3. social entertainment or related expenses; 


63a 


4. philanthropic contributions and activities; 
5. political activities; 


activities which would jeopardize the University’s 
tax exempt status. 


FUND ALLOCATION AND APPEAL PROCEDURES/ 
PROCESS: 


The Student Activities Committee chaired by the des- 
ignee of the Vice President for Student Affairs is charged 
with the authority and responsibility for supervision of 
the student activities fee fund. With respect to distribu- 
tions from the fund, Student Council is responsible for 
allocations to eligible student organizations. The ceiling 
on the aggregate amount allocated to all such organiza- 
tions shall be the current balance in the student activi- 
ties fees fund. The allocation process follows procedures 
established by Student Council which are intended to 
maximize the use of the funds and are consistent with 
the above guidelines. The Student Council Appropria- 
tions Committee is responsible for following these pro- 
cedures and making the recommendations to the Student 
Council Representative Body on the funding requests. 
In providing student organizations with appropriations 
deemed needed, the Student Council Appropriations Com- 
mittee shall be further guided by such criteria as the size 
of the group, the University wide benefit of the group’s 
activities, and the group’s level of financial self-sufficiency. 
The committee is encouraged but is not required to ap- 
propriate all of the available fund balance. 


The Appropriations Committee recommended alloca- 
tion to a student organization may be appealed to the 
Student Council Representative Body by any student or 
student organization. The Student Activities Committee 
is the next and final appeal for any budget reviewed and, 
in some cases, adjusted by the Student Council Repre- 
sentative Body. In addition, the Student Activities Com- 


64a 


mittee may examine on its own motion any student or- 
ganization’s allocation request submitted to the Student 


Council. 


After the allocations are finalized, the Student Council 
Vice President for Student Organizations writes the chair 
of the Student Activities Committee requesting that the 
allocations for those funded organizations be released to 
the Student Activities Business Manager. When the Stu- 
dent Activities Business Manager receives the funds, they 
are deposited into a demand deposit account. Expendi- 
tures from the allocations can be made provided the stu- 
dent organization completes the proper authorization 
forms with the Student Activities Business Manager. The 
student organizations receive their allocation on a per 
semester basis for payment of expenses of activities con- 
ducted during the fall and spring semesters only. 


Any funded student organization alleged to be in vio- 
lation of the above guidelines is subject to the suspen- 
sion or loss of student activity fee funding after notice 
and an opportunity to be heard by Student Council. The 
Student Activities Committee is the next and final appeal 
body. 


The Guidelines for Student Activities Fund Allocation 
apply to all student organization funding requests that 
are pending on, or are made after, January 31, 1991. 


Attachment Definition of Terms 


65a 


STUDENT ACTIVITY FEE FUNDING GUIDELINES 
ATTACHMENT DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 


These definitions of terms are intended to provide clari- 
fication of the student activity fee fund guidelines. In 
those cases where further clarification is needed, Student 
Council and, if necessary, the Student Activities Com- 
mittee will interpret the guidelines based on the facts 
presented and the Board of Visitors intent for the student 
activity fee. 


Ability to Perform—a student organization may restrict 
membership based on ability to perform the activities re- 
lated to the organization’s purpose. For example, a stu- 
dent publication may make requirements based on writing 
skills. A club sport may restrict membership where selec- 
tion is based on competitive skill or the activity involved 
is a contact sport thus resulting in a team of one or pre- 
dominately one gender. Likewise, a choral group may 
restrict membership based on vocal range or quality which 
may also result in a chorus or choruses of one or pre- 
dominantly one gender. 


Co-curricular Organization——-a group which provides op- 
portunities outside the classroom setting for students to 
apply classroom theory and/or to acquire knowledge, ex- 
perience and/or skills. 


Cultural Organization—an organization which is primar- 
ily concerned with studying, promoting, and or expressing 
racial, ethnic, or affinity group traditions, social forms, 
art, and/or tastes. 


Hobby Organization—a group which primarily pursues 
an activity for relaxation, recreation, or entertainment. 


Political Activity—an activity related to: (1) lobbying the 
principal purpose of which is to influence the passage or 
defeat of specific legislation; and/or (2) electioneering 
which encompasses participation or intervention in any 
political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any 
candidate for public office. These restrictions on funding 


66a 


political activities are not intended to preclude funding of 
any otherwise eligible student organization which: (1) 
advocates, as an incidental or insubstantial parts of its ac- 
tivities, the adoption or rejection of legislation; (2) en- 
gages in non-partisan analysis, study, or research, and 
makes the results available to the public; or (3) espouses 
particular positions or ideological viewpoints, including 
those that may be unpopular or are not generally 
accepted. 


Political Organization—an organization primarily involved 
with influencing legislation, the administration of govern- 
mental policy, and/or the election of candidates for pub- 
lic office. 


Religious Activity—an activity which primarily promotes 
or manifests a particular belief(s) in or about a deity or 
an ultimate reality. 


Religious Organization—an organization whose purpose 
is to practice a devotion to an acknowledged ultimate 
reality or deity. 


Student Activities Committee—the University faculty/ 
student committee charged by the Vice President for Stu- 
dent Affairs to provide oversight to the student activity 
fee fund and its allocation by Student Council. 


Special Status Student Organizations—Student organiza- 
tions which have University delegated functions to per- 
form are termed special status. These groups which in- 
clude but are not limited to Student Council, school 
councils, University Guides, and University Singers have 
a University department or a school responsible for each 
group relative to the delegated functions. 


Two groups, Student Council and WTJU, are charged 
by the Board of Visitors. The other Special Status Stu- 
dent Organizations receive their charge from a University 
department or school. Because of this relationship to a 
school or department and the concomitant funding avail- 
able to the group, Special Status Student Organizations 


67a 


not charged by the Board of Visitors are ineligible for 
Student activity fee fund allocations. 


Student Organizations Eligible for Funding—Contracted 
Independent Organizations which have been Student 
Council qualified and comply with the Student Council 
appropriations process guidelines as well as Special Status 
Student Organizations charged by the Board of Visitors 
are eligible for student activity fee funding. Currently, 
Student Council and WTJU are Special Status Student 
Organizations eligible for funding. 


