—- 
: 


Bogen Cou 


(6) RIL 
— “ : SEP 29 1994 | 


4 
Se eet CLERK | 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, et al., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


THe RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 
Respondents. 


On Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF 


MICHAEL W. MCCONNELL * MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 


MAYER, BROWN & PLATT CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
190 South LaSalle Street 1300 19th Street, N.W., 260 
Chicago, IL 60603 Washington, D.C. 20036 

(312) 702-3306 (202) 833-8400, ext. 102 

* Counsel of Record 


WILSON - Epes PRINTING Co., INC. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


F TOCCT AVAIL ARIE CODVE See 


£) \ 44 
DEON ee ¢ 
A PE LAO is a ae 
: LAS r | 
GOS anil Sah « 
ee : st She te a 
yy rc - ye ve 
be t Wi Pan Wey wd 4 : 
i Tt ot. 4 . 
BNR Hag ty) se A rags 
¥ 7 ee oe Te TP at Sac 
As YBN ‘3 : 
y y sae i ‘ ’ 
4 - | : “ ¢ 
. : { - ‘ »* 4 
. tEG = % ae os 
. ¢ . % igs ea 
| aE ee a 
6 . 4 
4 * 3 + Va ew ‘ 
Ee é as % - AS n 
- , i. seo. 
a ee ey h m ‘ 
x tA ASS Tey, san OF : 
titer vie CAIAT Fe ‘ + 
, | 4 oie ser 4 Baas ‘ 
AY trea RP om iB 
er) (ie a Ph Sort i 
eS 7 =J rs ; ‘ + 
by OF é “t 4 
7 2 - . a ? 
. : pf Sey y 4 
te SATE A 4 3 : 
7A - . a i> 
- = 6 A M4 : ° Fre 
{> Fs tot se .< pi Ng 
re OE Fiery +4 ¢ é 
5. Be OP Fay ony FY > A 
: yy cere. ; ee 
: BS : 
a ‘e fom 
‘ ? ¢ 
» £ § 
$ M i t 
{ ; \ 
: 
* -¥ 
es f 
% 
7 
j ; 3 
ae 
J 
4 
ay 
oF 
- 
i 
: 
: 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES 


Bd. of Educ. of Kiryas Joel v. Grumet, 114 S. Ct. 
2481 (1994) 

Gay & Lesbian Students Ass’n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 
361 (8th Cir. 1988) 

Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches School Dist., 
113 S. Ct. 2141 (1993) 

Regan v. Time, Inc., 468 U.S. 641 (1984) 

Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. New York State Crime 
Victims Bd., 112 S.Ct. 501 (1991) 

Tipton v. Univ. of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 922 (9th Cir. 


Witters v. Washington Dep’t of Services, 474 U.S. 
481 (1986) 

Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 113 S. Ct. 
2462 (1993) 


IN THE 
Supreuve Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-329 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, et al., 
. Petitioners, 
THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 
Respondents. 


On Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF 


|. The decision below is a particularly stark example 
of doctrinal confusion and contradiction: the Fourth Cir- 
cuit held that the University of Virginia’s exclusion of 
religious periodicals from the Student Activities Fund 
(“SAF” or “Fund”) is a violation of the viewpoint-neutral 
principles of the Free Speech and Press Clauses, but also 
held that this discrimination is required by the Establish- 
ment Clause. Pet. App. 39a. As we showed in the Peti- 
tion, this holding conflicts with other appellate decisions 
in two ways. First (Pet. 15-19), the courts are split on 
the question of whether the Establishment Clause trumps 
what would otherwise be a free speech claim. Second 
(Pet. 19-20), the courts are split on whether the Estab- 
lishment Clause can be violated by the neutral provision 
of benefits to a wide range of activities, religious as well 
as nonreligious. Moreover (Pet. 20-25), the decision 


2 


below is in conflict with several recent decisions of this 
Court (while admittedly consistent with older cases not 
easily reconcilable with current constitutional doctrine). 


Nothing in the University’s Brief in Opposition detracts 
in the slightest from the existence, importance, or recur- 
ring nature of this constitutional conflict. Instead, the 
University hopes to avoid the issue by the simple device 
of characterization. In the University’s eyes, its deliberate 
exclusion of religious viewpoints is not “discrimination” 
but “neutrality” toward religion. Br. in Opp. 15, 16. If 
one accepts that premise (discrimination is really “neu- 
trality”) then the conflict perceived by the Court of Ap- 
peals ceases to exist and all the cases become “crystal 
clear” (Br. in Opp. 17). But the University’s Brief begs 
the question: why is it “neutral” to exclude an otherwise 
eligible religious publication, solely on the basis of its 
religious viewpoint, when (as the University concedes, 
Br. in Opp. 17), “neutrality” normally requires that the 
University distribute funds on the basis of objective fac- 
tors, not including the viewpoint of the publication? The 
University admits it would not be “neutral” toward gay 
rights if it refused to subsidize a publication devoted to 
propagating the point of view of the Gay & Lesbian Stu- 
dents Association. /d., citing Gay & Lesbian Students 
Ass'n V. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 (8th Cir. 1988). Why is 
“neutrality” different for religion? 


Perhaps there is an answer to this. But it is hard to 
deny—and the University does not deny—that the lower 
courts are perplexed and divided about how to answer it. 
Sometimes religious speakers are given equal rights; some- 
times they are treated as second-class citizens. See Pet. 
18-19 & nn. 10-11. The Fourth Circuit, to its credit, did 
not attempt to hide behind euphemisms. It openly ac- 
knowledged that the University’s Guideline “creates an 
uneven playing field on which the advantage is tilted 
towards CIOs engaged in wholly secular modes of ex- 
pression” (Pet. App. 26a). The question—whether this 
discrimination is required by the Establishment Clause— 


3 


is squarely presented in this case. This Court’s guidance 
is urgently needed. 


2. A large part of the University’s Brief in Opposition 
is devoted to various attempts to avoid the issue. We will 
address each of these in turn. 


a. The University begins with the assertion (Br. in 
Opp. 6-7) that “[t]he holding below turns on the special 
circumstances of a state institution of higher education, 
which must make distinctions in allocating limited funds 
to student activities and organizations in order to fund 
those activities most related to its educational purpose.” 
But as the opinion below reveals, nothing in the Fourth 
Circuit’s judgment “turns” on any “special circumstances” 
unique to universities. Rather, the reasoning is broad. 
Denial of assistance on account of Wide Awake’s religious 
message, according to the court below, is a penalty on the 
exercise of free speech rights; but providing benefits, even 
on a neutral basis, would “advance religion” and “en- 
tangle” church and state in violation of the Establishment 
clause. As the Petition demonstrated, the same doctrinal 
conflict between Speech and Establishment has appeared 
in a wide variety of contexts. Pet. 18-19 & nn. 10-11. 


b. The University admits that there is “the appearance 
of a conflict among various courts and opinions” (Br. in 
Opp. 11), but argues against review on the ground that 
none of the cases petitioners have cited involved “this 
identical legal issue.” /d. at 10. But that depends on 
how narrowly the issue is framed. 


Even if one treats this case as solely about public uni- 
versity student activities funds, the University’s claim is 
inaccurate. Tipton v. University of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 922 
(9th Cir. 1994), also raised the constitutionality of ex- 
cluding otherwise eligible student organizations from stu- 
dent activities funds on account of their religious char- 
acter. The only substantial difference between the two 
cases is that Tipton was solely a facial challenge. To be 
sure, as the University points out (Br. in Opp. 10), the 


4 


Ninth Circuit’s constitutional analysis in Tipton is at 
odds with that of the Fourth Circuit here (though the 
utlimate result, upholding discriminatory exclusion of stu- 
dent religious speech, is the same). The Ninth Circuit 
essentially upheld University discretion, while the Fourth 
Circuit held that the Establishment Clause compels the 
University to exclude religious publications. This dis- 
agreement over constitutional principles is a reason for 
this Court to grant the Petition, not to deny it. Moreover, 
Gay & Leshian Students Ass'n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 
(8th Cir. 1988), is “identical” to this case, except that 
the viewpoint involved in Gohn is secular. The University 
may think that is a persuasive reason for reaching oppo- 
Site outcomes. Petitioners do not. 


More fundamentally, in evaluating the certwerthiness 
of this case, there is no reason to confine attention to 
Cases raising the “identical” legal issue. The point is that 
the governing principle of the decision below is of recur- 
ring significance, and has divided the courts of appeals 
in a wide variety of contexts. This Court has frequently 
granted certiorari in Establishment Clause cases that raise 
important general principles of law, even when the par- 
ticular context is unusual and the “identical” issue is 
unlikely ever to repeat itself (see. e.¢., Board of Educa- 
tion of Kiryas Joe! v. Grumet, 114 §. Ct. 2481 (1994)). 
or where lower court opinions on the specific issue are 
not in conflict (see. e.¢., Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills 
School Dist., 113 S. Ct. 2462 (1993)). 


c. The University argues strennous!yv that its exclusion 
of Wide Awake was not based en its viewpoint. See Br. 
in Opp. 8-9." This argument is completely untenable 


1 The University denies (Br. in Opp. 6) that the Fourth Circuit 
found that Wide Awake had been excluded on the basis of its view- 
point, suggesting that petitioners confuse the concepts of content 
and viewpoint discrimination. We are not sure why this matters, 
since content discrimination, in itself, is presumptively unconstitu- 
tional and requires strict scrutiny. Simon & Schus'er, Inc. v. New 
York State Crime Victims Bd., 112 S. Ct. 501, 508 (1991); Regan 


5 


after this Court’s decision in Lamb’s Chapel v. Center 
Moriches School Dist., 113 S. Ct. 2141 (1993). In 
Lamb’s Chapel, the government excluded any group that 
would use its property “for religious purposes.” /d. at 
2144. This is indistinguishable from the University Guide- 
line, which excludes “religious activities.” In Lamb's 
Chapel, the restriction was applied to a group that wished 
to show a film addressing issues of child rearing from a 
religious perspective. In this case, the University applied 
the restriction to a group that wished to produce a 
magazine addressing a variety of campus, personal, and 
community issues from a reiigious perspective. This 
Court had no hesitation in treating the exclusion in 
Lamb’s Chapel as an instance of viewpoint discrimina- 
tion. See 113 S. Ct. at 2147. The same is true here.’ 


v. Time, Inc., 468 U.S. 641, 648-49 (1984). But in any event, the 
Fourth Circuit unquestionably did find the exclusion of Wide Awake 
to be based on viewpoint. Four times in its opinion, the Court 
referred to “content and viewpoint discrimination” as the gravamen 
of the constitutional complaint. Pet. App. 17a, 2la. Moreover, the 
central free speech holding of the court is as follows: 


[W]hen funds are made available to CIOs generally, they must 
be distributed in a viewpoint-neutral manner, absent considera- 
tions of equal constitutional dignity. Although government 
need not subsidize exercise of a constitutional right, the lack 
of an affirmative duty of financial support does not mean that 
government may, in general, penalize exercise of constitutional 
rights by withholding from their possessors an otherwise dis- 
cretionary benefit. We conclude that the Rector and Visitors’ 
erection of a prior restraint against University funding of 
such “religious activities” as the publication of religious ex- 
pression in Wide Awake constitutes precisely such a penalty. 

. The Rector and Visitors’ funding proscription thus cre- 
ates an uneven playing field on which the advantage is tilted 
towards CIOs engaged in wholly secular modes of expression. 


Pet. App. 25a-26a (citations and paragraph break omitted). The 
University calls this finding of viewpoint discrimination “dictum” 
(Br. in Opp. 6); but manifestly it is not. 


2 The University argues (Br. in Opp. 7-8) that the exclusion 
of “religious activities” is not discriminatory because this is “only 


6 


d. The University raises the spectre (Br. in Opp. 11) 
that, if the government cannot discriminate against reli- 
gious speakers, “all other forms of nonreligious expres- 
sion . . . would have to be funded also,” which would 
“effectively emasculate” the right of the University to 
make academic judgments. But as the University con- 
cedes (Br. in Opp. 12; 17), the University is already for- 
bidden to discriminate against nonreligious groups on the 
basis of viewpoint. This has apparently been accomplished 
without disruption. We only ask that similar protection 
be extended to religious viewpoints.* 


e. The University claims that reversal of the decision 
below would “harm” religion, because SAF funding would 
lead to “supervision and audits.” Br. in Opp. 15. What- 
ever the merits of this argument in the abstract, it has no 
application here. University funds would not go to the 
student group; they would go to the printer. The Uni- 
versity is free to audit and supervise the direct recipient 
of the funds—the printer—to make sure that they are 


one of many categories of student groups which are ineligible for 
funding.” But this is the only category that is based on point 
of view. The exclusions for “honoraria or similar fees; .. .; social 
entertainment or related expenses; philanthropic contributions 
and activities; political activities; and activities which would jeop- 
ardize the University’s tax exempt status” (Pet. App. 62a-63a) 
are not based on viewpoint. Nor are the exclusions of fraternities, 
sororities, honor societies, or political organizations based on 
viewpoint. It is significant that—whatever the term “political 
activities” may mean—it does not extend to a publication that 
advocates a political point of view, for many of the funded publica- 
tions at the University do that. In any event, in Lamb’s Chapel, 
religious groups were not the only groups excluded from the facili- 
ties. That did not dissuade the Court from finding that the religious 
exclusion was viewpoint discriminatory. 


3 Similarly, the University expresses worry (Br. in Opp. 21-22) 
that it might have to provide a refund of the mandatory student 
activities fee to those who object to the funded activity. But the 
University already assumed that risk when it began to fund con- 
troversial secular activities. There is no difference, for purposes 
of refund litigation, between secular and religious speech. 


7 


used for properly authorized purposes. There would be 
no ijegitimate occasion to audit or supervise Wide Awake 
Productions itself. 


3. The University’s only serious argument is that cash 
subsidies must be treated differently than other forms of 
public benefit (such as access to government land or 
meeting rooms, tax subsidies, police and fire protection, 
and in-kind assistance to religious schools). See Br. in 
Opp. 13-15, 17-21. We do not (indeed, we cannot) 
claim that the University’s position is wholly without 
support in some of this Court’s older precedents.‘ But the 
University’s argument simply illustrates the difficulty and 
importance of this case. It is our position that the out- 
moded distinctions between various forms of aid have no 
relation to the purposes of the Establishment Clause and 
should be replaced by a general requirement of neutrality. 
The University takes the opposite position. This is a 
recurring and imporant issue, and warrants consideration 
by this Court. 


4. The Brief in Opposition is itself an argument for 
certiorari. If there is any doubt that university admin- 
istrators and others who have the responsibility for inter- 
preting and enforcing constitutional rights in the first in- 
stance have a distorted notion of the protections for reli- 
gious speech under the First Amendment, the Brief in 
Opposition dispels it. “If religion cannot be treated dif- 
ferently [i.e., less favorably] than political ideas, ideology, 


* The University plainly overstates its case when it declares (Br. 
in Opp. 17) that “[n]o court has ever held that direct funding of 
religious activities and programs is neutral.” Among other deci- 
sions, this overlooks Witters v. Washington Dep’t of Services for 
the Blind, 474 U.S. 481 (1986), in which this Court unanimously 
rejected the argument that the Establishment Clause prevents a 
state from paying the tuition for religious courses at a Bible 
College. To pay tuition for religious teaching is not constitutionally 
distinguishable from paying printing costs for a religiously-oriented 
publication. 


8 


Or viewpoints on various issues,” the University asks (Br. 
in Opp. 22-23), “what does the Establishment Clause 
stand for?” Let us state our answer: the Establishment 
Clause stands for neutrality, not hostility, toward religion. 
It prevents the government from favoring or preferring 
religious over secular ideas, institutions, or people, in such 
a way as to induce or encourage the practice of one reli- 
gion, or religion in general. But it does not require 
discrimination against religious speakers. 


The University’s position in this case, we believe, is 
symptomatic of a widespread misunderstanding about the 
fundamental principles of religious freedom under the 
First Amendment. This case provides an ideal oppor- 
tunity to dispel that misunderstanding. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, and those stated in the Petition, this 
Court should grant the Petition for Certiorari. 


Respectfully submitted, 


MICHAEL W. MCCONNELL * MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 


MAYER, BROWN & PLATT CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
190 South LaSalle Street 1500 19th Street, N.W., 260 
Chicago, IL 60603 Washington, D.C. 20036 

(312) 702-3306 (202) 833-8400, ext. 102 


* Counsel of Record 


6 


VENUE 


4. Venue is proper in this Court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1391(b) because the events giving rise to the claims 
occurred in the County of Albemarle, Commonwealth of 
Virginia, which is the site of the University of Virginia. 


PARTIES 


5. Plaintiff RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, a stu- 
dent at the University of Virginia, is presently a resident 
of the Commonwealth of Virginia and was a resident of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia at all times relevant 
herein. The unincorporated organization of which he is 
a member, plaintiff WIDE AWAKE PRODUCTIONS, is 
and was at all times relevant herein a Contracted Inde- 
pendent Organization (“CIO”) at the University of Vir- 
ginia, with its principal operations in the County of Al- 
bemarle, Commonwealth of Virginia. The publication of 
which he is Editor-in-Chief, plaintiff WIDE AWAKE 
MAGAZINE, is and was at all times relevant herein a 
journal of news, commentary and opinion published and 
distributed by plaintiff WIDE AWAKE PRDUCTIONS 
at the University of Virginia in the County of Albemarle, 
Commonwealth of Virginia. Plaintiff ROBERT J. 
PRINCE is a student at the University of Virginia and 
the Managing Editor of WIDE AWAKE MAGAZINE. 
Plaintiff GREGORY W. MOURAD is a student at the 
University of Virginia and Executive Editor of WIDE 
AWAKE MAGAZINE. Plaintiffs ROBERT J. PRINCE 
and GREGORY W. MOURAD are and/or at all times 
relevant herein were residents of or located in the County 
of Albemarle, Commonwealth of Virginia. Unless other- 
wise specified herein, plaintiffs will be referred to collec- 
tively as “Wide Awake.” 


6. Defendants EDWARD E. ELSON, W.L. LYONS 
BROWN, JR., ROBERT G. BUTCHER, JR., N. 
THOMAS CONNALLY, M.D., HOVEY S. DABNEY, 
WALLER H. HORSLEY, J. THOMAS HULVEY, 


7 


M.D., EVANS B. JESSEE, PATRICIA M. KLUGE, 
ARNOLD H. LEON, LEIGH B. MIDDLEDITCH, JR., 
ELIZABETH D. MORIE, FREDDIE W. NICHOLAS, 
SR., S. BUFORD SCOTT, JESSE B. WILSON, III, 
THOMAS E. WORRELL, JR., ADAM S. ARTHUR, 
and ALEXANDER G. GILLIAM, JR. are sued in their 
capacities as members of defendant RECTOR AND 
VISITORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 
(“Board of Visitors”). Upon information and belief, the 
Board of Visitors of the University of Virginia is a cor- 
poration established by the General Assembly of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia (“General Assembly”). The 
Board of Visitors is subject to the control of the General 
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The mem- 
bers of the Board of Visitors are appointed by the Gov- 
ernor of Virginia. The Board of Visitors, in accordance 
with the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia 
and with law, formulates policy, makes regulations and 
exercises such control over the University of Virginia as 
it deems expedient. Upon information and belief, the 
Board of Visitors may iawfully delegate this power. 
Under authority of the General Assembly, the Board of 
Visitors has exclusive jurisdiction over the internal or- 
ganization, government and management of the Univer- 
sity of Virginia. The University of Virginia is an institu- 
tion of higher education that receives public funds from 
the Commonwealth of Virginia. 


7. Defendant RONALD J. STUMP is and was at all 
times relevant herein Associate Dean of Students at the 
University of Virginia and Chairperson of the Student 
Activities Committee of the University of Virginia. De- 
fendant RONALD J. STUMP is sued in his capacity as 
Associate Dean of Students at the University of Virginia 
and Chairperson of the Student Activities Committee of 
the University of Virginia. The Student Activities Com- 
mittee is a University of Virginia committee composed of 
faculty members, administrators and students. The Stu- 
dent Activities Committee is charged by the Vice Presi- 


dent for Student Affairs of the University of Virginia to 
provide oversight of the student activities fee fund and its 
allocation by the Student Council. 


GENERAL ALLEGATIONS 


8. As provided for in the Code of Virginia Title 23, 
Chapter 9, Article 2, Sections 23-69 to 23-80, the Board 
of Visitors is charged with the authority to manage the 
affairs of the University of Virginia. One of its responsi- 
bilities is the general oversight of student activities. To 
this end, the Board of Visitors has adopted policies with 
regard to the operation and funding of student organiza- 
tions. Such policies include the requirement that the 
Board of Visitors (or its delegate) approve the constitu- 
tions and charters of these organizations; insure that these 
organizations adhere to all state, city and university regu- 
lations and statutes; and establish guidelines for the fund- 
ing of such organizations from Student Activities Fund 


(“SAF”) monies. 


9. The Student Council of the University of Virginia 
is a Special Status Student Organization that conducts its 
affairs pursuant to a delegation of authority from the 
Board of Visitors. Currently and at all times relevant 
herein, the Board of Visitors sets forth and has set forth 
the guidelines and procedures for the distribution of SAF 
funds to Contracted Independent Organizations. Cur- 
rently and at all times relevant herein, the Student Council 
implements and has implemented these guidelines and 


procedures. 


10. The Student Council has a number of subcommit- 
tees, including an Appropriations Committee. The Ap- 
propriations Committee is chaired by the Student Council’s 
Vice-President for Student Organizations. 

11. During the period relevant to this lawsuit, the 


Student Council, upon recommendation of its Appropria- 
tions Committee, has regularly funded CIOs from SAF 


funds. Upon information and belief, this practice dates 
back at least to 1973. 


12. Upon information and belief, the University of 
Virginia has charged at all times relevant herein and cur- 
rently charges each student a compulsory student activity 
fee of $14 per semester. There is no procedural or other 
mechanism by which a student may decline to pay the 
fee. These compulsory student fees are deposited into the 
University of Virginia Student Activities Fund. 


13. Upon information and belief, there are approxi- 
mately 343 CIOs at the University of Virginia. Upon 
information and belief, approximately 100 CIOs were 
funded with SAF monies during the 1990-1991 academic 
year under criteria and guidelines established by the 
Board of Visitors. Upon information and belief, act- 
ing pursuant to its authority from the Board of Visitors, 
the Student Council allocated approximately $237,662.00 
to CIOs for that time period. 


14. The Board of Visitors guidelines that are applied 
by the Student Council prohibit the funding of “religious 
activities” with SAF monies. 

15. Upon information and belief, CIOs receiving SAF 
funding in the past have included organizations that ex- 
press religious beliefs and engage in religious activities. 
The Student Council has previously funded with SAF 
monies, for example, a student gospel group, Black 
Voices. Upon information and belief, in the hearings that 
are part of the SAF funding process, the representative 
of Black Voices stated that the group engages in religious 
activity. Upon information and belief, the Student Coun- 
cil has also funded in the past and continues to fund with 
SAF money the Muslim Students Association, the Jewish 
Law Students Association, and the C.S. Lewis Society. 
The constitutions, charters and public statements and ac- 
tions of these CIOs indicate that (at the time the defend- 
ants agreed to fund them) they engaged in and continue 


to engage in religious activity and expression. 


10 


16. Upon information and belief, acting pursuant to 
its authority from the Board of Visitors, the Student Coun- 
cil uses and has used in the past SAF funds to support 
at least fourteen “student news, information, opinion, 
entertainment or academic communications media groups.” 
These funded publications and organizations have ex- 
pressed and continue to express and contain both religious 
and secular matter. 


17. Certain other SAF-funded student organizations 
express particular worldviews which are often inconsistent 
with or antagonistic to various religious beliefs. These 
funded CIOs include organizations that advocate gay and 
lesbian viewpoints, environmentalism, feminism, animal 
“rights,” “prisoners’ rights,” and abortion “rights.” 

18. In January of 1991, Plaintiff RONALD W. 
ROSENBERGER, on behalf of plaintiffs WIDE AWAKE 
PRODUCTIONS and WIDE AWAKE MAGAZINE, sub- 
mitted an application for Student Activities Fund bene- 
fits to the Student Council Appropriations Committee. 
This application for funding was in the amount of 
$5,862.00 to support the publication of Wide Awake 
magazine. 


19. On or about February 26, 1991 the Student Coun- 
cil Appropriations Committee turned down plaintiffs’ re- 
quest for Student Activities Fund funding. A February 
26, 1991 letter from the Student Council’s Vice President 
for Student Organizations to plaintiff RONALD W. 
ROSENBERGER stated that the reason for the denial 
of funding was that the Student Council Appropriations 
Committee had “determined your organization’s request 
could not be funded as it is a religious activity. The 
determination was made after reviewing your first issue 
of Wide Awake.” 


20. No reason other than the alleged status of Wide 
Awake as a “religious activity” was offered as a basis for 
the denial of funding. 


11 


21. The application of Wide Awake for Student Activ- 
ities Fund benefits conformed with all applicable, content- 
neutral Student Activities Fund requirements. In particu- 
lar, at least 51% of Wide Awake’s members are students; 
the organization’s officers are all full-time, fee-paying stu- 
dents; the group keeps an updated copy of its constitution 
on file at the University of Virginia Student Council 
offices; and Wide Awake has signed all anti-discrimination 
disclaimers that are required. 


22. Pursuant to procedures established by the Board 
of Visitors and implemented by the Student Council, Wide 
Awake appealed the Student Council Appropriations Com- 
mittee’s denial of funding to the full Student Council on 
or about March 3, 1991. 


23. On or about March 19, 1991 the full Student 
Council denied Wide Awake’s appeal and affirmed the 
Student Council Appropriations Committee’s denial of 
funding. Upon information and belief, the Student Coun- 
cil stated no reasons for the denial of benefits to Wide 
Awake other than its alleged status as a “religious ac- 
tivity.” 

24. Pursuant to Board of Visitors and Student Council 
procedures, Wide Awake appealed the decision of the Stu- 
dent Council to the Student Activities Committee. 


25. On or about April 8, 1991 the Student Activities 
Committee held a public hearing on the Wide Awake 


appeal. 


26. On or about April 15, 1991 the Student Activities 
Committee voted to reaffirm the denial of funding to 
Wide Awake. Upon information and belief, the Student 
Activities Committee stated no reasons for the denial of 
benefits to Wide Awake other than its alleged status as 
a “religious activity.” 

27. Wide Awake has exhausted all internal and ad- 
ministrative procedures provided by the University of 
Virginia. 


12 


28. Defendants have denied and continue to deny 
SAF benefits to plaintiffs solely and expressly on the 
basis of plaintiffs’ viewpoint or the content of their ex- 
pression. 


29. Because plaintiffs have been denied SAF benefits, 
they are denied access to certain space and facilities at the 
University of Virginia, including but not limited to com- 
puters, printers and other equipment located in Peabody 
Hall at the University of Virginia. 


30. Upon information and belief, the facilities in Pea- 
body Hall containing computers, printers and other equip- 
ment are available for use and have been available for 
use at all times relevant herein by SAF-funded Contracted 
Independent Organizations upon payment of a nominal 
fee. 


31. By establishing, implementing and administering 
the SAF and the SAF fund-allocation policy, defendants 
have created a limited public forum that offers access 
to benefits designed to support and encourage the ex- 
change of a variety of viewpoints on the campus of the 
University of Virginia. 

32. Defendants have impermissibly and unlawfully de- 
nied plaintiffs access to the limited public forum because 
of plaintiffs’ viewpoint or the content of their speech. 

33. Defendants cannot demonstrate a compelling in- 
terest sufficient to justify the denial of SAF benefits to 
plaintiffs, nor can defendants demonstrate that the denial 
of funding is a narrowly drawn means to satisfy any 
such state interest. 


COUNT ONE: VIOLATION OF FREE SPEECH, 
FREE PRESS AND FREE ASSOCIATION 


34. The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 
33 are incorporated herein by this reference. 


35. Although defendants have provided SAF funding 
to a wide variety of CIOs that engage in religious and 


13 


secular expression, defendants have illegally and uncon- 
stitutionally denied plaintiffs SAF funding based solely 
on the content or viewpoint of plaintiffs’ speech, communi- 
cations, identity, activities, and/or membership. 


36. Plaintiffs have unjustifiably and unlawfully been 
denied benefits to which they were and are entitled as 
Contracted Independent Organizations under the Board 
of Visitors guidelines as implemented by the Studeat 
Council. This loss was the result of state action. This 
State action violated and continues to violate plaintiffs’ 
rights of free speech, free press and free association under 
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution 
and under Article I, Section 12 of the Virginia Constitu- 
tion. The denial of SAF funds to plaiutiffs constitutes 
impermissible viewpoint and content discrimination. There 
exists no compelling state interest to justify the defend- 
ants’ actions. Moreover, whatever interest the state may 
have in discriminating on the basis of the plaintiffs’ view- 
point or the content of their expression can adequately 
be served by a less restrictive regulation. 


37. Defendants’ guidelines and definiticns for allocat- 
ing SAF funds to CIOs are unlawfu!ly vague in that per- 
sons of common intelligence must necessarily guess at 
their meaning and differ as to their application, and over- 
broad in that they reach constitutionally protected activity. 


38. By virtue of the unlawful policies and conduct of 
defendants, plaintiffs have suffered and continue to suffer 
injury to their rights of free speech, free press and free 
association, and to the furtherance of their lawful activi- 
ties. 


COUNT TWO: VIOLATION OF FREE 
EXERCISE OF RELIGION 
39. The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 
38 are incorporated herein by this reference. 
40. The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment 


to the United States Constitution, the Free Exercise Clause 
of Article I, Section 16 of the Virginia Constitution, and 


14 


Code of Virginia Title 57, Chapter 1, Sections 57-1 and 
57-2 (the Virginia Act for Religious Freedom) prohibit 
government discrimination in the allocation of benefits 
or imposition of burdens based upon an individual’s or 
group’s religious beliefs, character, or affiliation, or based 
upon the religious content of their expression. 


41. Defendants have impermissibly and unlawfully de- 
nied plaintiffs SAF benefits generally available to other 
students and CIOs. This denial was based upon plaintiffs’ 
religious beliefs, character, affiliation, speech and asso- 
Ciation. 


42. Defendants have not shown and cannot show that 
denying plaintiffs the SAF funds to which they are law- 
fully entitled is necessary to serve a compelling state in- 
terest, nor can defendants show that such a denial is a 
narrowly drawn means of achieving that interest. 


43. Defendants’ conduct deprived and continues to de- 
prive plaintiffs of their right to free exercise of religion 
as guaranteed under the First and Fourteenth Amendments 
to the United States Constitution; under Article I, Section 
16 of the Virginia Constitution; and under Code of Vir- 
ginia Title 57, Chapter 1, Sections 57-1 and 57-2 (the 
Virginia Act for Religious Freedom). 


44. Defendants’ conduct constitutes a failure to give 
reasonable accommodation to plaintiffs’ religious beliefs. 


45. By virtue of the unlawful policies and conduct of 
defendants, plaintiffs have suffered and continue to suffer 
injury to their rights of religious freedom and to the fur- 
therance of their lawful activities. 


COUNT THREE: VIOLATION OF EQUAL 
PROTECTION OF THE LAWS 


46. The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 
45 are incorporated herein by this reference. 

47. By denying plaintiffs the benefits to which other 
students and CIOs are entitled, defendants unlawfully and 
unconstitutionally treat plaintiffs differently from other 


15 


similarly situated students and student Organizations on 
the basis of the content or viewpoint of their speech, 
association, beliefs, character, affiliation, identity and ac- 
tivity. 

48. By denying plaintiffs the benefits that other stu- 
dents and CIOs engaging in religious speech and activi- 
ties receive and have received, defendants unlawfully and 
unconstitutionally treat defendants differently from other 
similarly situated students and student organizations on 
the basis of their religious speech, association, beliefs, 
character, affiliation, identity and activity. 


49. Defendants’ conduct under color of state law vio- 
lates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and the 
Anti-Discrimination Clause of Article I, Section 11 of the 
Virginia Constitution in that it constitutes discrimination 
on a suspect basis and violates fundamental constitutional 
rights. This violation is not justified by a compelling state 
interest and is not accomplished by narrowly drawn 
means. Defendants have singled out plaintiffs and denied 
them SAF benefits based upon the content or viewpoint 
of their group, their speech, their expression and their 
association. 


50. Plaintiffs have suffered and continue to suffer in- 
jury to their rights of equal protection under the law, 
and to the furtherance of their lawful activities, by virtue 
of the unlawful policies and conduct of defendants. 


COUNT FOUR: VIOLATION OF 42 U.S.C. § 1983 


51. The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 
50 are incorporated herein by this reference. 


52. Defendants’ denial of plaintiffs’ free speech, free 
press, free association, free exercise of religion and equal 
protection rights under color of state law violates Chapter 
22, Section 1 of the Civil Rights Act of 1871, as amended, 
42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1988). 


16 


PETITION FOR RELIEF 


53. The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 
52 are incorporated herein by this reference. 


54. Plaintiffs have no plain, speedy and adequate rem- 
edy at law. 


55. Plaintiffs have exhausted all University of Virginia 
internal and administrative procedures. 


56. Plaintiffs are suffering, and will continue to suffer, 
irreparable injury for the period of the continued viola- 
tion of their constitutional rights. 


57. WHEREFORE, having stated claims against the 
defendants under the United States Constitution, the Vir- 
ginia Constitution, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 1988, and 
other applicable law, plaintiffs petition this Court for the 
following relief: 


A. a declaratory judgment that the conduct of the 
various named defendants in establishing and applying a 
policy for the University of Virginia, the Rector and 
Visitors of the University of Virginia, the Student Council 
of the University of Virginia, and the Appropriations 
Committee of the Student Council, which refuses to allow 
the same benefits to plaintiffs as to other similarly situated 
student organizations (benefits including, but not limited 
to, eligibility to receive Student Activities Fund (“SAF”) 
funds) and which denies plaintiffs SAF funding solely 
and expressly because of the content or viewpoint of their 
speech violates plaintiffs’ rights to freedom of speech, 
freedom of association, freedom of the press, free exer- 
cise of religion and to equal protection under the law, as 
guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to 
the United States Constitution; by Article I, Sections 11, 
12 and 16 of the Virginia Constitution; and by the Vir- 
ginia Act for Religious Freedom, Code of Virginia Title 
57, Chapter 1, Sections 57-1 and 57-2; 


17 


B. a declaratory judgment that the above-described 
conduct of the various named defendants denies plaintiffs 
their civil rights under color of state law in violation of 
Chapter 22, Section 1 of the Civil Rights Act of 1871, 
as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1988); 


C. a permanent order enjoining defendants from main- 
taining and applying a policy of discriminating against 
plaintiffs in the appropriation of Student Activities Fund 
benefits or in any other manner on the basis of plaintiffs’ 
speech or on the basis of the content or viewpoint of the 
speech of the Contracted Independent Organization of 
which plaintiffs are members or of the journals, maga- 
zines, newsletters or other things that plaintiffs publish 
or may publish in the future; 


D. such compensatory damages for violation of plain- 
tiffs’ federal and state constitutional and statutory rights 
as the Court may find just and proper, including but not 
limited to $5,862.00, the sum of the SAF funds unlaw- 
fully denied plaintiffs, plus interest thereon from the date 
of such denial; 


E. an order awarding plaintiffs reasonable costs and 
attorneys’ fees pursuant to Section 2 of the Civil Rights 
Attorney’s Fees Award Act of 1976, as amended, 42 
U.S.C. § 1988 (1988); and 


F. such other relief as the Court deems just and 
proper. 


Dated: Charlottesville, Virginia 
July 11, 1991 


4 8 
Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ James R. Murray 
JAMES R. MURRAY 
JACKSON R. SHARMAN III 
COVINGTON & BURLING 
P.O. Box 7566 
1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20044 
(202) 662-6000 
Attorneys for Plaintiffs 


/s/ George H. Dygert 
GeorGE H. DyGert (Bar No. 16378) 
908 East High Street 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22901 
(804) 979-5515 
Attorneys for Plaintiffs 


Of Counsel 


MICHAEL P. McDoNnALD 
CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
2300 N Street, N.W. 

6th Floor 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 663-9041 


19 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
Charlottesville Division 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


ANSWER 


Defendants, by counsel, answer the Complaint in this 
action as follows: 


Nature and Summary of the Action 


1. Paragraph 1 generally sets forth legal conclusions 
for which no answer is required. 


2. Paragraph 2 generally sets forth legal conclusions in 
the context of the nature of relief the Plaintiffs seek, 
and thus no answer is required. It is admitted that the 
named Plaintiffs are past and present students of the 
University of Virginia. It is denied that WIDE AWAKE 
PRODUCTIONS, as well as other Contracted Independent 
Organizations (CIO), is an Organizational unit or com- 
ponent “of” the University of Virginia. With respect to 
the allegation in Paragraph 2.D. concerning the request 
for compensatory damages in the amount of $5,862.00, 
there is no assurance that even if WIDE AWAKE PRO- 
DUCTIONS were deemed eligible for student activity 
funding (SAF) the organization would have received this 
requested amount in whole or in part. Any remaining 
factual allegations in Paragraph 2 are denied. 


Jurisdiction 
3. The allegations in Paragraph 3 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


Venue 


4. The allegations in Paragraph 4 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


20 


Parties 


5. Regarding Paragraph 5, Defendants deny that the 
WIDE AWAKE magazine is (or was) exclusively or prin- 
cipe'ly “a journal of news, commentary, and opinion”, 
aid further state that the editor has stated that the mission 
of the organization and the magazine it publishes is (and 
has been) to challenge Christians to live according to 
their faith and to encourage students to consider what a 
personal relationship with Jesus Christ means. On in- 
formation and belief, the remaining factual allegations in 
Paragraph 5 are admitted. 


6. The allegations in Paragraph 6 are admitted. De- 
fendants further state that the student activity fees ad- 
ministered by the Student Council, and allocated to eligible 
student organizations constitute public or state funds. 


7. The allegations in Paragraph 7 are admitted. 


General Allegations 


8. Regarding Paragraph 8, Defendants deny that the 
Board of Visitors (directly or through delegated agents) 
approves the constitution and charters of student organi- 
zations or CIOs; nor does the Board “insure” that such 
organizations adhere to all State and City regulations and 
statutes. Defendants further state that, in administering 
and allocating public funds entrusted to the University, 
the Board of Visitors and its designees are legally obli- 
gated to comply with federal and State constitutional and 
statutory constraints, including the prohibition against 
financial support or subsidy of sectarian organizations or 
religious activities. The remaining factual allegations in 
Paragraph 8 are admitted. 


9. The allegations in Paragraph 9 are admitted. 
10. The allegations in Paragraph 10 are admitted. 
11. The allegations in Paragraph 11 are admitted. 


21 


12. Regarding Paragraph 12, only full-time students 
are charged the student activity fee. The remaining allega- 
tions in Paragraph 12 are admitted. 


13. The allegations in Paragraph 13 pertaining to the 
number of CIOs at the University of Virginia, the number 
or proportion of CIOs that were funded by the Student 
Council, and the total amount allocated by the Student 
Council are not accurate. In all other respects, the allega- 
tions in Paragraph 13 are admitted. 


14. The allegations in Paragraph 14 are admitted. 


15. Regarding Paragraph 15, it is admitted that the 
student organization, Black Voices, was funded for the 
1990-91 academic year, but as a cultural—and not a 
religious—activity. It is further admitted that a repre- 
sentative of Black Voices remarked during the SAF appro- 
priation process that the organization engaged in religious 
activity, but upon further discussion of the applicable defi- 
nition of religious activity in the guidelines, the representa- 
tive expressly stated that the organization is not a religious 
activity. Furthermore, during the 1990-91 year the 
Black Voices organization determined that it had shifted 
from being a cultural activity to a religious activity and 
consequently resolved not to seek SAF funding for the 
1991-92 academic year. It is also admitted that the 
Muslim Students Association, the Jewish Law Students 
Association, and the C. S. Lewis Society are organizations 
that have been funded in the past as cultural—and not re- 
ligious—activities. The remaining factual allegations in 
Paragraph 15 are denied. 


16. Regarding Paragraph 16, it is admitted that student 
publications that have received SAF funds in the past 
have occasionally and incidentally contained opinions or 
articles that express religious viewpoints. However, unlike 
WIDE AWAKE magazine whose overt and self-avowed 
purpose is to provide a pervasively sectarian perspective, 
such other funded student publications are secular in 


22 


nature and any religious viewpoints are invariably inci- 
dental parts of their activities. Thus, in this and all other 
respects the allegations in Paragraph 16 are denied. 


17. Regarding Paragraph 17, it is admitted only that 
certain SAF-funded student organizations express varying 
ideological viewpoints. The remaining allegations of Para- 
graph 17 are denied. 


18. The allegations in Paragraph 18 are admitted. 
19. The allegations in Paragraph 19 are admitted. 
20. The allegations in Paragraph 20 are denied. 


21. On information and belief, the allegations in Para- 
graph 21 are admitted. 


22. The allegations in Paragraph 22 are admitted. 

23. Regarding Paragraph 23, it is admitted only that 
on or about March 19, 1991, the full Student Council 
denied WIDE AWAKE’s appeal and affirmed the Student 
Council Appropriations Committee’s denial of funding. 
The remaining factual allegations in Paragraph 23 are 
denied. 

24. The allegations in Paragraph 24 are admitted. 

25. The allegations in Paragraph 25 are admitted. 


26. Regarding Paragraph 26, it is admitted only that 
the Student Activities Committee unanimously voted to 
reaffirm the denial of funding te WIDE AWAKE. The 
remaining factual allegations in Paragraph 26 are denied. 


27. The allegations in Paragraph 27 are admitted. 
28. The allegations in Paragraph 28 are denied. 
29. The allegations in Paragraph 29 are denied. 
30. The allegations in Paragraph 30 are denied. 
31. The allegations in Paragraph 31 are denied. 
32. The allegations in Paragraph 32 are denied. 
33. The allegations in Paragraph 33 are denied. 


23 


34. The allegations incorporated in Paragraph 34 are 
variously admitted or denied as specified in the responses 
reflected in the preceding paragraphs. 


35. Regarding Paragraph 35, Defendants state that 
only CIOs that are not religious, honorary, philanthropic, 
social, or political are eligible for SAF funding under the 
Board of Visitors guidelines. The remaining allegations in 
Paragraph 35 are denied. 


36. The allegations in Paragraph 36 are denied. 
37. The allegations in Paragraph 37 are denied. 
38. The allegations in Paragraph 38 are denied. 


3 9. The allegations incorporated in Paragraph 39 are 
variously admitted or denied as specified in the responses 
reflected in the preceding paragraphs. 

40. The allegations in Paragraph 40 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


41. The allegations in Paragraph 41 are denied. 
42. The allegations in Paragraph 42 are denied. 
43. The allegations in Paragraph 43 are denied. 


44. The allegations in Paragraph 44 are denied. 
45. The allegations in Paragraph 45 are denied. 


46. The allegations incorporated in Paragraph 46 are 
variously admitted or denied as specified in the responses 
reflected in the preceding paragraphs. 


47. The allegations in Paragraph 47 are denied. De- 
fendants further state that only CIOs that are not religious, 
honorary, philanthropic, social, or political are eligible for 
SAF funding. 

48. The allegations in Paragraph 48 are denied. De- 
fendants further state that only CIOs that are not religious, 
honorary, philanthropic, social, or political are eligible for 
SAF funding. 


49. Regarding Paragraph 49, Defendants state that the 
University and its agents are prohibited under the United 


24 


States and Virginia constitutions from financially funding 
or subsidizing religious organizations or activities. De- 
fendants further state that as part of its request for SAF 
funds, the WIDE AWAKE representative admitted that 
the organization’s publication was “a forum for Christian 
expression” and a means “to challenge Christians (and 
how) to live ...”. In this and other respects, therefore, 
the allegations in Paragraph 49 are denied. 


50. The allegations in Paragraph 50 are denied. 


51. The allegations incorporated in Paragraph 51 are 
variously admitted or denied as specified in the responses 
reflected in the preceding paragraphs. 


52. The allegations in Paragraph 52 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


Petition for Relief 


53. The allegations incorporated in Paragraph 53 are 
variously admitted or denied as specified in the responses 
reflected in the preceding paragraphs of this Answer. 


54. The allegations in Paragraph 54 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


55. The allegations in Paragraph 55 are admitted. 


56. The allegations in Paragraph 56 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


57. The allegations in Paragraph 57 set forth legal con- 
clusions for which no answer is required. 


AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES 


As required by Rule 8(c), Fed. Rules Civ. Proc., De- 
fendants assert the following affirmative defenses to the 


Complaint: 


1. Plaintiffs’ quest for retroactive monetary relief is 
barred by the Eleventh Amendment to the United States 


25 


Constitution for the reasons set forth in the accompanying 
Motion to Dismiss. 


2. At all times relevant to the matters alleged in the 
Complaint, Defendants acted in good faith compliance 
with the existing law and in good faith exercise of their 
official duties. 

Respectfully submitted, 


RONALD J. STUMP 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al. 


By: /s/ James J. Mingle 
Counsel 


Mary SuE TERRY 
Attorney General 


JAMES J. MINGLE 

Special Assistant Attorney General 
and General Counsel 

University of Virginia 

Post Office Box 9015 

Charlottesville, VA 22906-9015 

(804) 924-3586 


CAROLINE L. LOCKERBY 
Assistant Attorney General 
Office of the Attorney General 
101 North Eighth Street 
Supreme Court Building 
Richmond, VA 23219 

(804) 786-2421 


[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


26 


UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA AGREEMENT 
FOR A CONTRACTED INDEPENDENT ORGANIZATION 


THIS AGREEMENT, dated as shown on page 2, para- 
graph 15 of this Agreement, by and between The Rector 
and Visitors of the University of Virginia, A Virginia 
public corporation (the “University”), and the organiza- 
tion shown on page 2, paragraph 15 (the “CIO,” for 
“Contracted Independent Organization” ) ; 


WITNESS 


Various organizations comprised primarily of Univer- 
sity of Virginia students, faculty or staff wish the Uni- 
versity to provide the organizations with certain benefits. 
Without necessarily approving or disapproving the goals 
or activities of particular organizations, the University 
recognizes that the availability of a wide range of op- 
portunities for its students, faculty and staff tends to en- 
hance the University environment. 


The University is thus willing to provide certain benefits 
to certain organizations (known as “CIO’s”), but those 
benefits should not be misinterpreted as meaning that those 
organizations are part of or controlled by the University, 
that the University is responsible for the organizations’ 
contracts or other acts or omissions, or that the University 
approves of the organizations’ goals or activities. 


The University does not use the concept of “recogaiz- 
ing” organizations. They are free to exist and operate 
either with or without any University benefits. The pur- 
pose of this Agreement is to describe the entire relationship 
between the University and the CIO which is a party to 
this Agreement, including all of the University benefits the 
CIO may receive, and all of the conditions for their 
receipt. 


Accordingly, the parties agree as follows: 


27 
1. Representations 


The CIO represents that it is either a non-stock Virginia 
corporation in good standing with the Virginia State Cor- 
poration Commission or an unincorporated association 
(see page 2, paragraph 15) existing under the laws of 
Virginia pursuant to the CIO’s constitution, a copy of the 
current version of which, and all future amendments, shall 
be provided to the University by the CIO (unless the cur- 
rent constitution is already on file with Student Council 
and the Office of the Dean of Students). The CIO shall 
also provide the University with a list of all current offi- 
cers, their addresses and phone numbers, and any changes 
made to this list. 


The person executing this Agreement on the CIO’s be- 
half represents that. 


(a) the members of the CIO were provided with a 
copy of this Agreement as proposed and the membership 
thereafter authorized such person to execute the Agree- 
ment; and 


(b) the CIO has consulted with its legal counsel con- 
cerning the matters in this Agreement or has had adequate 
opportunity to do so. 


2. Relationship between the CIO and the University 


The University is a Virginia public corporation and the 
CIO is not part of that corporation, but rather exists and 
operates independently of the University. The CIO is not 
an agent, servant or employee of the University, but rather 
is an independent contractor which manages its own 
affairs. 


The parties understand and agree that this Agreement is 
the only source of any control the University may have 
over the CIO or its activities, except to the extent, if any, 
the University chooses to exercise control over activities 
occurring on its property, or over matters covered by the 
University’s honor or judiciary systems. The parties un- 


28 


derstand and agree that the CIO is not required to enter 
into this Agreement and the only result of the CIO 
terminating or failing to execute this Agreement will be 
the loss of the benefits described in this Agreement. 


3. The CIO’s Dealings with Third Parties 


The CIO shall not hold itself out as being part of, con- 
trolled by, or acting on behalf of the corporation which is 
the University. The CIO shall take affirmative steps in all 
of its recruitment, business, and other dealings with third 
parties (including, for example, prospective members, and 
businesses) to explain its relationship with the University. 
As one of such steps, the CIO shall include the following 
statement (or another similar statement approved in ad- 
vance by the University) in the CIO’s letters, contracts, 
publications and other such written materials (except intra- 
university and intraCIO correspondence) : 


Although this organization has members who are Uni- 
versity of Virginia students (faculty) (employees), 
the organization is independent of the corporation 
which is the University and which is not responsible 
for the organization’s contracts, acts or omissions. 


4. Use of the University’s Name and Symbols 


The University does not encourage the use of its name 
as part of the CIO’s name, but it will allow such use pro- 
vided that, to reinforce the CIO’s duties under Section 3 
above, the CIO takes whatever steps necessary to prevent 
persons and organizations with which it deals from receiv- 
ing the impression that the CIO is part of, controlled by 
or acting on behalf of the University. The University sug- 
gests that one such step is for any use of the University’s 
name as part of the CIO’s name to be in the form of “The 
XYZ Club at the University of Virginia.” “The University 
of Virginia XYZ Club” is not acceptable and cannot be 
used. 


29 


The CIO shall not use any marks, symbols, logos, 
mottoes or indicia of the University without its express 
prior written consent. 


5. Taxes 


The CIO shall not use the University’s taxpayer identifi- 
cation number or the University’s tax-exempt status in 
connection with purchases or sales by the CIO, gifts to the 
CIO, interest or other income of the CIO, or any other 
activity of the CIO. 


6. Liability, Insurance and Defense 


The CiO understands and agrees that the University, 
the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the employees and 
agents of either will not be liable for any of the CIO’s 
contracts, torts, or other acts or omissions, or those by 
the CIO’s directors, officers, members, staff or activity 
participants. The CIO understands and agrees that neither 
it nor its directors, officers, members, staff, or activity par- 
ticipants are protected by the University’s or the Common- 
wealth of Virginia’s insurance policies or self-insurance 
plans, and that the University and the Commonwealth will 
not provide any legal defense for the CIO or any such 
person in the event of any claim against any of them. 


7. Non-discrimination ( 


The CIO shall not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, religion, national origin, handicap, sex, citizenship, 
sexual orientation, or age when determining its member- 
ship. Notwithstanding these requirements, a club sport 
may restrict membership based on sex where selection for 
such teams is based upon competitive athletic skill or the 
activity involved is a contact sport. Organizations may 
also make requirements based on vocal range or quality 
which may result in a chorus or choruses of one or pre- 
dominantly one sex. A fraternity or sorority as defined in 


30 


Attachment B may discriminate on the basis of sex. In 
determining cases of the discrimination it is not sufficient 
to look merely to the constitution of the CJO. Its actual 
practices and operations are also relevant. 


8. Funding 


To be eligible to receive any funds from the student 
activities fee collected and administered by the University 
and Student Council, the CIO must comply with the pro- 
visions adopted by the Board of Visitors and Student 
Council. If the CIO receives any funding, it shall comply 
with the provisions adopted by the President, the Student 
Activities Committee, and Student Council pursuant to the 
powers delegated to them. 


9. Use of Facilities 


The University hereby makes the CIO eligible for use 
of the University’s facilities, subject to the policies and 
procedures of the University and Student Council appli- 
cable to such facilities. If space in Newcomb/Peabody is 
assigned to the CIO, the description of such space and 
any special conditions applicable to its use shall be main- 
tained by Student Council and/or the University. 


10. “Fraternity” or “Sorority” 


If the CIO is a “Fraternity” or “Sorority” as defined in 
Attachment B, it shall also comply with the provisions of 
that attachment as a part of this Agreement. 


11. Club Sports 


If the CIO is a “Club Sport” as defined in Attachment 
A, it shall also receive the benefits enumerated in that 
attachment and abide by the provisions of that attachment 
as a part of this Agreement. 


31 
12. Term of Agreement 


This Agreement shall become effective as of the date 
written below and shall terminate on the last day of class 
of the academic year unless terminated earlier by the CIO, 
with or without cause, by written notice to the Univer- 
sity, or by the University as a result of any violation of 
this Agreement by the CIO. The University Judiciary 
Committee may likewise recommend the termination of 
this Agreement for violations of the University’s Standards 
of Conduct. Further, the University reserves the right to 
suspend or terminate this Agreement for cause. 


13. Waiver 


Failure of the University to enforce any of the provi- 
sions of this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver 
of that provision or any later breach thereof. 


14. Notices 


Any notice under this Agreement shall be deemed 
given when deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, and 
addressed as follows: 


If to the CIO: (please print or type) 


Wipe AWAKE 

c/o R.W. Rosenberger 
P.O. Box 607 

Newcomb Hall 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 


If to the University: 


Office of the Dean of Students 
P.O. Box 708, Newcomb Hall Station, U.Va. 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22904 


or to such other persons, at such addresses, as either party 
may designate for itself and so notify the other party in 
writing. 


32 


15. Entire Agreement; Amendments 


This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement be- 
tween the CIO and the University concerning this subject 
matter, and it supersedes all prior written or oral agree- 
ments concerning this subject matter. This Agreement 
may not be amended except by written document executed 
by both parties. 


IN WITNESS THEREOF, the parties have executed 
this Agreement below: 


NAME OF CIO: WIDE AWAKE 
Check one: — a non-stock Virginia Corporation 
X an unincorporated association 


By Ronald W. Rosenberger 
(Authorized Organization Officer’s 
(Printed Name} 


/s/ R. W. Rosenberger 
(Authorized Organization Officer’s 
Signature ) 
Title: Editor-in-Chief 
Date: 4/24/91 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 


By /s/ Ronald J. Stump 
(University Authorized Officer ) 


Title: Associate Dean of Students 


Date: 5-2-91 
(Effective Date of Contract) 


Reviewed by Student Council: /s/ Mike Marcellin 
(Authorized Officer of Student Council) 


33 


PLEASE ATTACH ORGANIZATION’S CONSTITU- 
TION AND LIST OF OFFICERS; AND RETURN ALL 
COPIES OF THIS FORM 


University of Virginia CIO Agreement, Document #1, 
04/18/91 


White—Organization (CIO) 
Canary—Student Council 
Pink—Offfice of the Dean of Students 
Goldenrod—Governing Group 


34 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
CHARLOTTESVILLE DIVISION 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PLAINTIFFS’ STATEMENT OF MATERIAL FACTS 
AS TO WHICH THERE IS NO GENUINE ISSUE 


* * * * 


STATEMENT OF MATERIAL FACTS AS TO 
WHICH THERE IS NO GENUINE ISSUE 


Plaintiffs set forth below their statement of material 
facts as to which there is no genuine issue in support of 
their Motion for Summary Judgment. 


1. Plaintiff RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, a student 
at the University of Virginia, is presently a resident of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia and was a resident of the 
Commonwealth of Virginia at all times relevant herein. 
The unincorporated organization of which he is a mem- 
ber, plaintiff WIDE AWAKE PRODUCTIONS, is and 
was at all times relevant herein a Contracted Independent 
Organization (“CIO”) at the University of Virginia, with 
its principal operations in the County of Albemarle, Com- 
monwealth of Virginia. The publication of which he is 
Publisher, plaintiff WIDE AWAKE MAGAZINE, is and 
was at all times relevant herein published and distributed 
by plaintiff WIDE AWAKE PRODUCTIONS at the Uni- 
versity of Virginia in the County of Albemarle, Common- 
wealth of Virginia. Plaintiff ROBERT J. PRINCE is a 
student at the University of Virginia and the Managing 
Editor of WIDE AWAKE MAGAZINE. Plaintiff GREG- 
ORY W. MOURAD is a student at the University of 
Virginia and Editor-in-Chief of WIDE AWAKE MAGA- 


35 


ZINE. Plaintiffs ROBERT J. PRINCE and GREGORY 
W. MOURAD are and/or at all times relevant herein 
were residents of or located in the County of Albemarle, 
Commonwealth of Virginia. (Complaint 4 5; Answer 4 5; 
Affidavit of Ronald W. Rosenberger, Editor-in-Chief of 
Wide Awake magazine (“Rosenberger Aff.”) $4 1-2).” 


2. Defendants EDWARD E. ELSON, W.L. LYONS 
BROWN, JR., ROBERT G. BUTCHER, JR., N. 
THOMAS CONNALLY, M.D., HOVEY S. DABNEY, 
WALLER H. HORSLEY, J. THOMAS HULVEY, M.D., 
EVANS B. JESSEE, PATRICIA M. KLUGE, ARNOLD 
H. LEON, LEIGH B. MIDDLEDITCH, JR., ELIZA- 
BETH D. MORIE, FREDDIE W. NICHOLAS, SR.., S. 
BUFORD SCOTT, JESSE B. WILSON, III, THOMAS 
E. WORRELL, JR., ADAM S. ARTHUR, and ALEX- 
ANDER G. GILLIAM, JR. are sued in their capacities 
as members of defendant RECTOR AND VISITORS OF 
THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA (“Board of Visi- 
tors”). The Board of Visitors of the University of Vir- 
ginia is a corporation established by the General Assem- 
bly of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Board of 
Visitors is subject to the control of the General Assembly 
of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The members of the 
Board of Visitors are appointed by the Governor of Vir- 
ginia. The Board of Visitors, in accordance with the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia and with 
law, formulates policy, makes regulations and exercises 
such control over the University of Virginia as it deems 
expedient. The Board of Visitors may lawfully delegate 
this power. Under authority of the General Assembly, 
the Board of Visitors has exclusive jurisdiction over the 
internal organization, government and management of 
the University of Virginia. The University of Virginia 
is an institution of higher education that receives public 
funds from the Commonwealth of Virginia. The monies 


1 Unless otherwise specified, plaintiffs are hereafter referred to 
collectively as “Wide Awake.” ms 


36 


in the Students Activities Fund (“SAF”) constitute public 
funds. (Complaint 4 6; Answer 4 6). 


3. Defendant RONALD J. STUMP is and was at all 
times relevant herein Associate Dean of Students at the 
University of Virginia and Chairperson of the Student 
Activities Committee of the University of Virginia. De- 
fendant RONALD J. STUMP is and/or was at all times 
relevant herein the Associate Dean of Students at the Uni- 
versity of Virginia and Chairperson of the Student Ac- 
tivities Committee of the University of Virginia. The 
Student Activities Committee is a University of Virginia 
committee composed of faculty members, administrators 
and students. The Student Activities Committee is charged 
by the Vice President for Student Affairs of the Univer- 
sity of Virginia to provide oversight of the student activi- 
ties fee fund and its allocation by the Student Council. 
(Complaint 4 7; Answer 4 7). 


4. As provided for in the Code of Virginia Title 23, 
Chapter 9, Article 2, Sections 23-69 to 23-80, the Board 
of Visitors is charged with the authority to manage the 
affairs of the University of Virginia. One of its respon- 
sibilities is the general oversight of student activities. To 
this end, the Board of Visitors has adopted policies with 
regard to the operation and funding of student organiza- 
tions. Such policies include the requirement that the 
Board of Visitors (or its delegate) establish guidelines for 
the funding of such organizations from Student Activities 
Fund (“SAF”) monies. (Complaint 4 8; Answer 4 8). 


5. The Student Council of the University of Virginia 
is a Special Status Student Organization that conducts 
its affairs pursuant to a delegation of authority from the 
Board of Visitors. Currently and at all times relevant 
herein, the Board of Visitors sets forth and has set forth 
the guidelines and procedures for the distribution of SAF 
funds to Contracted Independent Organizations. Cur- 
rently and at all times relevant herein, the Student Coun- 


37 


cil implements and has implemented these guidelines and 
procedures. (Complaint 4 9; Answer 4 9). 


6. The Student Council has a number of subcommit- 
tees, including an Appropriations Committee. The Ap- 
propriations Committee is chaired by the Student Coun- 
cil’s Vice-President for Student Organizations. (Complaint 
q 10; Answer 4 10). 


7. During the period relevant to this lawsuit, the Stu- 
dent Council, upon recommendation of its Appropria- 
tions Committee, has regularly funded CIOs from SAF 
funds. This practice dates back at least to 1973. (Com- 
plaint 4 11; Answer 4 11). 


8. The University of Virginia has charged at all 
times relevant herein and currently charges each full- 
time student a compulsory student activity fee of $14.00 
per semester. There is no procedural or other mechanism 
by which a student may decline to pay the fee. These 
compulsory student fees are deposited into the University 
of Virginia Student Activities Fund. (Complaint 4 12; 
Answer 4 12). 


9. There are more than 300 CIOs at the University 
of Virginia. Approximately 100 CIOs were funded with 
SAF monies during the 1990-1991 academic year under 
criteria and guidelines established by the Board of Visi- 
tors. Acting pursuant to its authority from the Board of 
Visitors, the Student Council allocated more than 
$200,000.00 to CIOs for that time period. (Complaint 
q 13; Answer q 13). 


10. The Board of Visitors guidelines that are applied 
by the Student Council prohibit the funding of, inter alia, 
“religious activities” with SAF monies. (Complaint 4 14; 
Answer 4 14). 

11. The student organization Black Voices was funded 
with SAF monies for the 1990-91 academic year. During 
the SAF appropriations process, the representative of 


38 


Black Voices stated that the organization engaged in re- 
ligious activity. Subsequently during the SAF appropria- 
tions process, the representative of Black Voices stated 
that the organization did not engage in religious activity. 
Prior to the SAF appropriations process for the 1991-92 
academic year, defendant RONALD J. STUMP informed 
the Black Voices organization that the organization could 
either forego engaging in “religious activity” or forego 
receipt of SAF benefits. Black Voices subsequently re- 
solved not to seek SAF benefits for the 1991-92 academic 
year. (Complaint 4 15; Answer 4 15). 


12. The Muslim Students Association, the Jewish Law 
Students Association, and the C.S. Lewis Society have 
received in the past and continue to receive SAF benefits. 
(Complaint § 15; Answer 4 15). 


13. Student publications that have received SAF bene- 
fits in the past have contained opinions or articles that 
express both religious and secular viewpoints. (Complaint 
q{ 16; Answer § 16). 


14. Wide Awake magazine contains both religious and 
secular subject matter. (Rosenberger Aff. § 3). 


15. Wide Awake magazine generally expresses a reli- 
gious perspective. (Answer ¥ 16; Rosenberger Aff. § 4). 


16. SAF-funded student organizations express a va- 
riety of ideological viewpoints, including but not limited 
to viewpoints which are inconsistent with or antagonistic 
+1 her religious beliefs. (Complaint 417; Answer 


17. In January of 1991, Plaintiff RONALD wW. 
ROSENBERGER, on behalf of plaintiffs WIDE AWAKE 
PRODUCTIONS and WIDE AWAKE MAGAZINE, sub- 
mitted an application for Student Activities Fund benefits 
to the Student Council Appropriations Committee. This 
application for funding was in the amount of $5,862.00 


39 


to support the publication of Wide Awake magazine. 
(Complaint 4 18; Answer 4 18). 


18. On or about February 26, 1991 the Student Coun- 
cil Appropriations Committee turned down plaintiffs’ 
request for Student Activities Fund funding. A February 
26, 1991 letter from the Student Council’s Vice President 
for Student Organizations to plaintiff RONALD W. 
ROSENBERGER stated that the reason for the denial 
of funding was that the Student Council Appropriations 
Committee had “determined your organization’s request 
could not be funded as it is a religious activity. The 
determination was made after reviewing your first issue 
of Wide Awake.” (Complaint 4 19; Answer 4 19). 


19. No reason other than the alleged status of Wide 
Awake as a “religious activity” was offered as a basis for 
the denial of funding. (Complaint § 20; Complaint 4 20 
[sic]; Rosenberger Aff. 4 5). 


20. The application of Wide Awake for Student 
Activities Fund benefits conformed with all applicable, 
content-neutral Student Activities Fund requirements. 
In particular, at least 51% of Wide Awake’s members 
are students; the organization’s officers are all full-time, 
fee-paying students; the group keeps an updated copy of 
its constitution on file at the University of Virginia Stu- 
dent Council offices; and Wide Awake has signed all anti- 
discrimination disclaimers that are required. (Complaint 
q 21; Answer 4 21; Rosenberger Aff. 4 8). 


21. Pursuant to procedures established by the Board 
of Visitors and implemented by the Student Council, 
Wide Awake appealed the Student Council Appropria- 
tions Committee’s denial of funding to the full Student 
Council on or about March 3, 1991. (Complaint ¢ 22; 
Answer 4 22). | 


22. On or about March 19, 1991, the full Student 
Council denied Wide Awake’s appeal and affirmed the 


40 
Student Council Appropriations Committee’s denial of 
funding. (Complaint § 23; Answer § 23). 


23. The Student Council stated no reasons for the 
denial of benefits to Wide Awake other than its alleged 
Status as a “religious activity.” (Complaint 423; Answer 
{ 23; Rosenberger Aff. 4 5). 


24. Pursuant to Board of Visitors and Student Coun- 
cil procedures, Wide Awake appealed the decision of the 
Student Council to the Student Activities Committee. 
(Complaint § 24; Answer § 24). 


25. On or about April 8, 1991 the Student Activities 
Committee held a public hearing on the Wide Awake 
appeal. (Complaint ¢ 25; Answer 4 25). 


26. On or about April 15, 1991 the Student Activities 
Committee voted to affirm the denial of funding to Wide 
Awake. (Complaint § 26; Answer 4 26). 


27. The Student Activities Committee stated no rea- 
sons for the denial of benefits to Wide Awake other than 
its alleged status as a “religious activity.” (Complaint 
{ 26; Answer ¢ 26; Rosenberger Aff. 4 5). 


28. Wide Awake has exhausted all internal and ad- 
ministrative procedures provided by the University of 
Virginia. (Complaint ¢ 27; Answer § 27). 


29. Because plaintiffs have been denied SAF benefits, 
they are ineligible to apply for access to certain space 
and facilities at the University of Virginia, including but 
not limited to computers, printers and other equipment 
located in Peabody Hall at the University of Virginia. 
(Complaint ¢ 29; Answer 4 29; Rosenberger Aff. 4 6). 


30. The facilities in Peabody Hall containing com- 
puters, printers and other equipment are available for use 
and have been available for use at all times relevant 
herein by SAF-funded Contracted Independent Organiza- 
tions that produce publications and pay a nominal annual 


41 


fee for the use of such facilities. (Compiaint § 30; An- 
swer 4 30; Rosenberger Aff. 4 7). 


Dated: Charlottesville, Virginia 
November 11, 1991 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ James R. Murray 
JAMES R. MURRAY 
JACKSON R. SHARMAN III 
COVINGTON & BURLING 
P.O. Box 7566 
1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20044 
(202) 662-6000 


/s/ George H. Dygert 
GeorGE H. DYGERT 
(Bar No. 16378) 
GeEorGE H. DyGerT & ASSOCIATES 
900 E. High Street 
Charlottesville, VA 22701 
(804) 979-5515 
Attorneys for Plaintiffs 
Of Counsel 


MICHAEL P. MCDONALD 
CENTER FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 
1300 19th Street, N.W. 

Suite 260 

Washington, D.C. 20036 

(202) 833-8400 


42 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
CHARLOTTESVILLE DIVISION 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


AFFIDAVIT OF RONALD W. ROSENBERGER 


I, Ronald W. Rosenberger, state as follows: 


1. I, Ronald W. Rosenberger, am a student at the 
University of Virginia and «2 resident of the Common- 
wealth of Virginia, and I was a resident of the Common- 
wealth of Virginia at all times relevant herein. 


2. I am the Publisher of Wide Awake magazine, a 
non-profit journal that is written, edited, published and 
distributed at the University of Virginia by students at 
the University of Virginia (hereafter collectively “Wide 
Awake,” unless otherwise noted). Gregory W. Mourad 
is a student at the University of Virginia and Editor-in- 
Chief of Wide Awake magazine. Robert J. Prince is a 
student at the University of Virginia and Managing Edi- 
tor of Wide Awake magazine. 


3. Wide Awake magazine contains both religious and 
secular subject matters. 


4. Wide Awake magazine generally expresses a reli- 
gious perspective. 


5. At no time in the 1990-91 Student Activities Fund 
(“SAF”) appropriations process did the University of 
Virginia Student Council Appropriations Committee 
(“Appropriations Committee”); the University of Virginia 
Student Council (“Student Council”); the University of 
Virginia Student Activities Committee (“Student Activi- 


43 


ties Committee”); or the Rector and Visitors of the Uni- 
versity of Virginia (“Board of Visitors” or “BOV”), or 
any of their officers, members or agents inform Wide 
Awake that Wide Awake was denied SAF benefits for a 
reason other than the allegation that publication of Wide 
Awake magazine constitutes a prohibited “religious ac- 
tivity” under the relevant Board of Visitors Guidelines. 


6. Because Wide Awake has been denied SAF bene- 
fits, Wide Awake is ineligible to apply for access to cer- 
tain space and facilities at the University of Virginia, 
including but not limited to computers, printers and other 
equipment located in Peabody Hall at the University of 
Virginia. 

7. The facilities in Peabody Hall containing comput- 
ers, printers and other equipment are available for use 
and have been available for use at all times relevant 
herein by SAF-funded contracted independent organiza- 
tions (“CIOs”) that produce publications and pay a nom- 
inal annual fee for the use of such facilities. 


8. Wide Awake is composed of at least 51% students; 
Wide Awake’s officers are all full-time, fee-paying stu- 
dents; Wide Awake keeps an updated copy of its constitu- 
tion on file at the student council offices, and Wide Awake 
has signed antidiscrimination disclaimers. Throughout the 
appropriations process, none of the entities or individuals 
listed in Paragraph 5 above informed Wide Awake that 
Wide Awake did not apply with all applicable, content- 
neutral requirements for the receipt of SAF benefits. 


9. Because Wide Awake was denied and continues to 
be denied SAF benefits, the writers, editors and publish- 
ers of Wide Awake Magazine spend time raising funds 
for the publication that they would otherwise spend at 
their writing, editing and publishing tasks. 

10. At no point in the SAF appropriations process did 
the Appropriations Committee, the Student Council, the 


44 


Student Activities Com ittee or the Board of Visitors 
maintain that the religious beliefs of the writers, editors 
and publishers of Wide Awake Magazine were not or are 
not sincerely held. 


11. Throughout the appropriations process, Wide 
Awake received no communications from the Board of 
Visitors, nor was Wide Awake at any point informed that 
the Board of Visitors had considered or was considering 
the constitutional issues involved in Wide Awake’s appli- 
cation for SAF benefits. 


I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing 
is true and correct. 


EXECUTED this 8th day of November, 1991 in 
Charlottesville, Virginia. 


/s/ Ronald W. Rosenberger 
RONALD W. ROSENBERGER 


Given under my hand and seal this 
8th day of November, 1991. 


/s/ Kelly A. Hobbs 
Notary Public 


My Commission expires: 2/28/95 


45 
EXHIBIT 1 


LETTER FROM THE EDITOR 


Welcome! 


Dear Readers, Welcome to the first issue of Wide 
Awake. Wide Awake offers a Christian perspective on 
both personal and community issues, especially those rele- 
vant to college students at the University of Virginia. Last 
Spring we realized that none of the fifteen student-run 
publications at the University provided a forum for Chris- 
tian expression, and we decided to fill that void. 


Our mission is twofold: to challenge Christians to live, 
in word and deed, according to the faith they proclaim 
and to encourage students to consider what a personal 
relationship with Jesus Christ means. College is a time 
to pursue knowledge; an understanding of one’s religious 
beliefs should not be neglected, but should rather con- 
Stitute the heart of that quest. 


Christianity is not a spectator sport—it is a vital rela- 
tionship with our Creator, the One who knows us inti- 
mately and loves us infinitely. Jesus calls us to be active 
players in life. In Matthew 5:13-14, Jesus says “You are 
the salt of the earth... . You are the light of the world. 
A city on a hill cannot be hidden.” Christians are called to 
lead exemplary lives by walking in Jesus’s footsteps. 


In this issue, we will explore how Christian principles 
for living can have an impact on our personal lives, our 
attitudes towards others, and our relationship to people 
in need. Economics professor Ken Elzinga shares how 
Christ has influenced his role as a teacher. In our cover 
story, we examine how the Bible offers tenable solutions 


46 47 


to racism, a disease that has plagued society for centuries. 
Finally, we look at a Christian home for unwed mothers 
as a concrete example of Christian love in action. 


We hope that the articles in this issue will inspire you 
to consider how the Bible applies to your own life today. 
We would like to extend a special thanks to the Center for 
Christian Study for the use of their office and the encour- 
agement they gave us. We would also like to thank those 
who made this magazine possible through their prayers 
and financial support. 


Interested in graphics, writing, or editing? 
Spread the Good News! 
Join 
WIDE AWAKE! 


in Christ, ; 
Love in Christ For more information call Ron at 979-5844. 


/s/ Ronald W. Rosenberger 
RONALD W. RCSENBERGER 
Editor-in-Chief 


WIDE AWAKE 
A Christian Perspective at the University of Virginia 


The hour has come for you to awake 
from your slumber, because our 
Salvation is nearer now than when 
we first believed. 

—Romans 13:11 


Editor-in-Chief 
Ronald W. Rosenberger 


Executive Editor 
Greg Mourad 


Managing Editor 
Rob Prince 


Contributors 
Stephanie Ace 
Karen Barnes 
Jeff Buterbaugh 
Michelle Carpick 
Jason Craddock 
Crystal M. Dobson 


48 


Rod Early 
Alice Ferguson 
Traci Gallagher 

Lisa Hampson 
Fred Hopkins 
Robin Kim 
Jenny Lea Foley 
Kenneth Liu 
Vivian 
Kimberly Manno 
Marcus Meachum 
Christy Olson 
Nikki Poitevent 
Mike Snyder 
Heather Winter 


Special thanks to the 
Center for Christian Study. 


Send correspondence to: 


P.O. Box 607 
Newcomb Hall Station 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 


The opinions expressed in 
signed articles are the opinions 
of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent those of 
Wide Awake Productions. 


49 
EXHIBIT 2 


APPROPRIATION’S COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 
SPRING 1991 PROCESS 


Category 1 Special Status Student Organizations Charged By The 
Board Of Visitors 
Request Allocation 


Student Council Decided 4/91 
WTJU 25925 17104 
Total 25925 17104 


Category 2 Co-Curricular Organizations Which Are Not Adminis- 
tered By University Departments Or Units 


Request Allocation 


AIESEC 2954 944 
Classics Graduate Assoc. 552 252 
Darden Entrepreneurs Club 748 90 
Darden Health Care Forum 868 254 
Darden Marketing Club 2384 1088 
Environmental Sciences Org. 130 116 
Graduate Biosciences Society 4066 556 
Grad. Society Of Black Engineers 914 448 
International Pusiness Society 1374 0 Self-Sufficient 
Int. Relations Organization 2852 1854 
Nat. Society Of Black Engineers 1028 0 Self-Sufficient 
Operations Club 898 0 Self-Sufficient 
Philosophy Club 614 144 
Pre-Physical Therapy Club 430 830 
Pre-Veterinary Society 1998 1202 
Reserve Officers Assoc. Of Darden 748 826 
Rhetoric & Com. Studies Society 696 252 
Soc. Of Hispanic Prof. Engineers 826 294 
Society Of Arch. History 1728 878 
Student Alliance Of Landscape Arch. 1099 280 
Student Nurses Assoc. At UVA 2476 438 
Virginia AIAS 1234 430 
Washington Lit. Society 1848 364 


Total 31465 10540 


Category 8 Club Sports 


Cavalier Road Runners 

Club Sport Council 

Fencing Club (Virginia) 
Floor Hockey Club (Virginia) 
LaCrosse Club (Virginia) 
Mountain Biking Club 
Okinawan Kempo Karate Club 
Polo Club (Virginia) 
Raquetball Club 

Riding Team (Virginia) 

Rifle & Pistol Club (Virginia) 


Virginia Ski Team 
Virginia Soccer Club 
Volleyball 

Water Polo 

Women’s Soccer Club 


Total 


Category 4 Student News, Information, Opinion, Entertainment, 


50 


Request 


1512 
1314 
8404 
776 
1146 
670 


Allocation 


Or Academic Communications Media Groups 
Request Allocation 


Audio Visuals Unlimited 
Cavalier Communications/Wire 
Coup 

Declaration, The 

Dialogue Magazine 

Journal Of Law & Politics 
Loki Science Magazine 
Oculus 

Seasons 

Thoughtlines 

University Journal 

Virginia Advocate 

Virginia Env. Law Journal 
Virginia Journal Of Int. Law 
Virginia Literary Review 
Virginia Studio Record 
Virginia Tax Review 

Wide Awake Productions 
Yellow Journal 


Total 


9570 
714 


6512 


8392 
4748 
2580 


8538 
2470 


Defunded 
0 Self-Sufficient 


Request Allocation 


$1 

Category 5 Cultural Organizations 
Afri-Carib Association 1246 
Asian Student Union 1872 
Black Student Alliance 0 
Chinese Student Association 892 
Hellenic Association/Society 50 
Indian Student Association 1098 
Japanese Club 430 
Muslim Students’ Association 444 
Org. Of Young Filipino Americans 948 
Pakistan Student League 460 

Society For The Promotion Of 

Indian Class. Music 2372 
Vietnamese Student Assoc. 468 
Total 9780 


Category 6 Fine Arts Organizations 


Camerata Rotunda 

Musique 634 

Pep Band 9198 

Shalom Theatre Co. 0 

Virginia Glee Club 10980 

Virginia Sil’Hooettes 1224 
Total 22036 


Category 7 Madison House: 


Madison House 83188 
Total 83188 


Category 8 Hobby Organizations: 


712 
866 
0 Self-Sufficient 


Request Allocation 


Amateur Radio Club 2162 
C.S. Lewis Society 280 
Dance Club 824 
Karate & Self Defense 1012 
Outing Club At UVA 2080 
Virginia Ski Club 173 

Total 6031 


0 Self-Sufficient 


220 
812 
682 
840 
0 Self-Sufficient 
2054 


52 


Category 9 Non-Political Groups Whose Predominate Purpose Is To 
Present Speakers On Topics Of Probable General Interest To The 
University 

Request Allocation 

Alternatives: Perspectives In 


Medicine 1676 1050 
Black Law Students Assoc. 5612 8564 
Environmental Law Forum 852 764 
Darden Business Club 2162 968 
Federalist Society 8204 1444 
Moore, J.B., Society Of Int. Law 2360 1016 
Shotokan Karate Club 522 414 
Speakeasy 836 266 
Sports & Entertainment Law Forum 852 20 
Student Legal Forum 7636 6548 
Virginia Law Women 1122 843 

Total 26334 15897 


Category 10 The Student Legal Services 


Request Allocation 
Student Legal Services 66000 65346 
Total 66000 65346 


Category 11 Service Organizations 
Request Allocation 


Action For Better Living 1614 1496 
Amnesty International At UVA 0 0 Self-Sufficient 
Blue Ridge Mtn. Rescue Group 7574 6916 
Cavalier Civitan Club 788 472 
Circle K 866 0 Self-Sufficient 
Council Of Black Student Leaders 3206 2420 
Darden Environmental Alliance 758 660 
Gay & Lesbian Law Student Assoc. 476 460 
Legal Assistance Society 8176 2724 
Lesbian & Gay Student Union 2084 1862 
The Monroe Society Deferred 
Post Conviction Assistance Project 7060 5740 
Students Against Hunger 1838 846 
Students For Anima] Rights 522 200 
Student Alliance For Va. 
Environment Deferred 
Students For Rape Awareness 698 558 
Student Watch 1318 968 
Teach For America Of UVA 508 860 
Total 82486 25682 


53 
EXHIBIT 5 


[Univ. Logo] 


STUDENT COUNCIL 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 
P O Box 707 Newcomb Hall Station 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22904 


February 26, 1991 


108 Peabody Hall 
(804) 921-3151 
(804) 982-HEAR 


Mr. Ronald W. Rosenberger 
Chief Executive Officer 

Wide Awake Productions 

1904 Jefferson Park Avenue # 22 
Charlottesville, VA 22903 


Dear Ron: 


This letter is intended to formally notify you of the 
Appropriations Committee’s decision to not fund Wide 
Awake Productions for 1991-92. 


The Student Council Appropriations Committee is re- 
sponsible for allocating funds to student organizations 
within the Board of Visitors Guidelines. These Board of 
Visitors Guidelines designate specific student organiza- 
tions and activities which may or may not be funded. The 
Board of Visitors have determined that such student 
groups as fraternities, sororities, honor societies and re- 
ligious organizations and such activities as social enter- 
tainment, political activities and religious activities may 
not be funded by the Student Activity Fee. As you know, 
other student organizations and activities such as fine arts, 
sports clubs, hobby organizations may be funded by the 
fee. These distinctions have been made in order to fund 


54 


those activities felt to be most related to the educational 
purpose of the University because of the limited amount 
of money available in the fund. 


In reviewing the request by Wide Awake Productions, 
the Appropriations Committee determined your organiza- 
tion’s request could not be funded as it is a religious 
activity. This determination was made after reviewing 
your first issue of Wide Awake. In particular, the com- 
mittee noted in your Editor’s Letter that the publication 
was “a forum for Christian expression” and a means “to 
challenge Christians (in how) to live... .” The com- 
mittee’s decision was supported by the opinion of the 
University’s General Counsel who also reviewed the publi- 


cation. 


Please be aware that this decision simply denies Student 
Activity Fee funding for your publication. Wide Awake 
Productions may still print and distribute issues on 
Grounds. For this reason, we wish you every success 
with your efforts. As a reminder, the Appropriations Com- 
mittee’s decision may be appealed to Student Council if 
you submit a written appeal by 5:00 p.m., Sunday March 
3 at the Student Council office. You have until 5:00 p.m., 
Friday, March 1, to submit an appeal for a hearing at 
the March 5 Student Council meeting. 


If you have any questions about this matter, please 


feel free to contact me. 
Sincerely, 


/s/ Cynthia J. Wilbricht 
CyNTHIA J, WILBRICHT 
Vice President 
for Student Organizations 


CJW:be 


c: Ronald J. Stump 
Student Council Appropriations Committee 


55 
EXHIBIT 7 


[Univ. Logo] 


UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 
Office of the Dean of Students 


Peabody Hall 
Tel. 804-924-7133 
April 16, 1991 


Mr. Ronald W. Rosenberger 
Chief Executive Officer 
Wide Awake Productions 
P.O. Box 607 

Newcomb Hall Station 


Dear Ron: 


This letter is intended to formally notify you of the 
Student Activities Committee’s decision to deny the appeal 
by Wide Awake Productions. 

After reviewing your organization’s constitution, copies 
of the magazine’s first two editions, and the arguments 
presented at last week’s appeal by Wide Awake Produc- 
tions and by Student Council, the committee determined 
that the Wide Awake magazine could not be funded as it 
is a religious activity. In effect, the Student Activities 
Committee fully supports the decision and reasoning pro- 
vided to you in the February 26 letter from Ms. Cyndi 
Wilbricht. As noted in Ms. Wilbricht’s letter, Wide Awake 
Productions may still print and distribute copies of the 
magazine and as a CIO has full and equal access to other 
University facilities and services. 


On behalf of the Student Activities Committee, I extend 
our best wishes for a successful publication. If you have 
any questions regarding the committee’s decision, please 
feel free to contact me. 


LIz PSP $I OFF SP AYald0g suOTBOTUNUIWIOD pu¥ d110};e4y 
SLI 9ss II 996 SSL Aye}o0g A1vullez@ Aig 
992 ZIg 91 929 186 QnID Aydosoj1yg 
Iz ap I ap 8L¢ Bpquivy] veg 14d 
SSI 992 ~ PLZ SLP VH'ISSN 
268 PSL'T gg 8se‘T S182 “ossy Suysqiep o1jUlI_ 
0 0 0 0 92'S deq “7UlA0D “oossy juepnyg “pels 
uug pepunjeg pepunjeq pepunjeq  I¢1‘¢ oulsug Youlg JO AjeJD0g eqyenpessy 
0 0 0 0 POP “o0ssY S}UEpNzS 410481 eyenpeiy 
9IT 28s L 0FZ LPO'T 4197080 s08eg 1ypues 
L0Z PIP SI . 9a Zrg ‘B1Q se0uelsg [WyUeMIUOITAUY 
0 0 0 0 Z6L Qn{D [918] sineueidazjug 
808 919 61 r89 SLL ‘B10 s}Uepnys Suysiny [8103;90q 
0 0 0 0 OLT W-Oig Yw[_ SUVA yey porueg 
mS 298 POL bard 9ZL 206 Ayyo0g Suprecusug youlg 
0 0 0 0 0 “OOBSY jUEPNIS sINpeTqAIY youl 
28 POL g 891 LLI 09}}/UIWIOD SeIpPNg uvIsy 
262 r8g st Z09 129 ‘oossy A8ojodoiqquy 
aug peilejeq] peliejeq peiiejeq L082 OUSIV 
8622 969'F apis SSL‘rs L8L‘9$ IVLOL 
aug 
918 0SL‘T rg p0s'‘T IbL‘s SispeeyT JUEpNS youl jo [rounop 
SzP‘T 9r3'Z 88 r86'Z 90'S [}ouneD syodg qnip 
uoNwoOTy 34ND %E “0ITV ysonbey dnoiy 
[eulgy 
SNOILVOOTIV GNN4 ALIALLOV LNACOALS 68-8861 
ll LISIHXa 


ee rrr ener ere 


56 
Sincerely 
/s/ Ronald J. Stump 
RONALD J. STUMP 
Associate Dean of Students 


c: Student Activities Committee 
James J. Mingle 


RJS:be 


59 


58 


ILI‘%9 crs'vors §=§=Lzz‘ss = 99‘ LOTS Ls9°691$ =6s IVLOL 


OF6'T 088‘ 0ZI 866'8 6Z>'9 [euInof Koj]? x 
988'T ZL9'8 PII PBL‘S 6898 ‘Dossy MalAsy XV], BUISIIA 
8182 9SL‘b LPI 206'P $hz‘s plocey O;pngg ByUjZsy A 
91s 280'T 28 290'T 019'% maysoy A1esagyy BjUysI1A 
ave I 989‘ PIT 008‘8 QPP‘Ol O7BQOAPY VIULSITA 
set i 0 # 0 AW] S2OINOSOY “7BN JO [VUINOL “BA 
¥80‘0I 21g P6801 $08‘TT AW] [SUOT}wUIEZU] JO [VUINOL “BA 

19v‘9T 206'28 810‘T 8I6‘ss P88'0P Teurnor A}ya10Aju/) 
FIST 829'8 SIT ogz's PPP'L sour ysnoyL 
119% 22'S 191 2388'S Z8P‘9 es 
659'T 862's Z0I 00r‘s sT¢‘s snjn20 
LSS GTS 6S1 Zre'g 988'9 salepont 
090'T 001% 9 P9I'Z 686'F oU[ZUsE SOUs}POG PIO] 
PIGS 828") ZPz 0L0'8 0ZI'8 801} ]]0g Pus ABT Jo [wusnor 

I a ns a nan ny WV an0d 

pepunjeq  390‘T PID 8410714 

dug pepanjeq] pepunjeq pepunjeq GlZz‘T ° “on ‘an104 
SLI'Z 998'F S8I 06r‘F 000‘FT onsoreid 
2L8'9 WPL‘ZI v68 SSI‘sT 688‘ST GOR eIE}IOC 
968'8z Z6L‘LES osr'Is  ope'ers slozzit¢ 39s" TV.LOL 

uug 
969 068'T SP ZeP‘T p2s'Z qnip 
909 Z10'T 1g ZP0'T Z9P'T wx) eteen 
SeP‘T 018‘ 26 090‘S SsI'P QD seqstig o7euIIy fF) 
12s ovo 02 099 Z6L'T QN[D eyervy NAY ryDe/) 
PL8 SPL‘T rg Z08'T PZ QnI{Q 180005 
gis 989 0z ¥99 ¥69'T QNID eyeIvy UyO}0YS 


69L ssc‘T SP pso'T g9or'z UoTPBPosSY Zul[leg 


L60°2 PGI? OST aes ZOL‘b 8,UsUI0 MA ‘QNID [[8qQ}O04 Aquny 
$802 990°7 9Z1 061? ZPr‘or 8,U2aK ‘QniD [[equooy Aqsny 
$96's 906'L Gbz Ost’ L8S‘bs ‘vossy Supmoy 
QLI'T ras sad SL per'z SIP‘s GND [938d pus ely 
I2'T Zrs‘z 6L 0292 r89'L uve, Suiply 
L06'I ris's SIT 086s 898'8 QQID 91°d 
902'T ZIPs cL 98P'2 $90'ST eyeivy odusey uBMBUlyO 
vs 89 Z OL 9ZL‘T QNID e7e18y WIS OA, 
088 099°T 1g Ort 886'S QNip [8] pus opuey 
PLE SPL $2 OLL 08¢‘T qnip opar 
¥89 g92'T 68 908'T Z98'T qnip soAseuu{y 
z91 b2s or 28s Z10'T QniD AsyIo0H] 100/ 4 
968'T 06L‘Z 98 91382 699'F qniD Supouey 
00P 008 GZ ¥28 696 qnip sousg 
608 819 61 989 988 qnip 

6LP 896 08 986 OLI'Z qnio 

998 ZIL rad PEL 2ze'T qn{D Jeuuny peoy Je1/¥AasD 
298 PSL Ze OPL 969'T qniD Areyoy 
6LI‘S gos‘0rs ozs$ r99‘0T$ 906'92$ TVLOL 

uug 
Lg PL Z 9L 196'T 40S GC FL 
660°T 8612 89 $922 v2l's ‘DOMSY S19UUB[Y WUEPNYS 
PSL g9P'T oP rate t TILT AyaD0g [eo1pey] JuepNys 
soz ors 9T 2s Lys SIVOULSUG USUIO MA JO AZe}I0g 
uoHyeooTy 34ND %E “Oly qonboy dnoin 


[sal 


AUT [BUCH VUJEzUT JO “90G S100, “g*'¢ 
ATS WITerepey 


61 


UINIOg MV] GIO ByupsI1A 


Pefoig souBysIssy UOTDAUOD 40g 


osnoy UosIpeyy 


WiI-NfL 
pezyUlT[U/) sens, Ofpny 
dno) 


Allocation 
584 
584. 
524 
$19 
881 
156 
160 
808 
575 
869 
264 
568 
211 
160 
160 
129 
470 

4754 
870 
649 
218 
877 
711 
$11 
751 

52 
4385 
1138 
870 

2722 
698 

1481 
271 

1840 

1642 

$931 
889 


Allocation 
1168 
1168 
1048 

638 
762 
812 
320 
616 
1150 
738 
528 
1136 
422 
320 
820 
258 
940 
9508 
740 
1298 
436 
754 
1422 
622 
1502 
104 
870 
226 
740 
5444 
1886 
542 
2680. 
3284 
7862 
778 


63 


1990-91 STUDENT ACTIVITY FEE ALLOCATIONS RELEASE 
TOTAL 
TOTAL 


goegde ts 
uni 


Sssssssss 


Daniel Hale Williams Black Pre-Med 
Die Deutsche Gesselschaft 

Graduate Society Black Engineers 
Washington Literary & Debating Club 


International Business Society 
National Society of Black Engineers 


Category 2: 

AIAS 

International Relations Organization 
Undergraduate Economic Club 
Category 3: 

Archery Club 

Cavalier Road Runner Club 


AISEC 


(AqtIqIBeTI] 07 eng SuyjuzAd uy pey1WE 
esve[eY UOHWO[TY 94 APANDV 4UEPNAS 06-686] 


uug 
SSI‘zst § 91S‘P9z GLI'8 009‘Z1Z Z6L‘LSS STIV.LOL 
622 86P‘r$ 68I$ 989'rs SLo‘ZI$ IVLOL 

uua : : : : : 3 

989 ZLI'T 98 g02'T ris’s dnoiy Aseo0apy-J[ag JUePNAS 
L2v ps8 92 088 $99'F SOURTITY JUePMS ov 
982'T Ly‘% 9L- 8rs'z TOL» ‘Sosy S}USPNAS MV] WoT 
1L8‘0I ZPL‘0z$ IP9$ ZLS‘Iz$ SL8‘rss IVLOL 

a wud 

o «ag pepunjeq pepunjeq pepunjeq 96 Aya}o0g Sulssoujsug nwy, vey], 
sss 910'T Ss SOIT 1622 448M JUepNyS 
80L 9IP‘T vP Sort Lgv'T “DOSS [BOIPeW [BUCHSN jUepNyg 
ZoP 506 8z 086 268'8 Ayajo0g e010 
86L | 969°T 6 pr9'r 8292 uoray) prin fon Lvs: 
9962 316s SI ¥60‘9 br9'9 AYo190g sunsets 
68h 818 LZ $06 p9z'T ed[AIag Wqqng ad Oe 
0 0 0 0 SL9'T dnoip suazshg uor}eULIOjUy 
2ST ¥9Z - ZLz $88 “DOSY S,UEPNS Avy] uBlqsey] pus Aer 
86h 986 08 910‘T 110’ wWnI0y sseulsng 
PLY‘S 8h6'9 gz Z9l'L Lz0°6 dnois) onosey Ule}UNO, e8pry enig 


188 Z9L bz PBL 19¢'T ‘OSsY JUSPNAS [SOTpe | UBLAOUTY 


uoHssTy 3D %E “OV qsonbey dnoin 
[eulg 


64 
Total First Semester 
Allocation Allocation 

Va. Ultimate Frisbee Club 3150 1575 
Va. Volleyball Club 2158 1079 
Va. Women’s Rugby Football 8970 1985 
Water Polo Club 1596 798 
Women’s Soccer Club 1520 760 

TOTAL 47046 23523 
Category 4: 
COUP 12324 6162 
Declaration 9100 4550 
Journal of Law and Politics 5570 2785 
Loki Science Magazine 1952 976 
Oculus 4788 2894 
Seasons 3598 1799 
Thoughtlines 4188 2094 
University Journal 8944 4472 
Va. Environmental Law Journal 6732 8366 
Va. Journal of International Law 5998 2999 
Va. Tax Review Assoc. 7074 8537 
Virginia Advocate 2852 1426 

TOTAL 73120 86560 
Category 5: 
Audio Visuals Unlimited 1746 8738 

TOTAL 1746 878 
Category 6: 
Asian Student Union 1912 956 
Assoc. for Arab-American Understanding 376 188 
Assoc. of Afri-Carib Cultures 806 408 
Camerata Rotunda 2004 1002 
Chinese Student Association 1018 509 
C. S. Lewis Society 222 111 
Disco Beat, Yellow Journal 8016 1508 
Glee Club 8296 4148 
Indian Student Association 368 184 
Japanese Club 540 270 
Musique 666 833 
Organization of Young Filipino-American 800 400 
Va. Literary Review 8044 1522 
Va. Pep Band 4936 2468 
Va. Silhooettes 1090 545 
Va. Swing Orchestra 1614 807 
Vietnamese Students Assoc. 862 181 

TOTAL 81070 165385 


65 
Total First Semester 
Allocation Allocation 

Category 7: 
Madison House 848380 17415 

TOTAL 84830 17416 
Category 8: 
Post-Conviction Project 8620 1810 
Va. Health Law Forum 408 204 

TOTAL 4028 2014 
Category 9: 
Charlottesville Grotto 208 104 
Outing Club 400 200 
Va. Ski Club 76 38 

TOTAL 684 842 
Category 10: 
Alternatives: Perspectives 546 273 
Beyond War 114 57 
Darden Business Forum 668 834 
Environmental Forum & Research Group 298 149 
Federal Society 8842 1921 
Gandhi Peace Center 668 834 
J.B. Moore Society of International Law 490 245 
Law Students for Public Service 228 114 
Marketing Club of Darden 1600 800 
Sports & Entertainment Law Forum 502 251 
Student Legal Forum 8694 1847 
Students for Animals Rights 860 180 

TOTAL 18010 6505 
Category 12: 
Blue Ridge Mountain Rescue 8052 4026 
Circle K 198 99 
Legal Assistance Society 2256 1128 
Lesbian and Gay Student Union 1632 816 
Monroe Society 786 893 
SADD 266 133 
Student Alliance for Virginia’s 

Environment 140 70 

Students for Rape Awareness 786 893 

TOTAL 14116 7058 


Category 18: 


Asian-American Law Students 
Council of Black Student Leaders 
Black Law Student Association 
Va. Law Women 


TOTAL 
TOTAL 


608 804 
1318 659 
4380 2190 
1030 515 
7336 8668 

237662 118831 


57 
EXHIBIT 12 


Constitution of Wide Awake Productions 


Article 1: 


Purposes of Wide Awake Productions (Here- 


after referred to as Wide Awake.) 


1.) 


2.) 


To publish a magazine of philosophical and re- 
ligious expression. 
To facilitate discussion which fosters an atmos- 


phere of sensitivity to and tolerance of Chris- 
tian viewpoints. 


3.) To provide a unifying focus for Christians of 


Article 2: 
1.) 


2.) 


Article 3: 
The 


multicultural backgrounds. 


Membership of Wide Awake. 


Wide Awake does not discriminate in its mem- 
bership on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, 
handicap, national origin, or sexual orientation. 
Any person who contributes significantly to an 
issue of any Wide Awake publication or attends 
78% of all meetings of the full membership for 
one semester shall be a full member of Wide 
Awake. 


Governing Bodies of Wide Awake. 


governing bodies of Wide Awake shall consist of 


the Executive Board and the Managing Board. The size 
and membership of each Board shall be determined jointly 
by the CEO and the Chairman of each Board. 


1.) 


2.) 


Executive Board: Responsible for the editorial 
content of all Wide Awake publications. Cre- 
ates and executes the fiscal policy of Wide 
Awake. 


Managing Board: Responsible for the produc- 
tion and layout of all Wide Awake publications. 
Liases [sic] with University organizations. 


68 


Article 4: Officers of Wide Awake. 


1.) Chief Executive Officer: Coordinates and su- 
pervises activities of the Managing and Execu- 
tive Boards. Confirms appointments to and de- 
cisions of the Boards. Acts as Editor-in-Chief 
of all Wide Awake publications. 


2.) Chairman of the Executive Board: Appoints 
members to the Executive Board. Presides over 
Executive Board. Acts as Executive Editor of 
all Wide Awake publications. 


3.) Chairman of the Managing Board: Appoints 
members to the Managing Board. Presides over 
Managing Board. Acts as Managing Editor of 
all Wide Awake publications. 


Article 5: Expenditures of Wide Awake. 


Expenditures shall be made in accordance with fiscal 
policy developed by the Executive Board and approved 
by the CEO and Managing Board. 


Article 6: Elections of Wide Awake Officers. 


All officers shall be elected by a majority vote of the 
full members. Elections shall be held each spring semester 
by April 15. New officers will take office at the end of 
each spring semester. Elections will be carried out in 
accordance with rules adopted by the governing Boards 
and the CEO. 


Article 7: Amendments 


Amendments to this Constitution shall be composed by 
the governing Boards and the CEO and confirmed on a 
two-thirds vote of the full membership. 


69 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


Charlottesville Division 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


AFFIDAVIT OF RONALD J. STUMP 


I, Ronald J. Stump, do hereby depose and state: 


1. I am an Associate Dean of Students at the Univer- 
sity of Virginia. I have served in this position since 1985. 
My previous experience includes serving as Director of 
Student Activities at Michigan State University, and as 
an Assistant Dean of Students and Director of Student 
Activities at Northern Michigan University. 


2. My responsibilities as Associate Dean of Students 
include providing guidance to the Student Council in 
allocating student activity fee monies among eligible stu- 
dent organizations and activities in accordance with the 
“University Student Activity Fee Statement of Purpose 
and Funding Guidelines (“SAF Guidelines”), a policy 
the University Board of Visitors has adopted and charged 
the Student Council to administer. I also serve as chair- 
man of the Student Activities Committee, a panel com- 
prised of students, faculty, and administrators that pro- 
vides oversight and hears appeals of student organiza- 
tions which contest denial of funding. 

3. Under the SAF Guidelines, the “purpose of the stu- 
dent activity fee is to provide financial support for student 
organizations that are related to the educational purpose 
of the University of Virgina.” Both the Student Council 
and the Student Activities Committee are specifically di- 
rected to administer the limited SAF funds “in a manner 
consistent with the educational purpose of the University 


ii 


70 


as well as with State and Federal law” (See University 
SAF Guidelines, p. 1). 


4. Student activity fees are public funds that are de- 
rived from a compulsory fee collected annually from each 
full-time student as part-of- their tuition and fees. The 
total amount of SAF funds available for allocation each 
year among student organizations is obviously limited, 
and is invariably substantially less than the aggregate 
amount requested by eligible student organizations. For 
example, for the 1990-91 academic year 135 student or- 
ganizations requested an aggregate amount of $501,277, 
while only $402,028 was available for allocation. 


5. The SAF Funding Guidelines were originally adopted 
by the Board of Visitors in 1970. The SAF Funding 
Guidelines were revised in 1973, 1978, 1980 and 1991. 
Since the policy was originally adopted, and currently, 
the following student organizations have been deemed 
incligible to receive SAF funds: fraternities, sororities, 
honor societies, political organizations, religious organiza- 
tions, and organizations whose membership is exclusionary 
in nature or engage in unlawful discrimination. Addi- 
tionally, certain expenditures and activities are deemed 
not related to the educational purpose of the University 
are not eligible for funding: honoraria or similar fees; 
religious activities; social entertainment or related ex- 
penses; philanthropic contributions and activities; political 
activities; and activities which would jeopardize the Uni- 
versity’s tax exempt status. (See University SAF Guide- 
lines, p. 2.) 


6. The University has a procedure, separate from the 
SAF funding system, for entering into a relationship with 
student organizations. All student organizations which 
execute an annual agreement with the University become 
Contracted Independent Organizations (CIOs) and thereby 
are entitled to access and use of University facilities, for 
the organizations’ meetings, functions, and programs. 

7. In order to apply for SAF funds, a student organ- 
ization must be a CIO. However, to be entitled to receive 


71 


SAF funds the CIO must further satisfy the eligibility cri- 
teria separately set forth in the University SAF Guidelines. 
For academic year 1990-91, 343 student organizations 
qualified as CIOs. Of the 343 CIOs, 135 student organ- 
izations applied for SAF funds in 1990-91 and 118 were 
allocated SAF monies. 


8. In determining the eligibility of CIOs for SAF funds, 
the Student Council (as a delegated agent of the Board 
of Visitors) customarily examines written and oral state- 
ments of applying organizations to ensure compliance with 
criteria contained in the University SAF Guidelines. Such 
an examination typically entails review of the organiza- 
tion’s purpose and objectives as embodied in constitutions, 
charters, publications, and related amplifying statements 
of officers during the Student Council allocation hearings. 
In certain instances the examination extends beyond a 
review of documents and statements that reveal an or- 
ganization’s purpose: “In determining cases of discrimi- 
nation, it is not sufficient to look merely to the constitu- 
tion of an organization but to its actual practices and 
operations.” (See University SAF Guidelines, p. 2.) The 
University does not approve the constitutions or charters 
of student organizations. 


: 9. In January 1991, the Wide Awake student organ- 
ization applied for SAF funds to support the publication 
of the Wide Awake magazine. The organization requested 
eta ae py igre for the 1991-92 aca- 
demic year. was and application for 
SAF funding that Wide Awake led to Student Coun- 
cil. There is no assurance that even if eligible for funding 
Wide Awake would have received the entire requested 
amount. Furthermore, the funded allocation is not given 
to an organization to be put into its own savings or 
checking accounts, The money is held by the Univer- 
sity, and disbursed by the Student Activities Business 
Manager through a voucher system. 


10. The Student Council Appropriations Committee, 
following a review of Wide Awake’s constitution and its 


72 


first issue of the Wide Awake magazine (Nov./Dec. 
1990), decided not to fund the organization’s request be- 
cause the publication was determined to be a “religious 
activity” and thus not eligible for funding under the SAF 
Guidelines. The rationale for the Committee’s decision 
was communicated in a letter dated February 26, 1991, 
from Cynthia J. Wilbricht, Student Council Vice Presi- 
dent for Student Organizations, to Ronald W. Rosenber- 
ger, Chief Executive Editor of Wide Awake Productions. 


11. On or about March 3, 1991, Wide Awake timely 
appealed the Student Council’s Appropriation Committee’s 
decision to the full Student Council. At its March 19, 
1991 meeting, the Student Council voted to uphold the 
funding denial decision. 


12. Wide Awake subsequently submitted an appeal 
to the Student Activities Committee, which held a public 
hearing on April 8, 1991. The Student Activities Com- 
mittee voted unanimously that Wide Awake was ineligible 
to receive SAF funding. I notified Mr. Rosenberger of 
the Committee’s decision in a letter dated April 16, 1991, 


which stated in part: 


“. . . After reviewing your organization’s constitu- 
tion, copies of the magazine’s first two editions, and 
the arguments presented at last week’s appeal by Wide 
Awake Productions and by Student Council, the 
committee determined that the Wide Awake maga- 
zine could not be funded as it is a religious activity. 
In effect, the Student Activities Committee fully sup- 
ports the decision and reasoning provided to you in 
the February 26 letter from Ms. Cyndi Wilbricht. 
As noted in Ms. Wilbricht’s letter, Wide Awake Pro- 
ductions may still print and distribute copies of the 
magazine and as a CIO has full and equal access to 
other University facilities and services. . . .” 


13. The decision not to fund the Wide Awake publica- 
tion was based on the group’s intent as stated in their 
constitution and in the first edition of the organization’s 


73 


magazine. The editor stated that Wide Awake’s mission 
was to challenge Christians to live according to their faith 
and to encourage students to consider what a personal 
relationship with Jesus Christ means. In public state- 
ments during the organization’s application and a 
process, Wide Awake editors also acknowledged that the 
magazine has “a Christian focus and a Christian editorial 
thrust,” that the editors want the magazine “to glorify 
God,” and that the organization “opens each meeting with 
a prayer.” 


14. Other student groups like Black Voices, the C. S. 
Lewis Society, the Jewish Law Students Association, and 
the Muslim Students Association have qualified in the 
past for SAF funding as “cultural organizations.” 


15. Black Voices was funded in 1990-91 but did not 
apply for funding in 1991-92 because the organization’s 
officers felt they had become a religious organzation. 
During the 1990-91 appropriation process which occurred 
in the Spring of 1990, the Black Voices representative 
was asked if the group engaged in religious activity. The 
representative did say yes. In further discussion which 
included the definition of religious activity used by the 
Student Council appropriation committee, the representa- 
tive said no. 


16. During the Fall of 1990, I met with the Black 
Voices’ President and talked with him about the group’s 
activities and whether they were religious. He said the 
group itself had begun to consider that maybe they had 
drifted away from simply singing Gospel music as a Black 
cultural activity and more toward a religious group. They 
now were praying at practices and encouraging members 
to be more of a model of faith. He said the group as a 
whole was going to make a decision. Later in the Fall 
semester, he said the group decided they wished to be a 
religious group and would change their constitution to 
reflect this decision. The group’s constitution was, in fact, 
changed. Consequently, Black Voices did not apply for 
funding for 1991-92. 


74 


17. Student Council has funded publications and media 
groups which have expressed religious opinions and similar 
matter as an incidental part of their activities. The reason 
for these groups’ existence and the nature of the activities 
themselves are not to evangelize or to principally express 
a religious perspective. 

18. Wide Awake Productions has not been denied ac- 
cess to space, equipment, and facilities at the University of 
Virginia. As a CIO, Wide Awake has been and is accorded 
the same access and use of University facilities as other 
CIOs. Also, use of computers, printers, and other special 
equipment in Peabody Hall is open to all groups which 
produce a publication including Wide Awake. 


19. There are currently about 17 religious organiza- 
tions qualified as CIOs, none of which have sought or 
received SAF monies. 


/s/ Ronald J. Stump 
RONALD J. STUMP 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


75 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


Charlottesville {vision 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


AFFIDAVIT OF TREVON GROSS 


I, Trevon Gross, do hereby depose and state: 


_ 1. I was a student at the University of Virginia, hav- 
ing graduated from the College of Arts and Sciences in 
May, 1991. For four years, I was a member of Black 
Voices, a student organization that has been recognized 
as a Contracted Independent Organization (“CIO”) at 
the University. I served as Vice-President for Musical 
Development of Black Voices during the 1990-91 aca- 
demic year. 


2. Black Voices was established, to my knowledge, 
about 19 years ago. During my tenure as vice-president 
of the organization (and currently, I believe), Black 
Voices has had about 130 members. 


3. In 1990-91, the organization sought and received 
funding support from the Student Activity Fee adminis- 
tered by the Student Council in accordance with the Stu- 
dent Activity Fee Guidelines adopted by the Board of 
Visitors (“SAF Guidelines”). At the time, when the 
organization applied for SAF funds, the purpose of Black 
Voices, as stated in the organization’s Constitution at- 
tached to this affidavit as Exhibit A, was “to invite indi- 
viduals to congregate for the intent of singing gospel and 
contemporary religious music.” The SAF funds granted 
to Black Voices for the 1990-91 academic year were used 
to cover the costs of equipment and apparel for the or- 


76 


ganization and travel expenses to attend out-of-state choir 
events. 


4. When Black Voices sought funding for the 1990-91 
academic year, it did so as a “cultural organization.” In 
response to a question raised during a Student Council 
Appropriations Committee Hearing, then President Brad 
Braxton remarked that Black Voices occasionally engaged 
in religious activities. However, upon further discussion 
of the applicable definition of “religious activity” under 
the SAF Guidelines, Mr. Braxton clarified that the orga- 
nization was a “cultural activity,” and not a “religious 
activity.” 


5. During the Fall of 1990 members of Black Voices 
engaged in internal discussion about the main purpose of 
the organization. Some members felt that the organiza- 
tion should confine itself to cultural activities, while other 
members felt that the focus of the organization was shift- 
ing from simply singing gospel music to assuming a more 
religious character. During rehearsal meetings, for ex- 
ample, the group was periodically engaging in prayer and 
encouraging members to be more of a model of faith. 


6. As a consequence of the organization’s internal 
discussion, Black Voices’ members voted to adopt a new 
constitution in the early Spring, 1991 semester. That 
Constitution, which serves as the Black Voices’ current 
charter, now states the purpose of the organization is “to 
provide an opportunity for people to assemble in Chris- 
tian fellowship and song. Moreover, by singing this 
music, the choir aims to share the Afro-American culture 
with others as well as express spiritual principles... . 
Black Voices represents God, the Afro-American culture 
at the University.” A copy of the organization’s current 
condition is attached to this affidavit as Exhibit B. 

7. Because of the organization’s deliberate decision to 
shift its purpose to one that would be acknowledged as a 
religious activity, Black Voices did not seek SAF funds 
for the 1991-92 year. Nor, to my knowledge, would the 


77 
organization so qualify under the SAF Guidelines, which 


exclude religious organizations and religious activities 
from SAF funding. 


/s/ Trevon Gross 
TREVON GROSS 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


78 


Constitution 
Black Voices of the University of Virginia 


Article 1: 


NAME. The official name of this organization is 
Black Voices of the University of Virginia. 


Article II: 


Purpose. The purpose of Black Voices is to invite 
individuals to congregate for the intent of singing gos- 
pel and contemporary religious music. Black Voices’ 
main objective is to carry this music into the univer- 
sity and residential communities. 


Article III: 


Membership. Black Voices is open to anyone that is 
interested in volunteering their musical abilities to the 
organization. Black Voices does not discriminate on 
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, 
political affiliation, handicap or sex. This policy 
complies with the requirements of the Virginia Con- 
stitution, Article I, Section 11, Titles VI and VII of 
the Civil Rights Acts of 1964, as amended and the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 


Article IV: 


Officers. Officers of Black Voices must be registered 
officially with the University of Virginia. The offices 
are as follows: 


President: 
To serve as a chief executive. 
Vice President: 


Acts as president in the absence of the presi- 
dent. 


Treasurer: 
To keep financial records of Black Voices and 
make necessary deposits and withdrawals of the 
funds. 


79 
Co Treasurer: 
To assist the treasurer in his/her duties. 
Secretary: 


To draft letters, respond to letters and make 
arrangements for engagements through corre- 
spondence. 

Dues/Attendance Clerk: 


To keep a tentative record of present dues pay- 
ing members and their attendance at rehearsals 
and engagements. 


The above named offices constitute a board that shall 
work together as a governing body. They have the 
power to make policies and have control of all ex- 
penditures. 


Article V: 


Elections. The offices of President, Vice President, 
Treasurer, Co Treasurer, Secretary and Dues/ 
Attendance Clerk shall be occupied through the par- 
liamentary procedure. 


Two thirds of the voting body (official dues paying 
students) is needed to elect an officer. The term for 
each office is one year. 


Section 1. The position of committee chairperson 
shall be filled on a voluntary basis. Persons who 
serve on the committee shall also be selected on a 
voluntary basis. The size of the committee shall 
depend on the service the committee is providing 
and will be left up to the discretion of the committee 
chairperson. 

Section 2. The removal of any officer or chairperson 
shall be discussed by the board members and brought 
before the entire body of Black Voices for discussion. 
After discussion there will be a vote and the major- 


80 


ity decision will decide on the outcome of the indi- 
vidual in question. 


Article VI: 


Committees. The Board (President, Vice President, 
Treasurer, Co Treasurer, Secretary and Dues/ 
Attendance Clerk) shall preside as a standing com- 
mittee and will discuss major issues (finances, en- 
gagements) concerning the welfare of Black Voices. 
This committee shall function as a governing body. 


Article VII: 


Meetings. Black Voices meets on every Thursday 
(excluding student holidays and summertime) for 
two hours in the evening. This rehearsal is con- 
ducted in the music department. - 


Section 1. The Board shall meet once every month 
(except student holidays and summertime) to discuss 
business at hand. This meeting’s time and place shall 
be agreed upon by the Board members. 


Article VII: 


Finances. Each member is expected to contribute 
ten dollars as dues. ; 


Section 1. Each member is asked to submit a pa- 
tron’s list with contributions from persons not in the 
choir. 


Section 2. Fund raising projects will require coop- 
eration and support from all members. Members 
will volunteer to serve on different projects. 


Section 3. All funds, self generated and allocated by 
student council shall be used to purchase equipment, 
uniforms, and pay for travel expenses for Black 
Voices and any hired musicians, directors, etc. 


81 


Section 4. Monies will be used only after members 
vote. Only students of the university are allowed to 
vote on monies allocated by student council. 


Section 5. All funds are to be used in a non dis- 
criminatory fashion. 


Article 1X: 


Amendments and By Laws. Permission is granted to 


amend the preceding articles with the consensus of 
two thirds of the voting members. 


82 


CONSTITUTION OF BLACK VOICES OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 


Article I: 


Purpose 

Black Voices of the University of Virginia is a choir 
that sings music of the African-American culture 
(i.e. anthems, spirituals, classical music, contempo- 
rary gospel, etc.). The purpose of this organization 
is to provide an opportunity for people to assemble 
in Christian fellowship and song. Moreover, by sing- 
ing this music, the choir aims to share the African- 
American culture with others as well as express 
spiritual principles. 

Rendering music at the University of Virginia and 
elsewhere, Black Voices provides an excellent oppor- 
tunity for University of Virginia students to interact 
with residents of the Charlottesville-Albermarle com- 
munities, other college choirs, and each other in a 
setting not provided by any other organization on 
Grounds. Black Voices represents God, the African- 
American culture and the University. 


Article II: 


Membership 

Although the membership is largely composed of Uni- 
versity students, non-students are welcome. Member- 
ship is on a semesterly basis and is contingent upon 
payment of dues and adherence to the established 
attendance policy. Black Voices does not discrimi- 
nate on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, religion or 
national origin. 


Article III: 


Meetings 
Black Voices will hold regular rehearsals. Ti 


ime and 
location of rehearsals and other meetings will be 


83 


determined by the Executive Board. The Executive 
Board will meet periodically, as deemed necessary. 
Six of the ten executive board members will deter- 
mine a quorum. 


Article IV: 


Finances 


Each member will be expected to pay non-refundable 
dues each semester. The amount of and due date for 
dues will be determined by the Executive Board. 


Article V: 


Officers and Job Descriptions 


Executive Board 


A. The Executive Board will consist of the follow- 
ing officers: President, Vice President for Ad- 
ministration, Vice President for Musical De- 
velopment, Secretary, Membership Director, Co- 
Treasurers, Sergeant at Arms, Materiels [sic] 
Manager and Historian. 


B. The Board will be responsible for the adminis- 
trative aspects of the choir. 


President 


A. Will be the Chief Executive Officer and chief 
spokesperson of the organization. 

B. Will preside over the Executive Board and all 
of its subsidiary activities as an ex officio mem- 
ber. 

C. Will have the power to delegate and to appoint 
offices and ad hoc committees as deemed nec- 
essary. 


D. Will be responsible for presiding over all meet- 
ings and rehearsals of the choir. 


| 


84 


Vice President for Administration 


A. 


F. 


Will develop and implement the administrative 
aspects of the choir. This will include, but not 
be limited to, engagement and rehearsal attend- 
ance policies. 


Will oversee the following members of the Exec- 
utive Board; 1) Secretary; 2) Historian; and 3) 
Sergeant at Arms. 


Will coordinate performance dates for Black 
Voices in conjunction with the Musical Com- 
mittee. 

Will assume the role and responsibilities of the 
President in that officer’s absence. 


Will undertake any additional duties as deemed 
necessary by the Executive Board to ensure the 
welfare of Black Voices. 


Will report directly to the President. 


Vice President for Musical Development 


A. 
B. 


C. 


Will serve as chair of the Music Committee. 
Will specifically oversee the activities of the 
Music Committee, and shall make all decisions 
in conjunction with said committee concerning 
the musical aspects of the choir and its engage- 
ments. 


Will work with the Vice President for Adminis- 
tration and the Music Committee in the develop- 
ment of programs for engagements and concerts. 


Will assume the role and responsibilities of the 


President in the absence of both the President 
and Vice President for Administration. 


E. Will report directly to the President. 


85 

Secretary 

A. Will be responsible for all correspondence. 

B. Will take minutes at all Executive Board meet- 
ings and make them available to choir members 
upon request. 

C. Will be responsible for announcements and pub- 
licity concerning the choir’s engagements and 
concerts. 

D. Will Teport directly to the Vice President for 
Administration. 

Membership Director 

A. Will be chair of the Membership Concerns 
Committee as an ex officio member (except in 
the case of a tie, the chair will be the deciding 
vote) and will serve as liaison between that com- 
mittee and the Executive Board. 

B. Will be responsible for developing and maintain- 
ing accurate membership lists and attendance 
records. 

C. Will be responsible for maintaining a current 
membership directory. 

D. Will report directly to the President. 

Co-Treasurers 

A. Will be responsible for all financial records, 
deposits of all monies, disbursements concern- 
ing the choir, collecting dues and for giving fi- 
nancial reports. 

B. Will work with the Executive Board to develop 
a budget. 

C. Will be responsible for presentation of the 
budget at the Student Council Appropriations 

D. Will be responsible for the administrative con- 


86 
E. Will report directly to the President. 


Sergeant at Arms 
A. Will be responsible for running orderly meet- 
ings and rehearsals. 


B. Will serve as Parliamentarian at all meetings of 
the Executive board and choir. 


C. Will report directly to the Vice President for 
Administration. 

Materiels Manager 

A. Will be responsible for the maintenance, dis- 
tribution and collection of robes. 


B. Will be responsible for the maintenance, storage, 
transportation and set up of musical equipment 
at all Black Voices engagements. 


C. Will report directly to the President. 


Historian 


A. Will be responsible for developing and maintain- 
ing a scrapbook of Black Voices for that one 
year. 

B. Will report directly to the Vice President for 
Administration. 


Article VI: 


Committees 
Music Committee 


A. Will consist of the following persons: Vice Pres- 
ident for Musical Development, directors, mu- 
sicians, section leaders, technical assistant, sec- 
retary and assistant secretary to the committee. 


87 


B. Will be chaired by the Vice President for Mu- 
sical Development who will work in conjunction 
with said committee regarding the musical de- 
velopment of the choir. 


C. The Music Committee will meet at the discretion 
of the Vice President for Musical Development. 


D. Persons interested in becoming members of this 
committee will be required to submit a letter of 
intent to the committee which will then select 
members according to its established selection 
process. 


Membership Concerns Committee 


A. Will serve as the liaison between the Executive 
Board and the members at-large. 


B. Will be chaired by the Membership Director. 


C. Will consist of two elected representatives from 
each choral section. Representatives will be re- 
sponsible for presenting the members’ ideas and 
concerns to the committee which will in turn 
relay them to the Executive Board. 


D. The recommendations made by the committee 
will - subject to the approval of the Executive 


Article VII: 


Elections and Removal of Officers 


Exectuive Board. ) Elections will be held during the 
month of February at the discretion of the Executive 


Board. Elections will be conducted by an ad hoc 
committee appointed by the President. 


Elected officers will be installed at the last said meet- 
ing of the choir, and the term of office will be from 
that installation until the next installation of newly 


elected officers. 


Section II 

Officers may resign or be removed from office for 
failure to pay dues or to execute the office’s proper 
duties. In the case of the latter, the Executive Board, 
by a majority vote, may recommend the dismissal of 
that officer to the choir. By two-thirds vote of the 
choir, the officer will then be dismissed. 


THE CONSTITUTION MAY BE AMENDED BY % 
VOTE OF THE ENTIRE MEMBERSHIP. 


89 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


Charlottesville Division 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 
AFFIDAVIT OF SAQUIB LAKHANI 


I, Saquib Lakhani, do hereby depose and state: 


1. I am a student at the University of Virgini 
member of the Muslim Students pa lrgenay a. 
organization that has been recognized as a Contracted 
Independent Organization (“CIO”) of the University. I 
have been a member of the Muslim Students Association 
since September 1989, and I have served as President 
from November 1990 to November 1991. 


2. As set forth in the constitution of - 
dents Association, which is attached as Petes emnpe this 
Affidavit, the objective of the organization “is to aid 
Muslim students during their Stay at the University and 
to promote a better understanding of Islam to the Uni- 
versity community.” The principal activities of the Mus- 
lim Students Association are to sponsor speakers and, as 
a recent initiative, to publish a news magazine, both of 
which are designed to promote Islamic culture. For ex- 
ample, last week the organization sponsored a speaker 
who made a presentation on the “Western Mi 
tions about Islam.” The news magazine, which is sched- 
uled to be published soon, will contain articles on calli- 
~—_ 4 transla tion of a Persian poem, news items ex- 

om internati i 
bree -vagpars Be onal newspapers, and recipes of 
3. The Muslim Students Association was established 


in December 1987. It currently has about 30 members. 
The organization meets about twice a month. The meet- 


90 
ings begin with the officers handling administrative busi- 
ness. Otherwise, they have no set agendas, rather they 
are essentially informal gatherings of students sharing a 
common cultural background. The meetings provide 
members an opportunity to share ideas and insights on 
subjects of mutual interest. For example, during the 


Gulf War members voiced their views and discusses [sic] 
their concerns. 


4. At no time during the meetings do officers or mem- 
bers of the Muslim Students Association engage in any 
religious rituals or activities, read from religious texts, 
or recite prayers or invocations to a deity. Nor has the 
organization produced, published or distributed any reli- 
gious pamphlets or publications among members or non- 
members. 


5. The Muslim Students Organization sought and re- 
ceived funding support from the Student Activity Fee 
administered by the Student Council in accordance with 
the Student Activity Fee Guidelines adopted by the Board 
of Visitors (“SAF Guidelines”). For the 1989-90 aca- 
demic year, the organization received $164. Because of a 
failure to meet the funding application deadline, the Mus- 
lim Students Association did not receive SAF funds for 
the 1990-91 academic year. The organization has ob- 
tained $264 in SAF funds for the current 1991-92 aca- 
demic year. The organization applied for and was 
granted SAF funds in the above noted amounts as a 
“cultural organization” which is defined in the SAF Guide- 
lines as “an organization which is primarily concerned 
with studying, promoting, and/or expressing racial, eth- 
nic, or affinity group traditions, social forms, art and/or 
tastes.” 


6. To my knowledge, the Muslim Students Organiza- 
tion has not received any complaints that the organization 
engages in religious activities, that SAF funds are imper- 
missibly used for religious activities, or that it is im- 
properly classified as a “cultural organization” under the 


91 


SAF Guidelines, except for the complaint raised offi- 
cers of the Wide Awake student organization d the 
course of the organization’s unsuccessful quest for SAF 
funding. 
/s/ Saquib Lakhani 
SAQUIB LAKHANI 


{Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


92 


CONSTITUTION OF 
THE MUSLIM STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA 


as submitted to Student Council on December 10, 1987. 


ARTICLE I. Title of the organization 

The Muslim Students Association at the University of 
Virginia. 
ARTICLE II. Objectives of the organization. 


The objective of the MSA at Uva is to aid Muslim 
students during their stay at the University and to pro- 
mote a better understanding of Islam to the University 


Community. 


ARTICLE III. Membership. 

Anybody who wishes to participate will be allowed to 
do so. Voting members will be restricted to those who 
pay membership dues. 


ARTICLE IV. Officers. 


There shall be seven elected officers forming the execu- 
tive committee. This committee will be in charge of all 
organization activities. The seven posts are as follows: 

1. The president handles all external affairs of the 
organization and carries out programmes of the organiza- 
tion as spelled out by the executive committee. The 
president is also authorized to spend the organization’s 
money. 

2. The vice-president acts as president in the absence 
of the president. 


3. The secretary records the minutes of the meeting 
and organizes membership lists. 


7" oe ne 


93 


4. The treasurer keeps the accounts of the organization 
and is authorized to spend the organization’s money. 


_ 5. The organizing secretary will coordinate the activi- 
ties of the organization with the general membership. 


6. There will be two (2) members-at-large who will 
complete the executive committee. 


ARTICLE V. Election and removal of officers. 


Elections will be held in March each year. Nomina- 
tions for each position will be accepted, and the nominee 
who receives the most votes will become the officer until 
the elections of the following year. A two-thirds vote of 
all the members present excluding the officer in question 
Is required to remove him/her from office. Immediately 
after the Temoval of any officer, the above election pro- 
cedure will be used to fill the vacant post. A quorum of 
one-third of all voting members must be present to under- 
take the election or removal process. 


ARTICLE VI. Finances. 


To gain voting member status, a member must pay one 
dollar in annual dues. The treasurer and the president 
are authorized to spend the money of the organization. 
es. ony of at least one-third of all voting mem- 

required to approve a budget prepared 
the executive committee. er wf 


ARTICLE VII. Amendments to the constitution. 


A two-thirds vote of at least one-third of all voting 
members is required to amend the constitution. 


94 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
Charlottesville Division 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


AFFIDAVIT OF MICHAEL TOW 


I, Michae!] Tow, do hereby depose and state: 


1. I am a student at the University of Virginia and 
currently serve as the President of the Jewish Law Stu- 
dents Association, a student organization that has been 
recognized as a Contracted Independent Organization 
(“CIO”) of the University. I have been a member of this 
organization since August 1990 and I have served as an 
officer for the past four months. 


2. The purpose of the Jewish Law Students Associa- 
tion is set forth in the organization’s by-laws which are 
attached as an exhibit to this Affidavit. Succinctly, the 
purpose is to represent and promote the interests of Jew- 
ish law students through a series of social, educational, 
and cultural activities. Specifically, the organization spon- 
sors (or co-sponsors with other groups) speakers on a 
variety of topics of interest to Jewish law students and 
law students at-large; arranges luncheon presentations by 
professors from the Law School and the Graduate Business 
School; and coordinates social acivities. Examples of 
presentations the organization has sponsored include lec- 
tures on: “Complex Tort Litigation” by Kenneth Fein- 
berg, and on “Judaism and Homosexual Rights” by Rabbi 
David Kaye. This Spring the organization plans to host 
the attorney who represents the Baltimore Orioles. 


3. The Jewish Law Students Association currently has 
about 75 members, and three officers including myself. 


95 


No dues are charged members. The organization is open 
to any interested law students; the current membership in- 
cludes several non-Jewish students, one of whom also 
serves as Vice-President. The officers meet periodically, 
about four times each semester, to plan the organization’s 
activities. At no time during these meetings does the 
organization engage in any religious prayer or invocation 
to a deity or read from any religious texts. Nor has the 
organization produced, published, or distributed any re- 
ligious pamphlets or publications among its officers or 
members. Furthermore, no religious symbols are placed 
iy any rooms during the conduct of the officers’ meetings. 


4. The Jewish Law Students Association over the past 
Utree years since the organization was established sought 
and received funding support from the Student Activity 
Fee administered by the Student Council in accordance 
with the guidelines adopted by the Board of Visitors 
(“SAF Guidelines”). The organization received $1,134 
for the 1990-91 academic year. Because of a failure to 
meet the application deadline, the organization did not 
receive SAF funds for the current 1991-92 academic year. 
The organization applied for and received SAF funds 
in this amount as a “cultural organization,” which is de- 
fined in the SAF Guidelines as “an organization which is 
primarily concerned with studying, promoting, and/or ex- 
pressing racial, ethnic, or affinity group traditions, social 
forms, art and/or tastes.” 


5. The SAF funds the Jewish Law Students Associa- 
tion received in 1990-91 were used solely to support ex- 
penses the organization incurred for photocopying, print- 
ing, and registration fees and travel costs associated with 
a trip to the national convention of the National Jewish 
Law Students’ Network. At no time has the organization 
used any SAF monies for religious activities, as that term 
is defined in the SAF Guidelines (“an activity which pri- 
marily promotes or manifests a particular belief(s) in or 
about a deity or an ultimate reality”). 


96 


6. Each year the Jewish Law Students Association 
sponsors a “holiday dinner” known as the Seder. This 
event is an incidental part of the organization’s activities. 
The Seder dinner is held off grounds and both Jewish and 
non-Jewish students attend. The cost of the Seder dinner 
is basically covered by participation fees paid by those 
attending. No SAF monies are used to cover the costs 
of the Seder dinner. 


7. To my knowledge, the Jewish Law Students Asso- 
ciation has not received any complaints that the organiza- 
tion engages in religious activities, that SAF funds are 
impermissibly used for religious activities, or that it is 
improperly classified as a “cultural organization” under 
the SAF Guidelines, except for the complaint raised by 
officers of the Wide Awake student organization in the 
course of the organization’s unsuccessful quest for SAF 


funding. 
/s/ Michael H. Tow 
MICHAEL TOW 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


97 


By-Laws 
of the 
University of Virginia 
Jewish Law Students Association 


I. _Name. The name of this organization shall be the 
haa of Virginia Jewish Law Students Association 


Il. Purposes. The purposes of this organization shall be: 


1. To encourage Jewish law students to participate 
in Jewish activities no matter what their religious 


background. 


2. To improve the quality of Jewish life in the Law 
School, on Grounds, and in the surrounding com- 
munity. To represent the interests of Jewish law 
students. To do legal work which will help promote 
the interests of the Jewish community. 


3. To be a focal point for Jewish activities at the 
Law School and to organize such activities. 


4. Tax Exempt Status. Other sections of these by- 
laws notwithstanding, the JLSA shall engage in no 
activities which would make it ineligible for tax ex- 
empt status. To that end, the JLSA is organized 
exclusively for charitable, religious, and educational 
purposes. No part of the net earnings of the JLSA 
shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to 
its members, officers, or other private persons except 
as reasonable compensation for services rendered or 
expenses incurred. The JLSA will not engage in any 
activities attempting to influence legislation, nor will 


political campaigns on behalf of any candidate for 
public office or any other activity not within the 


Il. 


98 


charitable, religious, and educational purposes set 
out above. Upon the dissolution of the JLSA, if 
such dissolution occurs, all of its assets, net of its 
liabilities (specifically including its liabilities, if any, 
to the University of Virginia or the Student Council 
of the University of Virginia) shall be distributed 
to Jewish organizations operated exclusively for 
charitable, religious, or educational purposes and 
which shall at the time qualify as tax-exempt organ- 
izations under the Internal Revenue Code. 


5. To enhance the Law School administration and 
faculty’s awareness of the special needs and interests 
of Jewish law students. 


6. To participate in the National Jewish Law Stu- 
dents Network. 


7. To enhance the understanding of all law students 
at the Law School of the culture and religion of their 
Jewish classmates. 


Membership. 


1. Membership shall be open to all members of the 
Law School community. The JLSA shall actively 
seek the membership of Jewish law students. Non- 
Jewish law students who wish to join the JLUSA may 
do so. Other graduate students at the University of 
Virginia may participate in JLSA activities as non- 
members. Only JLSA members may vote and hold 
Office. 


Officers. 

1. Bach year the membership shall elect four offi- 
cers: President, Vice-President, Treasurer, and Sec- 
retary. Elections shall be held in the spring semester 
at a duly called general meeting and shall be run by 
the President. The terms of the officers shall start 
upon a date fixed by resolution at the general meet- 


99 


ing. They shall serve until their successors are chosen 
and the term of those successors begins. Any va- 
cancies among the officers shall be filled by a vote 
of the Executive Board for the remainder of the cur- 
rent school year. Officers may be removed by a two- 
thirds vote of the Executive Board. 


2. President. The President shall be the chief ex- 
ecutive officer of the JLSA. She/he shall call and 
chair all Executive Board and general meetings, ap- 
point committees and their chairs, be the organiza- 
tion’s representative to the National Jewish Law Stu- 
dents Network Executive Board, and serve as the 
spokesperson for the JLSA to the Law School com- 
munity and to the public at large. The President 
shall have primary responsibility for developing the 
next generation of leadership for the JLSA. 


3. Vice-President. The Vice-President shall chair 
all meetings in the absence of the president and shall 
become President upon the resignation or removal of 
the President. She/he shall assist the President in all 
JLSA activities. 

4. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be responsible 
for all financial affairs of the JLSA, including the 
raising and expenditure of funds. She/he shall have 
sole authority to sign checks on the JLSA account. 
However, she/he shall authorize the expenditure of 
sums over ten dollars only if there has been prior 
authorization by the Executive Board. 


5. Secretary. The Secretary shall be responsible for 
maintaining the records of the JLSA and for keeping 
minutes of all general and Executive Board meetings. 


Executive Board. 


1. The Executive Board shall consist of all the 
elected JLSA officers and any JLSA menibers unani- 
mously elected by the officers of the JLSA. 


100 


2. Anyone may attend Executive Board meetings, 
which shall be held periodically after notice, but such 
notice may be waived by a vote of the majority of 
the Executive Board. i 

3. The Executive Board shall authorize all projects 
and approve all expenditures in excess of ten dollars. 
It shall. advise the President on all issues which 
come before the JLSA. 


4. The Executive Board may, on its own behalf 
only, take a stand on an issue of interest to Jewish 
law students, only by unanimous agreement of the 
members of the Executive Board. All such communi- 
cations shall be signed, “The Executive Board of the 
Jewish Law Students Association”. 


5. No individual may take a stand on behalf of the 
JLSA without the unanimous consent of the Execu- 
tive Board. 


6. The Executive Board, may, on behalf of the 
JLSA as a whole, take a stand on an issue of inter- 
est to Jewish law students, only by unanimous agree- 
ment of the members of the Executive Board and 
by the agreement of 30% (or 30 in number, which- 
ever is greater) of all Jewish law students at the 
University of Virginia. The President shall keep 
and maintain a list of the signatures of all those so 
consenting. All such communications shall be 
signed, “Jewish Law Students Association”. 


General Meetings. 


1. General Meetings of the entire membership shall 
be held whenever called by the President, but in any 
case no less frequently than once each year in the 
spring for the purpose of electing officers. 

2. Except as provided in Paragraph V.4, 5, and 6, 
a quorum for doing business or holding elections at 
a general meeting shall be 10% of the membership, 


401 
or the ‘current total number of the membership of 
the Executive Board, whichever is less. ’ 


3. General meetings shall only -be called if reason- 
able notice has been given of the time and place of 


VII. Adoption and Amendment. These by-laws shall be 


adopted and may be amended by a two-thirds vote 
of those present at a duly called General Meeting. 


102 


UNITED STATES DIST RICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
Charlottesville Division 


(Title Omitted in Printing ) 
AFFIDAVIT OF JAMES KOZLOSKI 


I, James Kozloski, do hereby depose and state: 


1. I am a student at the University of Virginia and 
currently serve as the President of the C. S. Lewis So- 
ciety, a student organization that has been recognized 
as a Contracted Independent Organization (“CIO”) of 
the University. I have been a member of this organiza- 
tion since September 1989 and I have served as the 
President for the past two years. : 


2. As stated in the constitution of the C. S. Lewis 
Society, the purpose of the organization is “to promote 
interest in, discussion of various literary, moral, and 
philosophical topics, with particular emphasis on the work 
of the ‘Oxford Christians’.” Despite the reference to “Ox- 
ford Christians” in the constitution that was prepared 
when the C. S. Lewis Society was formed three years ago, 
the purpose and focus of this study group is currently— 
and has been for the past two years that I have served as 
President—broader. In other words, there is no partic- 
ular emphasis on the study of the Oxford Christians. 
Rather, the main purpose of the C. S. Lewis Society is to 
study and discuss topics that cross several disciplines. 

3. The organization’s activities essentially entail 
weekly meetings of the group’s 15-25 members, during 
which they discuss essays, poems, and excerpts of novels 
by such authors as Emily Dickinson, Nietzsche, Dostoyev- 
ski, and C. S. Lewis. The organization often invites Uni- 
versity professors to lead the discussion groups, including 


103 


professors from the English Department, the Religi 
’ , Religious 
Studies Department, the Phi 4 
History D nak hilosophy Department, and the 


4. At no time during the meetings of the C. S. Lewis 
. 8%. 
Society does the organization engage in any religious 
prayer or invocation to deity or read from any religious 
texts. Nor has the organization produced, published, or 
distributed any religious pamphlets or publications among 
its officers or members. Furthermore, no religious sym- 
bols are placed in any rooms where meetings are held. 


_ 5. The C. S. Lewis Society sought and recei 

ing support from the Student po ok Fee per wm 
by the Student Council in accordance with the Student 
Activity Fee Guidelines adopted by the Board of Visitors 
(“SAF Guidelines”). The organization received $96 in 
1989-90, $220 in 1990-91, and currently receives $220 
for 1991-92. This SAF funding support is used exclu- 
sively to cover photocopying costs for study and discus- 
sion materials circulated among the members. 


6. The C. S. Lewis i i 
granted the SAF funds as gow Be nerd See chien 
is defined in the SAF Guidelines as “an organization 
which is primarily concerned with studying, promoting, 
and/or expressing racial, ethnic, or affinity group tradi- 
tions, social forms, art and/or tastes.” 


7. To my knowledge, the C. S. Lewis Soci 

received any complaints that the couinedee + ta 

in religious activities, that SAF funds are used for reli- 

gious activities, or that it is improperly classified as a 

Page organization” under the SAF Guidelines, except 

peal complaint raised by officers of the Wide Awake 
t organization in the course of the organization’s 

unsuccessful quest for SAF funding. 


/s/ James Kozloski 
JAMES KOZLOsKI 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


