No. 94-329 ———— 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
. 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, et al., 


Petitioners, 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 


Respondents. 


+ 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Fourth Circuit 


¢ 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION TO 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


+ 
James J. MINGLI Paut J. Forcn* 
University General Counsel Senior Assistant 
and Special Assistant Attorney General 
Attorney General Office of the Attorney 
University of Virginia General 
Post Office Box 9015 101 North Eighth Street 
Madison Hall Richmond, VA 23219 


Charlottesville, VA 22906 
(804) 924-3586 


*Counsel of Record 


(804) 786-3810 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


| BEST AVAILABLE COPY: 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a state university is constitutionally 
required to directly subsidize with public funds the prep- 
aration and distribution of a religious student group’s 
publication designed to advocate a particular religious 
belief. 


il 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTION PRESET. «oc scessecccesscuuh ouneeee i 
TABLE OF ALTTICSEOED ccc cccccccscsnsscuseunens ili 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE... ...cccccccssccsscess 1 


SUMMARY OF REASONS FOR DENYING WRIT... 6 
ATATIGIINT on oc ccccccccnsessedesueuekeeene 7 
I. No Important Federal Question Is Presented.... 7 


A. This Is Not a Case Where Religion Has 
Been Singled Out for Discriminatory Treat- 
MMT TTT) OU 7 


B. This Case Does Not Present a “Recurring 
and Contentious Issue” .................. 10 


II. The Holding Below Is Consistent with Deci- 
sions of this Court and Lower Courts ....... 11 


A. The Establishment Clause Does Not 
Require Discrimination Against Religious 
Speech; to the Contrary, Courts Have Con- 
sistently Held that the Establishment 
Clause Requires Government Neutrality 
Fowasd Baggam .....scccvcesensneehnses 12 


B. This Case Does Not Present this Court 
with a Meaningful Opportunity to Refine 
Establishment Clause Jurisprudence; the 
Allocation of Public Funds to Pay for Reli- 
gious Proselytization Is Not “Neutrality” 
and Conflicts with the Establishment 
oe ee i 16 


CONLIN occ ccccccccscnccsevussusseuenne enna 24 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Abingdon School District v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203 
TRUE CRRSaSSRGSSercenccscccccscccees 18 
Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 
TUE RERERGNSGEESEGe ces ecctveccccccccecces 22 
Bd. of Educ. of Kiryas Joel v. Grumet, 114 S.Ct. 2481 
DEAR CEER GE RECSGA CS ep biscccceccccccceceses 12 
Committee for Public Education v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 
ES Ee 19 
Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421 (1962) ...............4.. 18 
Everson v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1 (1947)......... 12, 18 
Fairfax County School Board v. Fairfax Covenant 
Church, 17 F.3d 703 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 
eine cena enesessocccecescce: 13 
Gay & Lesbian Students Ass'n v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 
Cite ed cntedsdbccsecccceuce 12, 13, 17 
Good News/Good Sports Club v. School Dist., 28 F.3d 
Tees pecan acbescacecspeseue 13 
Grand Rapids School District v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373 
UEC EGREES eR daoenedeedseoccccccccesss 19, 20 
Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. 734 (1973).............. 19, 20 
Joyner v. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 (4th Cir. 1973) ....13, 17 
Keller v. State Bar of California, 496 U.S. 1 (1990)..... 22 
Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches School Dist., 113 
i i Ci cee eecensbedsssccecvcccsecs 13, 14 
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971)....... 12, 18, 19 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES —- Continued 


Page 

Levitt v. Committee for Public Education, 413 U.S. 
Ge GOO v's. bs. ncsanvascccanseneias ve. SaGnkennewe 19 
Meek v. Pittenger, 421 U.S. 349 (1975)................ 19 


Roemer v. Board of Public Works, 426 U.S. 736 (1976) .... 19 


Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of 


Virginia, 795 F. Supp. 175 (W.D. Va. 1992).......... 3 
Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of 

Virginia, 18 F.3d 269 (4.4 Cir. Va. 1994)....... passim 
Sloan v. Lemmon, 413 U.S. 825 (1973)................ 19 


Smith v. Regents of the University of California, 4 
Cal. 4th 843, 844 P.2d 500, cert. denied, 114 S.Ct. 


BS Chee kdb ce cndevtvacsusesvaasainsdekbenienes 21, 22 
Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock, 489 U.S. 1 (1989)...... 21 
Tilton v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 672 (1971) ............. 19 
Tipton v. University of Hawaii, 15 F.3d 922 (9th Cir. 

SPUD: o cocvecencatstentunesebeeen enna 10, 11, 12, 13 
Walz v. Tax Comm'n of New York City, 397 U.S. 664 

GOUG ED oc oncccvavevascensccueaceutesuseiwastecusies 21 
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981)............ 11, 14 
Witters v. Wash. Dept. of Services for Blind, 474 U.S. 

481 (1985)......... >» ipeeeenene beuedhsteneweeseaas 20 
Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977) ............... 19 


Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 113 S.Ct. 
COs os 0s ccvcescancessvusawieed beeeteviels 20 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
OTHER AUTHORITIES 
lh Oe TES OF MI 503 0 ecccsecdcanyentcunkundated’ 21 
ee ER is day boc ba bakin eweawaeneevesseunniers 14 
a TE NE OF Us 6 oo 00 6 00 6.5.90 s0ccdenncnauanas 20 


No. 94-329 
¢ 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
+ 


RONALD W. ROSENBERGER, et al., 


Petitioners, 


THE RECTOR AND VISITORS OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 


Respondents. 


¢ 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Fourth Circuit 


¢ 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION TO 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


¢ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The Respondents, the Rector and Visitors of the Uni- 
versity of Virginia, et al., respectfully set forth the follow- 
ing pertinent facts to correct and clarify petitioners’ 
statement of the case. 


This case involves the long-standing policy of the 
University of Virginia not to fund religious student orga- 
nizations and activities. The University determined that 
the Wide Awake student group was ineligible to receive 


funding under the Student Activity Fee (“SAF”) Guide- 
lines because of its pervasively religious purpose: Wide 
Awake’s avowed “mission is to challenge Christians to 
live, in word and deed, according to the faith they pro- 
claim and to encourage students to consider what a per- 
sonal relationship with Jesus Christ means.” Rosenberger 
v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia, 18 F.3d 
269, 272 (4th Cir. 1994). Wide Awake’s assortment of jour- 
nal articles, portfolio of advertisements and physical 
appearance! all underscore its self-described proselytiz- 
ing mission. Petitioners themselves concede that “Wide 
Awake constitutes a ‘religious activity’ within the meaning 
of the Guidelines” and agree with the Cvuurt of Appeals 
that the publication is “ ‘marked by unflagging invoca- 
tion of religious, specifically Christian themes.’ ” Petition 
for Writ of Certiorari, at 7.? 


Contrary to petitioners’ assertion, respondents do dis- 
pute petitioners’ claim that Wide Awake “conformed to all 
applicable, content-neutral funding eligibility require- 
ments, as set out in the Guidelines, other than the prohi- 
bition relating to ‘religious activities.’ ” Pet. for Cert. at 7. 
If, as petitioners claim, Wide Awake indisputably fell 
within the category of “student news, information, opin- 
ion, entertainment, or academic communications media 
group,” it would have been funded. Instead, it falls 


1 As the Court of Appeals noted, “the Christian symbol of 
the Cross lying in a dark oval field, is printed at the top of each 
page; another Cross marks the end of each contribution.” Rosen- 
berger v. Rector and Visitors of the Univ. of Virginia, 18 F.3d 269, 273 
(4th Cir. 1994). 


2 Hereinafter, Pet. for Cert., at __. 


within the category of religious exhortation, which is 
outside SAF funding eligibility. 


Wide Awake did not receive University funding from 
the Student Council, because the SAF Guidelines prohibit 
the funding of religious activities and organizations. The 
funding guidelines, adopted in 1970, “charge the Student 
Council with administering the SAF ‘in a manner consis- 
tent with the educational purpose of the University as 
well as with State and Federal law.’ ” Rosenberger, 18 F.3d 
at 271. Religious groups are by no means singled out, but 
represent only one of many categories which are inelig- 
ible for funding under the Guidelines. See Id. 


On July 11, 1991, members of Wide Awake Produc- 
tions and editors of Wide Awake magazine filed suit in the 
federal district court for the Western District of Virginia 
against the Rector and Visitors of the University of Vir- 
ginia.> Petitioners claimed that the exclusion of religious 
activities from funding under the SAF policy had violated 
their free speech, free exercise of religion and equal pro- 
tection rights under the First and Fourteenth Amend- 
ments to the United States Constitution, as secured by 42 
U.S.C. § 1983, and sought declaratory and injunctive 
relief as well as compensatory damages. 


3 Ronald J. Stump was also designated as a defendant in his 
official capacity as Associate Dean of Students at the University. 


* Along with its Answer denying that it had violated Wide 
Awake's constitutional rights, the University filed a motion to 
dismiss Wide Awake’s claim for compensatory damages on Elev- 
enth Amendment immunity grounds. The District Court found 
it unnecessary to decide this issue in light of its summary judg- 
ment ruling in the University’s favor. Rosenberger v. Rector and 
Visitors of Univ. of Va., 795 F. Supp. 175, 178, n. 4 (W.D. Va. 1992). 


Both parties moved for summary judgment. Satisfied 
that there were no genuinely disputed issues of material 
fact, the district court following oral argument granted 
summary judgment in the University’s favor on all issues. 
Wide Awake appealed the district court’s order entered 
May 20, 1991. 


In affirming the judgment of the district court, the 
Court of Appeals properly recognized that while the 
Establishment Clause does not prohibit government from 
accommodating or incidentally benefitting religion, peti- 
tioners are demanding a direct and substantial govern- 
mental subsidy of religion:® 


Direct monetary subsidization of religious orga- 
nizations and projects . . . is a beast of an 
entirely different color. A proper respect for the 
Establishment Clause compels the Rector and 
Visitors to pursue a course of “neutrality” 
toward religion. Yet providing SAF monies to 


5 The Court of Appeals did not consider petitioners’ free 
exercise claim: “[i]n granting the University’s motion for sum- 
mary judgment, the district court ruled that the denial of fund- 
ing to Wide Awake Productions did not unconstitutionally 
burden the plaintiffs’ free exercise of religion . . . Because the 
plaintiffs failed to assign error to this holding on appeal, . . . we 
consider it abandoned, and decline to address it herein.” Rosen- 
berger, 18 F.3d at 277, n. 23. As to petitioners’ equal protection 
claim, the Court of Appeals similarly found that appellants- 
petitioners had not contested the district court’s factual finding 
that the University had not acted with discriminatory intent in 
denying funding to Wide Awake. Id. at 288. “Moreover, the plain- 
tiffs’ failure to argue the existence of discriminatory intent as a 
matter of law on appeal deprives us of jurisdiction to consider 
the merits of their equal protection claim.” Id. 


defray the publication costs of Wide Awake inev- 
itably would advance Wide Awake’s Christian 
mission: “to encourage students to consider 
what a personal relationship with Jesus Christ 
means.” . . . Because Wide Awake is a journal 
pervasively devoted to the discussion and 
advancement of an avowedly Christian theo- 
logical and personal philosophy, for the Univer- 
sity to subsidize its publication would, we 
believe, send an unmistakably clear signal that 
the University of Virginia supports Christian 
values and wishes to promote the wide pro- 
mulgation of such values. Since offering SAF 
funds to the members of Wide Awake Produc- 
tions would excessively entangle the University 
of Virginia with the propagation of the Christian 
religion, we hold that the Rector and Visitors 
have proved the existence of a compelling state 
interest in complying with the Establishment 
Clause. 


Rosenberger, 18 F.3d at 285. 


Respondents disagree with petitioners’ suggestion 
that the Court of Appeals held that the Establishment 
Clause “requires” discrimination against religion, see Pet. 
for Cert. at 12, and seriously doubt that any court would 
arrive at such a conclusion given both our country’s 
religious heritage and the obvious counterweight of the 
free exercise clause. In fact, the Court of Appeals speci- 
fically stated that the Establishment Clause “compels the 
Rector and Visitors to pursue a course of ‘neutrality’ 
toward religion.” Rosenberger at 2&5. This holding was 
based on the court’s factual finding that if the University 
was required to fund Wide Awake, it could not avoid 


“state sponsorship” of religion, and “excessive entangle- 
ment” in governmental supervision of religion. See Id. 


Respondents also disagree with petitioners’ percep- 
tion that the Court of Appeals held that the funds were 
not distributed in a viewpoint neutral manner. See Pet. for 
Cert. at 11. The Fourth Circuit actually held that the 
University must demonstrate a compelling interest in 
order to deny Wide Awake funding because the SAF 
Guidelines categorize groups according to content. The 
Court of Appeals did not hold, as the petitioners suggest, 
that the University had discriminated against Wide Awake 
on the basis of its point of view. The Court of Appeals 
merely mentioned in dicta that “when funds are made 
available to CIOs generally, they must be distributed in a 
viewpoint-neutral manner, absent considerations of equal 
constitutional dignity.” Rosenberger, 18 F.3d at 280. Peti- 
tioners have distorted the Court of Appeal’s holding by 
quoting the court’s words about “viewpoint discrimina- 
tion” out of context, and using the terms “content” and 
“viewpoint” interchangeably. See Pet. for Cert. at 11. This 
distinction is important because if viewpoint discrimina- 
tion were deemed to occur every time a public university 
creates categories for funding, every student group 
declared ineligible for funding would be able to attack 
the school’s decision as impermissible viewpoint discrim- 
ination. 


SUMMARY OF REASONS FOR DENYING WRIT 


No important federal question is presented. The 
holding below turns on the special circumstances of a 


state institution of higher education, which must make 
distinctions in allocating limited funds to student activ- 
ities and organizations in order to fund those activities 
most related to its educational purpose. This is not a case 
where government has sought to censor speech. This is a 
case where government has rightfully declined to subsi- 
dize with public funds the preparation and distribution 
of religiously proselytizing materials. Moreover, the 
Court of Appeals’ holding is not in conflict with any 
decision of this Court or that of any other United States 
Court of Appeals. Of the forty-one cases cited in their 
brief, petitioners fail to cite a single case approving direct 
governmental funding of a pervasively religious activity. 


4 


ARGUMENT 


I. NO IMPORTANT FEDERAL QUESTION IS PRE- 
SENTED 


A. THIS IS NOT A CASE WHERE RELIGION 
HAS BEEN SINGLED OUT FOR DISCRIMI- 
NATORY TREATMENT 


The University’s “Student Activity Fee Statement of 
Purpose and Funding Guidelines” make clear that reli- 
gious activities and organizations are only one of many 
categories of student groups which are ineligible for 
funding. Specifically: 

The Board of Visitors has determined that frater- 

nities, sororities, honor societies, political orga- 

nizations, religious organizations, and special 
status student organizations not charged by the 

Board of Visitors are ineligible for funds from 


the student activities fee. An organization is also 
ineligible when admission is exclusionary in 
nature and not open to all students or if mem- 
bership is restricted by reason of age, citizen- 
ship, color, disability, gender, race, religion, 
national origin, political affiliation, sexual orien- 
tation, or status as a disabled veteran or veteran 
of the Vietnam era. Notwithstanding these 
requirements, a student organization may 
restrict membership based on ability to perform 
the activities related to the organization’s pur- 
pose. 


Funding Guidelines, reprinted in Pet. for Cert. at 61a, 62a. 


“The Board of Visitors has further determined that 
the following expenditures and activities do not relate to 
the educational purpose of the University and thus are 
not eligible for funding”: honoraria or similar fees; reli- 
gious activities; social entertainment or related expenses; 
philanthropic contributions and activities; political activ- 
ities; and activities which would jeopardize the Univer- 
sity’s tax exempt status. Id., at 62a-63a. 


Petitioners’ assertion that “this explicit discrimina- 
tion on the basis of viewpoint would violate the Free 
Speech and Press Clauses if the viewpoint expressed 
were nonreligious” oversimplifies the SAF funding 
scheme. This argument suggests that the Guidelines 
divide student activities into two categories: religious 
and nonreligious, the former of which is ineligible for 
funding, the latter of which is not. However, the fact that 


many nonreligious activities are also ineligible for fund- 
ing undermines petitioners’ logic.® 


For example, if the student Democratic or Republican 
Club sought funding for campaign literature, or for a 
magazine which advocated their political platform, fund- 
ing would be denied under the Guidelines. However, 
applying petitioners’ reasoning, political groups would 
be able to argue that they were denied funding based on 
their point of view. They world also claim that, despite 
their dominant purpose of political advocacy, they should 


© Petitioners’ assertion that the University “discriminates 
among various religious viewpoints,” citing as “example[s]” the 
funding of the Muslim Students Association and the Jewish Law 
Students Association (Pet. for Cert. at 16, n. 8), is belied by the 
record. The undisputed facts established that these two student 
groups were funded as “cultural” organizations; neither 
embraced an evangelical mission nor received funding for any 
religious activity. The record reviewed by the district court also 
revealed that another group plaintiffs-petitioners initially 
assailed as evincing unequal treatment, Black Voices, declined 
to seek SAF funding after the organization shifted its purpose 
from simply singing Gospel music as a black cultural activity to 
engaging in evangelizing as a religious activity. 

It is difficult to reconcile petitioners’ persistent argument of 
“viewpoint discrimination” with the district court’s finding on 
the equal protection issue that petitioners presented no evi- 
dence of “discriminatory intent,” a finding petitioners did not 
pursue on appeal. See, Rosenberger, 18 F.3d at 288. Furthermore, 
in testing the University’s funding decision under the Establish- 
ment Clause, the Court of Appeals declared that “[t]he record 
gives us no reason to doubt that the Rector and Visitors’ 
expressed purposes are ‘sincere and not a sham.’ . . . Therefore, 
we hold that the guidelines’ proscription against funding of 
‘religious activities’ is not motivated wholly by an impermiss- 
ible purpose.” Id. at 284. 


10 


receive governmental monetary support as “student 
news, information or opinion.” A philanthropic activity 
or a student Ku Klux Klan organization could make simi- 
lar viewpoint discrimination arguments if denied funding 
under the Guidelines. A policy which defines eligibility 
for any benefit must make some reasonable distinctions 
based on the content of the activities in question. While 
the University does not fund religious activities, neither 
does it uniformly fund all nonreligious activities. 


B. THIS CASE DOES NOT PRESENT A “RECUR- 
RING AND CONTENTIOUS ISSUE” 


Petitioners have cited no other cases that have con- 
sidered this identical legal issue. Petitioners do cite Tipton 
v. University of Hawaii, in which the Ninth Circuit Court 
of Appeals affirmed the district court’s grant of summary 
judgment in favor of the University of Hawaii and its 
policy with regard to funding of student activities. 15 
F.3d 922 (9th Cir. 1994). However, the Tipton case, which 
was also resolved on summary judgment, hardly sup- 
ports the notion that this is a “recurring and contentious 
issue.” Although the Court of Appeals in Tipton 
expressed “no opinion whether the events for which [the 
student religious organization] sought funding . . . could 
be subsidized without violating the Establishment 
Clause,” Tipton, 15 F.3d at 926, n. 3, the Court allowed the 
University “wide latitude in adopting a funding policy to 
allocate the limited resources available to promote stu- 
dents’ extracurricular activities.” Id. The court also sug- 
gested that a university policy excluding the funding of 


” 


11 


all religious groups would “likely [be] permissible . . . so 
long as it is uniformly applied.” Id. at 928. 


Petitioners have not established that an important 
federal question has been implicated through the adop- 
tion of funding guidelines at various universities. None- 
theless, if this Court were to reverse the Court of Appeals 
decision, the effect would be to create recurring conten- 
tion, since the reversal would invalidate any eligibility 
requirements for funding student activities and organiza- 
tions. If the government cannot exclude religious activ- 
ities and organizations from public funding in order to 
avoid a violation of the Establishment Clause, it logically 
follows that all other forms of nonreligious expression, 
protected by the Free Speech clause and not restricted by 
the Establishment Clause, would have to be funded also. 
As a consequence, funds would have to be either equally 
divided among all student groups who want them or 
distributed on a first-come, first-serve basis. Such a prop- 
osition would effectively emasculate “the right of the 
University to make academic judgments as to how best to 
allocate scarce resources.” Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 
276 (1981). 


Il. THE HOLDING BELOW IS CONSISTENT WITH 
DECISIONS OF THIS COURT AND LOWER 
COURTS 


Petitioners’ attempt to mesh all cases dealing with 
the Establishment Clause may, at first blush, create the 
appearance of a conflict among various courts and opin- 
ions. However, as Justice O’Connor recently made clear, 


12 


“[e]xperience proves that the Establishment Clause can- 
not easily be reduced to a single test. There are different 
categories of Establishment Clause cases, which may call 
for different approaches.” Bd. of Educ. of Kiryas Joel v. 
Grumet, 114 S.Ct. 2481, 2499 (1994) (O’Connor, J., concur- 
ring).” 


A. THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE DOES NOT 
REQUIRE DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
RELIGIOUS SPEECH; TO THE CONTRARY, 
COURTS HAVE CONSISTENTLY HELD THAT 
THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE REQUIRES 
GOVERNMENT NEUTRALITY TOWARD 
RELIGION 


Petitioners assert the obvious when they note that 
“public universities may not deny funding to student 
groups or publications on the basis of their viewpoint.” 
Pet. for Cert. at 15, citing Gay & Lesbian Students Ass‘n v. 
Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 (8th Cir. 1988). However, the Rosen- 
berger case does not involve a situation where a student 
group was denied University recognition or access to 
campus facilities because of its speech. Nor does the case 


7 The fact that Justice O’Connor made these statements in 
the course of critiquing a rigid application of the test set forth in 
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971), has no bearing on the 
case at hand. Respondents note that the outcome of this case is 
not contingent upon strict adherence to the Lemon test. The 
Court of Appeals’ holding is supported by cases decided prior 
to Lemon. See, e.g., Everson v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1 (1947). Even 
if this Court abandons the Lemon test altogether, there is no 
reason to expect that all principles of the Establishment Clause 
developed by the Supreme Court over the years will be ren- 
dered obsolete. 


13 


involve administrative censorship or as in Gohn, with- 
drawal of financial or physical resources because the 
student group’s viewpoint was found objectionable. 


Petitioners argue that the Rosenberger and Tipton deci- 
sions are in conflict with other cases holding that a state 
cannot discriminate against religious speech in a public 
forum. See, e.g., Fairfax County School Bd. v. Fairfax Cove- 
nant Church, 17 F.3d 703 (4th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 114 
S.Ct. 2166 (1994).® Petitioners also rely on this Court's 
holding that excluding religious speech from the use of 
facilities in nonpublic forums on the basis of the 
speaker’s religious point of view constitutes impermissi- 
ble viewpoint discrimination. Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Mor- 
iches School Dist., 113 S.Ct. 2141 (1993). However, whether 
the forum is public, limited public or nonpublic, the 
crucial distinction between these cases and the case at 
hand is that they all involved general access to physical 
space, not a direct and substantial payment of govern- 
ment funds. See also Good News/Good Sports Club v. School 
Dist., 28 F.3d 1501 (8th. Cir. 1994). 


The standard for review before this Court is not 
whether petitioners find the principles derived from a 
comparison of various cases construing different aspects 
of constitutional law incongruous. Rather, the proper 


8 Respondents note that two of the cases cited by peti- 
tioners, Joyner v. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 (4th Cir. 1973), and Fairfax 
County School Board v. Fairfax Covenant Church, 17 F.3d 703 (4th 
Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 114 S.Ct. 2166 (1994), were decided by the 
Fourth Circuit, the second only months before Rosenberger. 
Though theoretically possible, it seems unlikely that the Fourth 
Circuit would have decided Fairfax Covenant and Rosenberger in 
a contradictory manner. 


14 


inquiry is whether a federal court of appeals “has ren- 
dered a decision in conflict with the decision of another 
United States court of appeals on the same matter” or 
“has decided a federal question in a way that conflicts 
with applicable decisions of this Court.” Sup. Ct.R. 10.1. 


Cases involving equal treatment of religious and non- 
religious speech in granting access to facilities have abso- 
lutely no bearing on this case. Religious and nonreligious 
speakers can simply wait their turn to use physical space; 
the allocation of public funds, on the other hand, is not 
only a very direct subsidy, it requires government discre- 
tion and supervision. Nonetheless, petitioners have been 
contending throughout this protracted litigation that 
Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981), and more recently, 
Lamb's Chapel, control the analysis of this case. Respon- 
dents maintained and continue to maintain that public 
forum cases, of which Widmar is the chief example, are 
entirely distinguishable from the case at hand, because 
they concern physical space, not funding. The Court of 
Appeals reached the same conclusion: 


[T]he proper analysis of this case lies under the 
line of authority dealing with content-based dis- 
crimination relating to government-generated 
benefits or burdens. The long line of public 
forum cases have taken “forum” in a fairly liter- 
alistic way involving physical space, and we do 
not see how it advances the jurisprudence to 
wrench that word out of its accepted form to 
encompass this type of case already subject to 
First Amendment scrutiny. 


Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors, 18 F.3d at 287. 


15 


The University would clearly be prohibited from 
denying religious groups access to generally available 
meeting space on the University grounds, and in fact it 
provides such access. However, when a state university is 
asked to pay for speech, the issue is no longer whether 
private speech should passively be allowed to occur, but 
whether the state may directly subsidize a religious belief 
with public funds. The potential harm to religion is 
manifest: government largess comes with its “strings” 
including supervision and audits.? 


The University’s treatment of religion has nothing to 
do with whether religious belief and practice is popular 
or unpopular. Like the religion clauses of the First 
Amendment, the funding guidelines adopted by the 
Board of Visitors were not designed to punish or penalize 
religious activity, but to ensure government neutrality 


° Petitioners’ argument that religion should never be 
treated differently from other forms of activity under the federal 
Constitution would strip the First Amendment religion clauses 
of any meaning. Although religion or religious activity may not 
be eligible for certain benefits the state offers to secular groups 
or activities, this is not the end of the inquiry. In other contexts, 
the Free Exercise clause of the First Amendment affords religion 
advantages over other forms of activity and expression pro- 
tected only by the Free Speech clause. 

For example, whereas the Journal of Law & Politics would 
not be permitted, as a Contracted Independent Organization 
(CIO), to discriminate on the basis of religion or other imper- 
missible factors in the selection of its editorial board, Wide 
Awake would presumably be permitted to select its Editor on the 
basis of the strength of the individual’s religious convictions. 
Wide Awake is protected by the free exercise clause; the Journal of 
Law & Politics and all other nonreligious student publications 
and organizations are not. 


16 


toward religion so that all religious faiths may flourish 
without government intervention or supervision. As the 
Court of Appeals recognized: 


The Rector and Visitors have not attempted to 
ban the publication of Wide Awake; indeed, they 
have supported its religious mission by allow- 
ing the members of Wide Awake Productions 
access to University meeting and printing facili- 
ties equal to that afforded all other CIOs. The ~ 
University permits the plaintiffs to distribute 
Wide Awake on its grounds without limitation. 


Rosenberger, 18 F.3d at 284. 


B. THIS CASE DOES NOT PRESENT THIS 
COURT WITH A MEANINGFUL OPPOR- 
TUNITY TO REFINE ESTABLISHMENT 
CLAUSE JURISPRUDENCE; THE ALLOCA- 
TION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO PAY FOR RELI- 
GIOUS PROSELYTIZING IS NOT 
“NEUTRALITY,” AND CONFLICTS WITH 
THE ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE 


Petitioners concede “that the decision below .. . finds 
support in older cases.” Pet. for Cert. at 21. However, 
according to petitioners, there is a conflict between two 
categories of cases because one line requires neutrality 
with respect to public facilities, and the other requires 
discrimination with respect to “direct monetary subsidiz- 
ation.” Pet. for Cert. at 22. To provide evidence of this 
purported conflict, petitioners cite a hodgepodge of cases 
dealing with access to facilities, distribution of written 
materials in public school, and religious symbols in a 
public forum. See Pet. for Cert. at 18-19 and 20, n. 11 and 


17 


n. 12. The cases are all actually crystal clear: when direct 
monetary subsidization is involved, there is an Establish- 
ment Clause violation because the benefit to religion is 
not neutral. Petitioners beg the question by framing the 
central issue as whether a “wide range of activities” 
receives the “neutral” benefit being offered. No court has 
ever held that direct funding of religious activities and 
programs is neutral. 


Respondents readily concede that it would be wrong 
for the University to fund some political or religious 
activities and not others, or to defund publications for 
expressing a particular viewpoint, or to refuse to fund 
organizations which qualify for funding under the Guide- 
lines because of the views of the organization. See, e¢.g., 
Gay & Lesbian Students Association v. Gohn, 850 F.2d 361 
(8th Cir. 1988); Joyner v. Whiting, 477 F.2d 456 (4th Cir. 
1973). However, pure viewpoint discrimination is very 
different from content-based decisions which are view- 
point neutral. In his concurring opinion in Widmar v. 
Vincent, Justice Stevens emphasized that there is nothing 
constitutionally suspect in a public university making 
content-based classifications or assessments in allocating 
limited resources: 


In performing their learning and teaching mis- 
sions, the managers of a university routinely 
make countless decisions based on the content of 
communicative materials. They select books for 
inclusion in the library, they hire professors on 
the basis of their academic philosophies, they 
select courses for the inclusion in the curricu- 
lum, and they reward scholars for what they 
have written. In addition, in encouraging stu- 
dents to participate in extracurricular activities, 


18 


they necessarily make decisions concerning the 
content of those activities. 


454 U.S. 263, 278 (1981). 


Indeed, numerous cases provide support for the 
proposition that the state cannot directly fund religious 
activity without violating the Establishment Clause. In 
Everson v. Bd. of Educ., 330 U.S. 1 (1947), decided well 
before Lemon v. Kurtzman, Justice Black explained: 

The ‘establishment of religion’ clause of the First 

Amendment means at least this: Neither a state 

nor the Federal Government can set up a 

church. Neither can pass laws which aid one 

religion, aid all religions, or prefer one religion 
over another .. . No tax in any amount, large or 
small, can be levied to support any religious 
activities or institutions, whatever they may be 
called, or whatever form they may adopt to 
teach or practice religion. Neither a state nor 

the Federal Government can, openly or secretly, 

participate in the affairs of any religious organi- 

zations or groups and vice versa. 


Everson v. Bd. of Ed., 330 U.S. at 15. (emphasis added). 
Even before school prayer and Bible reading in public 
school classrooms were thought to violate the Establish- 
ment Clause, see Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421 (1962) and 
Abingdon School Dist. v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203 (1963), the 
Supreme Court declared that the Establishment Clause 
prohibits the use of public funds, of any amount, to 
support religious activities.!° Perhaps direct govern- 
mental funding of religious activity so obviously violates 


10 It was permissible for the state to fund the cost of bus 
transportation, at issue in Everson, because bus transportation is 
not a religious activity. 


19 


the Establishment Clause that the point is not always 
explicitly made. However, the principle has consistently 
been enunciated in a variety of religion cases. 


For instance, this Court has invalidated, on Establish- 
ment Clause grounds, various state programs that sought 
to subsidize sectarian practices and activities. See Lemon 
v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971) (subsidy of parochial 
school salaries for teachers of secular subjects); Committee 
for Public Education v. Nyquist, 413 U.S. 756 (1973) (main- 
tenance and repair grants for parochial schools); Levitt v. 
Committee for Public Education, 413 U.S. 472 (1973) (reim- 
bursement to parochial schools for expenses of teacher- 
prepared test); Sloan v. Lemmon, 413 U.S. 825 (1973) 
(tuition reimbursement and grant program for parochial 
schools); Meek v. Pittenger, 421 U.S. 349 (1975) (loan of 
instructional materials and equipment to non-public 
schools); Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977) (field trip 
transportation services to non-public school students); 
Grand Rapids School District v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373 (1985) 
(use of public school programs and personnel on private 
school premises). 


In the few cases involving governmental aid to 
higher education, this Court likewise emphasized that the 
Establishment Clause prohibits governmental financial 
assistance to higher education institutions for pervasively 
sectarian purposes. See Tilton v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 672 
(1971); Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. 734 (1973); Roemer v. 
Board of Public Works, 426 U.S. 736 (1976). In the univer- 
sity context: 

Aid normally may be thought to have a primary 


effect of advancing religion when it flows to an 
institution in which religion is so pervasive that 


20 


a substantial portion of its functions are sub- 
sumed in the religious mission or when it funds 
a specifically religious activity in an otherwise 
secular setting. 


Hunt v. McNair, 413 U.S. at 743. 


This Court’s opinion in Witters v. Wash. Dept. of Ser- 
vices for Blind, 474 U.S. 481 (1985), is not to the contrary. 
The Witters decision distinguished between two scenarios 
in which “money previously in the possession of the State 
is conveyed to a religious institution.” Witters, 474 U.S. at 
486. While there is no Establishment Clause violation 
when a State issues a paycheck to one of its employees 
who then donates all or a part of the money to a religious 
institution, Id., 474 U.S. at 486-87, “[i]t is equally well 
settled . . . that the State may not grant aid to a religious 
school, whether cash or in kind, where the effect of the aid 
is ‘that of a direct subsidy to the religious school’ from the 
State.” Id., 474 U.S. at 487, citing Grand Rapids School 
District v. Ball, 473 U.S. at 394.1! Relying on Witters, this 
Court reiterated in Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 
113 S.Ct. 2462, 2466 (1993), that “government programs 
that neutrally provide benefits to a broad class of citizens 


11 Moreover, on remand, the State Supreme Court, at this 
Court’s invitation, held in Witters that the state constitutional 
prohibition against applying public monies to any religious 
instruction prohibited-the granting of the neutral aid for a reli- 
gious education. Witters v. State Com’n for the Blind, 771 P.2d 
1119 (Wash. 1989). The University would similarly be prohibited 
from funding religious student organizations under Article IV, 
§ 16 of the Virginia Constitution, as respondents argued in briefs 
submitted to the district and appellate courts below. 


21 


defined without reference to religion are not readily sub- 
ject to an Establishment Clause challenge. .. . ” 


Nor do cases involving indirect subsidies to religious 
and secular activities alike have any bearing on this case. 
See, e.g., Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock, 489 U.S. 1 (1989). As 
noted by the Court of Appeals, the Rosenberger case, 
which “involves a direct governmental subsidy of reli- 
gious expression rather than a mere exemption from the 
payment of duties, . . . is not directly on point with Texas 
Monthly.” Rosenberger, 18 F.3d at 283, n. 31. Although 
exempting religion from a burden (such as a tax) results 
in an “indirect economic benefit,” “[t]ax exemp- 
tions . . . constitute mere passive state involvement with 
religion and not the affirmative involvement characteris- 
tic of outright governmental subsidy.” Walz v. Tax Comm'n 
of New York City, 397 U.S. 664, 691 (1970) (Brennan, J., 
concurring). 


Reversal of the Court of Appeals’ decision would 
also expose the University to suits by other students or 
parents for refunds of the student activity fee.!2 Although 
this issue has not been treated uniformly by the courts, if 
the University is required to fund religious organizations 
and activities, it risks expensive challenges from individ- 
uals who object to such use of the mandatory student 


12 Respondents disagree with petitioners’ claim that this 
issue “is not raised in this case.” Pet. for Cert. at 15, n. 7. 
Respondents raised this issue both at the district court and 
Court of Appeals level. Most recently, pursuant to Fed. R. App. 
P. 28 (j), respondents called the Court of Appeals’ attention to 
the California Supreme Court’s opinion in Smith v. Regents of the 
University of California, 4 Cal. 4th 843, 844 P.2d 500, cert. denied, 
114 S.Ct. 181 (1993) during the pendency of the case. 


22 


fees. In addition to raising Establishment Clause objec- 
tions, litigants could draw upon decisions of this Court 
that restrict the use of mandatory professional association 
fees and union dues for activities that deviate from the 
organization’s established purpose. See Keller v. State Bar 
of California, 496 U.S. 1 (1990); Abood v. Detroit Board of 
Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977). The decision of the Califor- 
nia Supreme Court in Smith v. Regents of the University of 
California, 4 Cal. 4th 843, 844 P.2d 500, cert. denied, 114 
S.Ct. 181 (1993), illustrates the basis and impact of a 
challenge from students who object to uses of mandatory 
fees for purposes that are not related to the University’s 
educational mission As petitioners themselves point out, 
some decisions “have permitted dissenting students to 
‘demand refunds of portions of the student activities fee 
that are used to support the expression of ideological 
viewpoints with which they disagree.” Pet. for Cert. at 15, 
a 7: 


If required to fund Wide Awake, in the short term, the 
University would be supporting a single religion in dero- 
gation of the Establishment Clause. As competing reli- 
gions began to seek University funding, University 
agents would be compelled to scrutinize the worth of 
various religious organizations and activities in an 
attempt to decide how much money each group should 
receive, why one should receive more than another, and 
why one project or mission would be worthier than 
another. 


Petitioners’ “constitutional challenge” to the funding 
guidelines appears to be a constitutional challenge to the 
Establishment Clause itself. If religion cannot be treated 
differently than political ideas, ideology or viewpoints on 


23 


various issues, what does the Establishment Clause stand 
for? Petitioners’ suggestion that the Free Speech Clause 
should operate to nullify the Establishment Clause is not 
supported by the Constitution, opinions rendered by this 
Court or any other federal court, or common sense. 


Even if the case could be analyzed within a different 
framework which does not require the compelling inter- 
est standard, this case does not offer the Court a mean- 
ingful opportunity to differentiate between cases 
involving the government's ability to allocate its limited 
resources, and cases involving equal access of religious 
and secular groups to neutral benefits. This case has 
evolved into an academic debate about the logic and 
soundness of doctrine itself, and does not present a true 
conflict among courts on issues relating to the First 
Amendment. 


24 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the petition for writ of 
certiorari should be denied. 


Respectfully submitted, 


The Rector and Visitors of | 
the University of Viriginia, 


et al. 

By: Counsel 
James J. MINGLE Paut J. Forcn* 
University General Counsel Senior Assistant 
and Special Assistant Attorney General 
Attorney General Office of the Attorney 
University of Virginia General 
Post Office Box 9015 101 North Eighth Street 
Madison Hall Richmond, VA 23219 


Charlottesville, VA 22906 
(804) 924-3586 


*Counsel of Record 


(804) 786-3810 


