Supreme Court, U.$. 
FILED 


FEB 16 1996 


hte 
| SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Petitioner, 
v. 
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION, 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the Export Clause of the U.S. Constitution pre- 
cludes the application of § 4371 of the Internal Revenue Code 
to premiums paid for casualty insurance on export shipments. 
To accept the Government’s argument that the Export Clause 
permits the tax, this Court would have to overrule Thames & 
Mersey Marine Ins. Co. v. United States, 237 U.S. 19 (1915). 


_— 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 
re se oe as bes ea ee be old a i 
ED & ils < OW) oe 068% 0 SUC os ii 
nn aes 6 dON ow 6 CSR ON c's os we iv 
Constitutional Provisions Involved ............. | 
POPPED cei ce We ec deo ee deesoce 3 
Ee se ea ee ee 7 
i. cbs oe le We beweb Se coenes code 9 


1. This Court Has Consistently Held that the Export 
Clause Precludes the Imposition of Federal Taxes on 
the Export Process, Whether or Not the Tax Is One 
of General Applicability. Thames & Mersey, Which 
Controls on the Facts in This Case, Is Part of that 
Unbroken Line of Authority. .............. 9 


A. The Court's Consistent Reading of 
 . o> bas edwe Reecees 10 


ili 
2. Taxes not specifically directed at 
the export process ...... 2... . ees 17 


B. The Controlling Force of Thames & Mersey .. 25 


Il. The Government's Request that the Court 
Overrule Thames & Mersey Should Be Rejected. .. 26 


A. The "Modern Decisions" Under the 


Export and Commerce Clauses .......... 28 
B. Newer Decisions under the 

Import/Export Clause... ........ sees 29 
C. The Relevance of Michelin and Washington 

Stevedoring to the Export Clause ......... 32 
D. The Compelling Text of the Constitution .... 40 


Ill. Even if the Import/Export Clause Analysis Were 
Relevant to This Case, the § 4371 Tax Is Still 


Unconstitutional as Applied. .........-..-.. 42 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: Page 
A.G. Spalding & Bros. v. Edwards, 262 U.S. 
EE bees» 6as Ceeetee ooehts 24-25, 28 
Brown v. Maryland, 25 U.S. (12 Wheat.) 419 
ees oe 12-14, 37, 38-39, 40 
Canton R.R. v. Rogan, 340 U.S. 511 (1951) .... . 29-30 
Cornell v. Coyne, 192 U.S. 418 (1904) ... 20-21, 22, 23 


Department of Revenue v. Association of 


Washington Stevedoring Cos., 435 U.S. 734 
Ree ee lewiwems. 5, 8-9, 29-33, 38, 41, 42-43 


Fairbank v. United States, 181 U.S. 283 

ne 7, 8, 14-15, 17, 23, 27-28, 34, 40, 42 
Head Money Cases (Edye v. Robertson), 112 U.S. 

PE ORES 06 Shee E eWEES OS ee Ces 19 
Itel Containers International Corp. v. 

Huddleston, 507 U.S. 60, 113 S. Ct. 1095 


Dns «sae bive< keh bein deeenée 31, 43-44 
License Tax Cases, 72 U.S. (5 Wall.) 462 

Pri. 8 Can AW obese kd@enteccewsee 18 
Limbach v. Hooven & Allison Co., 466 U.S. 353 

th ch dewae bd dwlek see weees 30, 32, 41 


Louisiana Land & Exploration Co. v. Pilot 
Petroleum Corp. , 900 F.2d 816 (Sth Cir.), 


cert. denied, 498 U.S. 897(1990) .......... 44 
Mayo v. United States, 319 U.S. 441 (1943) ...... 41 
Michelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, 423 U.S. 276 

a 5, 8-9, 29-33, 37, 41, 42-43 


Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33 (1990) ......... 40 


7 


Moon v. Freeman, 379 F.2d 382 (9th Cir. 1967) .... 19 
New York v. United States, 326 U.S. 572 (1946) .... 41 
Pace v. Burgess, 92 U.S. 372 (1876) ......... 18-19 
Pacific Insurance Co. v. Soule, 74 U.S. 433 (1868) .. 38 
Peck & Co. v. Lowe, 247 U.S. 165 (1918) . . . . 22-24, 28 
Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co., 158 U.S. 

ee Oe re ee 38 
Richfield Oil Corp. v. State Board of 

Equalization, 329 U.S. 69 (1946) ........... 44 
Thames & Mersey Marine Insurance Co. v. 

United States, 237 U.S. 19 (1915) ........ passim 


Turpin v. Burgess, 117 U.S. 504 (1886) 19-20, 21, 22, 23 
United States v. Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1 


a Parr 4, 7, 10, 15-16, 17, 21-24, 31, 33 
United States v. New York & Cuba Mail S.S. 
Co., 200 U.S. 488 (1906) ...........446. 16 


Virginia Indonesia Co. v. Harris County 
Appraisal District, 910 S.W.2d 905 


Gee, TD 6c de 6b es Uw SNS ONS CSRS TO 44 
Western Live Stock v. Bureau of Revenue, 303 

Se Se gw eaeeuk 06-6 ud o Se UH 28 
Willcuts v. Bunn, 282 U.S. 216 (1931) .......... 17 


U.S. Const. art. 1, §8,cl. 1 .... 1, 11, 18, 32, 39, 41 
OS. Gem. a0. £ GR GD occccccscess 2, 28-29 
U.S. Comm. ant. 1, 99,66. 49 2... cc ccccees 2, 12, 18 
F@. @ BS |S | BPP passim 
OS. Comet. 0. ERG GS .. cc ccsccscs 2, 12, 18 
U.S. Comm. amt. 1, § 00,6. 2... ecco passim 
Revenue Act of 1921, ch. 136, 42 Stat. 227 ........ 4 


vi 
Stamp Act (Mar. 22, 1765), in Documents 
of American History 53 (Henry Steele 
Commager ed., 6th ed. 1958) ........... 37, 40 
War Revenue Act of June 13, 1898, ch. 448, 30 
Mh CGA od ws & See Sb FSCS eh ed os 02 28 
er ek I er ee al passim 
Ce Ne sg Bin 3-4 
Reg. 55, art. 110(a) (CCH Fed. Tax Serv. 
ee 4-5 
Rev. Rul. 57-256, 1957-1C.B. 416 ............. 4 
Miscellaneous: 
Peter V. Bergstrom, Markets and Merchants: 
Economic Diversification in Colonial 
Virginia, 1700-1775 (1980) ............... 34 
The Compact Edition of the Oxford English 
EL See 38 
The Documentary History of the Ratification 
of the Constitution (John P. Kaminski & 
Gaspare J. Saladino ed. 1988) ............. 36 
Max Farrand, The Records of the Federal 
Convention of 1787 (rev. ed. 1966) . . . . 11-12, 34-39 
The Federalist (Clinton Rossiter ed. 1961) ...... 12, 41 
13 The Papers of Benjamin Franklin 
(Leonard W. Labaree ed. 1969) .......... 37-38 
Emory R. Johnson, T.W. Van Metre, G.G. 
Huebner & D.S. Hanchett, History of 
Domestic and Foreign Commerce of the United 
a RR Ee a 34 


Samuel Johnson, Dictionary of the 
English Language (1755) ................ 38 


(Norton ed. 1987) .. 0... 6 ee ee ee ee es 
Thomas P. Slaughter, The Whiskey Rebellion 

Pyar 2) eee. eee eee 
Joseph Story, Commentaries on the 

Constitution of the United States (1833) ....... 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-591 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Petitioner, 


Vv. 


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION, 
Respondent. 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENT 
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


The Government’s brief adequately sets out the statutory 
provisions relevant to this case (U.S. Br. 2-4). A fuller presentation 
of the relevant provisions of the Constitution of the United States is 
as follows: 


a. Art. I, § 8, cl. 1: 


"The Congress shall have Power To lay and collect Taxes, 
Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide 
for the common Defense and general Welfare of the 
United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be 
uniform throughout the United States." 


Art. I, § 8, cl. 3: 


"The Congress shall have Power . . . To regulate 
Commerce with Foreign Nations, and among the several 
States, and with the Indian Tribes.” 


Art. I, § 9. cl. 4: 


"No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless 
in Proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein before 
directed to be taken.” 


Art. I, § 9, cl. 5: 


“No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from 
any State.” 


Art. I, § 9, cl. 6: 


"No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of 
Commerce or Revenue to thé Ports of one State over those 
of another: nor shall Vessels bound to, or from, one State 
be obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.” 


Art. I, § 10, cl. 2: 


"No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay 
any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what 
may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection 
Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and Imposts, laid 
by any State on Imports or Exports, shall be for the Use 
of the Treasury of the United States; and all such Laws 
shall be subject to the Revision and Controul of the 


Congress.” 


3 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

Respondent International Business Machines Corporation 
(IBM) brought this suit in the United States Court of Federal 
Claims to obtain a refund of $826,054.55 in taxes assessed 
under § 4371 of the Internal Revenue Code.' Section 4371 
(26 U.S.C. § 4371) imposes a tax of four cents per dollar on 
insurance premiums paid to a foreign insurer for insurance 
against risks or losses wholly or partly within the United 
States. See 26 U.S.C. §§ 4371 & 4372. As an exporter of 
computers and other business products, IBM purchased — 
either directly or through its foreign subsidiaries — casualty 
insurance to protect against the risk of loss or damage to its 
products during the export process. The insurance was “point 
to point"; that is, it applied to each shipment from the time it 
left IBM’s facility in the United States until arrival at the 
foreign destination. A separate premium was charged for each 
shipment, with the amount determined by the value of the 
shipment and underwriting factors such as the time and 
distance of the trip.’ 

When the insurance was purchased by IBM’s foreign 
subsidiary, a foreign insurance company would typically issue 


: The amount of $1.5 million referenced in the Government's brief 
(U.S. Br. 5) includes both taxes and interest. See Pet. App. 33a. 


>‘ Pet. App. 39a. IBM exported products to diverse countries around 
South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, the former U.S.S.R., Vietnam, and 
the overseas portion of the journey, and the inland segment within the 
foreign country, but in all cases insurance coverage did not commence until 
the shipment had been tendered in the United States to a common carrier 


4 


the policy. The statutory language of § 4371 would thus be 
triggered, even though only a small portion of the voyage 
occurred within the United States. The tax applies where a 
domestic company is insured by a foreign insurer against risks 
“wholly or partly" within the United States (26 U.S.C. 
§ 4372(d)), and the Government has construed this to mean 
that the tax applies to the entire premium for insurance on an 
international shipment, without apportionment, if more than a 
“trifling” portion of the shipment is within the United States. 
See Rev. Rul. 57-256, 1957-1 C.B. 416. 

Eighty years ago, this Court held in Thames & Mersey 
Marine Ins. Co. v. United States, 237 U.S. 19 (1915), that a 
similar federal tax levied against premiums paid for marine 
casualty insurance was unconstitutional as applied to export 
shipments. The reason was the Export Clause of the 
Constitution: "No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles 
exported from any State." U.S. Const. art. 1, § 9, cl. 5. The 
Court in Thames & Mersey concluded that a tax upon 
insurance policies covering export shipments was “so directly 
and closely related to the ‘process of exporting’ that the tax is 
in substance a tax upon the exportation and hence within the 
constitutional prohibition .. . ." 237 U.S. at 25, quoting 
United States v. Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1, 13 (1915). Based on 
the authority of Thames & Mersey, IBM took the position that 
the Internal Revenue Service could not constitutionally apply 
§ 4371 to casualty insurance premiums for its export ship- 
ments.’ 


> An earlier version of § 4371 (Revenue Act of 1921, ch. 136, 
§§ 1107, 42 Stat. 227, 306) was -- presumably in deference to Thames & 


Mersey -- accompanied by a regulation that admunistratively excluded 
insurance on exports from the scope of the tax: 


(continued...) 


5 


After audit of IBM’s tax returns for the years 1975 
through 1984, the Internal Revenue Service maintained that 
IBM was liable for the § 4371 tax insofar as the policies 
purchased from foreign insurers applied to IBM’s exports 
from the United States. (Pet. App. 17a) IBM paid the tax 
under protest and filed suit for refund. In the lower courts 
and in its briefing to this Court, the Government has conceded 
that — if the Export Clause was correctly interpreted and 
applied in Thames & Mersey — then the tax here is also 
unconstitutional as applied and that IBM is entitled to a full 
refund. (Pet. App. la & 22a; U.S. Br. 12 n.3) 

On stipulated facts, the Court of Federal Claims (Senior 
Judge Thomas J. Lydon) granted IBM’s motion for summary 
judgment and denied the Government's cross-motion. The 
court held that, on the facts presented, "the tax imposed by 
§ 4371 is a tax that amounts to a tax on exports” (Pet. App. 
26a); that Thames & Mersey was controlling (id. 27a); and 
that recent Court decisions under the Import/Export Clause‘ 
could not be read as rejecting this Court’s established rulings 
under the Export Clause (id. 27a). As an alternative ground, 
Judge Lydon also ruled that the federal tax here and in 
Thames & Mersey were distinguishable from the state taxes 


*(...continued) 

“No tax is imposed upon the premium charged for insurance 
issued to cover commodities which are in the actual process of 
exportation and which have begun their voyage or preparation for the 
voyage from the United States.” 


Reg. 55, art. 110(a) (CCH Fed. Tax Serv. 1926 ed.). The regulation 
lapsed without explanation. 


* Principally Michelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, 423 U.S. 276 (1976), and 


Department of Revenue v . Association of Washington Stevedoring Cos. , 435 
U.S. 734 (1978). 


6 


upheld in recent Import-Export Clause rulings: 


"Thus, even if the government is correct in its 
assertion that all taxes that involve exports, whether 
considered in light of the Export Clause or the 
Import-Export Clause, should be examined to see if 
they discriminate against exports qua exports, it 
appears that in the Court’s view a tax such as that 
imposed by § 4371 could indeed be considered a tax 


on exports in their capacity as exports” 


and thus was unconstitutional as applied. (Pet. App. 29a) 
This was because § 4371 amounted to an ad valorem tax on 
export goods in transit,’ a type of tax that this Court’s recent 
Import/Export Clause rulings indicated was distinguishable 
from the state taxes that were there upheld. (/d. 29a) 

The Federal Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed in a 
unanimous decision by Judge William C. Bryson (Chief Judge 
Archer and Judge Plager joining). After reviewing the history 
of the Export Clause, the court of appeals observed: 
"Acknowledging the importance of the Export Clause and its 
flat prohibitory language, the Supreme Court has consistently 
given the Clause a broad construction.” (/d. Sa) While this 
Court has in recent years narrowed its construction of the 
Import/Export Clause applicable to state taxation, 


"{s]upport for the continuing vitality of Thames & 
Mersey can be found both in the Court’s Import- 
Export Clause decisions and in the distinctions in 
language and policy between the Import-Export 
Clause and the Export Clause." (/d. 9a) 


5 ‘The tax imposed by § 4371 varies directly with the declared value of 
the export shipment. Pet. App. 39a. 


7 


Hence, on the basis of established precedents and the 
"undisputed applicability of Thames & Mersey" (id. 11a), the 
court of appeals held that the § 4371 tax as applied to IBM’s 
export shipments was unconstitutional. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


I. Thames & Mersey correctly applied the Export Clause 
in prohibiting the imposition of a federal excise tax on premi- 
ums for casualty insurance that covers export shipments. 
Although the federal government generally has broad authority 
to levy taxes, the Export Clause is an express and unequivocal 
restriction on that power: “No Tax or Duty shall be laid on 
Articles exported from any State." This is not simply a 
prohibition of taxes that discriminate against exports -- i.¢., 
taxes that are levied on exports qua exports. E.g., Fairbank 
v. United States, 181 U.S. 283, 292 (1901); United States v. 
Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1 (1915). Instead, the Export Clause has 
consistently been read as an exemption from all federal taxes 
as applied to the export process. “The requirement of the 
Constitution is that exports should be free from any govern- 
mental burden. The language is ‘no tax or duty.’" Fairbank 
v. United States, 181 U.S. at 290. Insurance is an integral 
part of the export process, and the premiums paid vary 
directly with the value of the product. As Thames & Mersey 
concluded, a federal excise tax as applied to such insurance is 
an impermissible tax on the export process. 

II. The Government argues that the Court should now 
adopt the “modern doctrine” developed under the Import/- 
Export Clause to overrule Thames & Mersey and, indeed, to 
repudiate this Court’s analysis in a half-dozen other Export 
Clause cases. The argument that the Export Clause should 


now be reinterpreted to fit the new Import/Export Clause mold 
has no justification -- historical or modern. The proposed 


interpretation distorts the plain meaning of a constitutional 
provision that was an important compromise at the 1787 
Constitutional Convention, and one that has been consistently 
understood as exempting the export process from federal 
taxation, discriminatory or not. The § 4371 tax at issue here 
fits squarely within the scope of the Export Clause as con- 
strued and applied in a long line of Court decisions. 

Moreover, the Government’s argument would require the 
Court to disregard -- indeed, to repudiate -- the analysis in the 
same "modern" cases on which the Government relies. This 
is because the Court, when it recently reinterpreted the Im- 
port/Export Clause to permit greater freedom for State 
taxation, applied an analysis that supports rather than under- 
mines the historically broad scope of the Export Clause. The 
Court stressed that the Import/Export Clause prohibits only 
State "imposts” and “duties,” and "just as clearly, the Clause 
is not written in terms of a broad prohibition of every ‘tax.’” 
Michelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, 423 U.S. 276, 290 (1976) 
(emphasis in original). See also Department of Revenue v. 
Association of Washington Stevedoring Cos., 435 U.S. 734, 
759 (1978). By comparison, the Export Clause does say "No 
Tax.” Moreover, the modern Import/Export Clause cases 
turned on the Court’s understanding of the specific and narrow 
purposes that underlay that constitutional provision, purposes 
that were not frustrated by non-discriminatory state taxation. 
The Export Clause, by contrast, was designed to serve broader 
purposes and was intended by the Framers to be absolute and 
unqualified in scope. The Framers intended that “exports 
should not be made a source of revenue to the National 
Government” (Fairbank v. United States, 181 U.S. at 292), 
and nothing in the newer cases cited by the Government 
supports a different conclusion. 

III. Even if the Government were right that the Export 
Clause and Import/Export Clause should be construed in 


9 


identical fashion, the result in this case is still unchanged. As 
the Claims Court below ruled in its alternative holding, the 
§ 4371 tax at issue here -- like the tax in Thames & Mersey -- 
applies to goods during the international journey and bears a 
direct relation to the value of those goods. This is unlike the 
state taxes upheld in Michelin and Washington Stevedoring, 
where in one case the goods were not in transit and in the 
other the tax was unrelated to value. Indeed, Washington 
Stevedoring distinguished Thames & Mersey on the ground 
that a tax on insurance premiums varies directly with the value 
of the goods. Thus, even under the Import/Export Clause 
analysis set forth in the Court's recent decisions, the federal 
excise tax here is still unconstitutional as applied. 


ARGUMENT 


I. This Court Has Consistently Held that the Export 
Clause Precludes the Imposition of Federal Taxes 
on the Export Process, Whether or Not the Tax Is 
One of General Applicability. Thames & Mersey, 
Which Controls on the Facts in This Case, Is Part 
of that Unbroken Line of Authority. 


The Govergment’s brief (U.S. Br. 19-26) may leave the 
impression that the Court has vacillated in its interpretation of 
the Export Clause, sometimes viewing the issue of discrimi- 
nation against exports as important and other times not. That 
is not so. The Court's reading of the Export Clause has been 
entirely consistent: the process of exportation is immune from 
federal taxation, period. This includes the articles of export 
themselves, as well as the documents and transactions in- 
volved in the export process. The issue of discrimination has 
been relevant only when the tax at issue did not apply during 
or fo the export process. But if the tax applies during or to 


10 


whether or not the tax is specifically directed at exports qua 
exports. 

Thames & Mersey is square’: within this unbroken line of 
precedent. It holds that even 4 me a-discriminatory excise tax 
may not be applied to casualty insurance purchased for export 
shipments because such a tax is "so directly and closely 
related to the ‘process of exporting’ that the tax is in substance 
a tax upon the exportation and hence within the constitutional 
prohibition... ." 237 U.S. at 25, quoting United States v. 
Hvoslef, 237 U.S. at 13. Thames & Mersey controls on the 
facts of this case. 


A. The Court’s Consistent Reading of 
the Export Clause 


The Export Clause has not needed frequent judicial 
consideration, presumably because its text is clear enough: 
"No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from any 
State." The clause was inserted during the Constitutional 
Convention at the insistence primarily of the southern States, 
whose economies were dependent on exports of regional crops 
such as tobacco, rice, and indigo. Whereas under the Articles 
of Confederation Congress could raise revenue only by 
requisitioning funds from the States, the Constitution was to 
give the federal government the unaccustomed power to 
impose its own taxes. The South, fearing that the Northern 
and Mid-Atlantic States would dominate Congress, insisted 
that exports be excepted from the taxing power.° Certain 


* When in July 1787 the Convention's Committee of the Whole was to 
adjourn and to refer drafting matters to the Committee of Detail, General 
Pinckney of South Carolina 

(continued...) 


ll 


Northern delegates also supported the clause because they 
believed a tax exemption would encourage development of 
domestic industries’ and because they feared the federal 
government might become too powerful and use its control 
over exports to extract concessions from the States.* 

The Constitution that emerged from the 1787 Convention 
gave Congress general power to lay and collect taxes (art. I, 
§ 8, cl. 1), but that power was subject to express limitations. 
Taxes and duties against exports were prohibited outright. 
Art. I, § 9, cl. 5. In addition, duties, imposts, and excises 
had to be uniform throughout the United States (art. I, § 8, cl. 
1) and could not discriminate against the ports of one State 


*(.. continued) 


“reminded the Convention that if the Committee should fail to insert 
some security to the Southern States agst. an emancipation of slaves, 
and taxes on exports, he shd. be bound by duty to his State to vote 
agst. their Report.” 


Madison's Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention, reproduced in 2 
Max Farrand, The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787 95 (rev. ed. 
1966) (“Records”). See also id. at 362-63 (statement of George Mason of 
Virginia). The August 6 report of the Committee of Detail did then 
include a provision that “No tax or duty shall be laid by the Legislature on 
articles exported from any State... .” jd. at 359n.15. It was comment- 
ed that “It seems to be feared that the Northern States will oppress the 
trade of the Southn.” Jd. at 359 (statement of John Langdon of New 
Hampshire). Various proposals to weaken the provision were considered 
but rejected (id. at 359-63), and the provision emerged from the Conven- 
tion essentially unchanged. See generally Clinton Rossiter, /787 -- The 
Grand Convention 200, 209 & 217 (Norton ed. 1987). 


” 2 Records at 360 (statement of Oliver Elisworth of Connecticut). 


* — E.g., id. at 362 (statement of Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts). 


12 


over those of another (art. 1, § 9, cl. 6). Direct taxes could 
only be laid in proportion to the census. Art. I, § 9, cl. 4. 
Taking these provisions as a whole, and given that the appor- 
tionment requirement was seen as a significant limitation on 
direct federal taxes, it was expected that taxation of imports 
would be the principal source of revenue for the federal 
government.” As for exports, however, “the hands of the 
Legislature were absolutely tied. . . -- exports could not be 
taxed."'° 

In light of this strong intent and the Export Clause’s clear 
language, it is not surprising that the Court has given the 
Clause a broad and consistent interpretation. 


1. Taxes "laid on Articles exported 
from any State" 


One early issue of interpretation was whether the constitu- 
tional prohibition of taxes "laid on Articles exported” literally 
required that the tax apply directly to the exported product, or 
whether the Export Clause would also prohibit a tax that was 
levied on the export process in some other manner. In Brown 
v. Maryland, 25 U.S. (12 Wheat.) 419 (1827), the Court 
addressed this issue, albeit in dictum because the case in- 
volved a state rather than federal tax and thus was decided 


% See, e.g., The Federalist No. 12, at 93 (Alexander Hamilton), No. 
36, at 222 (Hamilton), No. 41, at 262 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter 
ed. 1961). 


© 2 Records at 220 (statement of Rufus King of Massachusetts). See 
also 2 Joseph Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States 
§ 1011, at 470 (1833) (by virtue of the Export Clause, "(t]he power is, 
therefore, wholly taken away to intermeddle with the subject of exports”). 


13 


under the Import/Export Clause applicable to the States. "! 
Maryland required all import traders to pay a license fee, and 
the issue was whether that levy was "on Imports or Exports” 
within the meaning of the Import/Export Clause. In conclud- 
ing that it was, Chief Justice Marshall referred by analogy to 
a hypothetical federal tax on the occupation of exporting. 
Such a tax, he suggested, would clearly violate the Export 
Clause even though not laid directly on the articles of ex- 
port.? It was in this context -- on the issue whether a tax 
might be "laid on Articles exported” even though not imposed 
directly on the articles themselves -- that Chief Justice 
Marshall made the statement that is enthusiastically embraced 
in the Government's brief (U.S. Br. 17): “There is some 
diversity in language [between the Export Clause and the 
Import/Export Clause], but none is perceivable in the act 


"Art. I, § 10, el. 2: 


“No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts 
or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely 
necessary for executing its inspection Laws: and the net Produce of 
all Duties and Imposts, laid by any State on Imports or Exports, shall 
be for the Use of the Treasury of the United States: and all such 
Laws shall be subject to the Revision and Controul of the Congress.” 


* "The United States have the same right to tax occupations which is 
possessed by the states. Now, suppose the United States should 
require every exporter to take out a license, for which he should pay 
such tax as congress might think proper to impose; would government 
be permitted to shield itself from the just censure to which this 
attempt to evade the prohibitions of the constitution would expose it, 
by saying, that this was a tax on the person, not on the article, and 
that the legislature had a right to tax occupations?” 


25 U.S. at 445. 


14 


which is prohibited." 

In accord with Chief Justice Marshall’s dictum, the Court 
has consistently held that the Export Clause cannot be avoided 
by the expediency of applying a federal revenue measure to a 
transaction that is a part of the export process rather than to 
the exported products themselves. The issue was addressed 
most directly in Fairbank v. United States, 181 U.S. 283 
(1901), which struck down a federal stamp tax on bills of 
lading for export shipments. The Government argued that the 
Export Clause did not apply because the tax applied to bills of 
lading and not to articles of export. The Court concluded that 
an express constitutional prohibition on federal powers could 
not be construed so narrowly.'* An important purpose of the 
Constitution was to ensure "free exportation,” a principle that 
would be violated by federal taxation of the export process: 


"The requirement of the Constitution is that 
exports should be free from any governmental 
burden. The language is ‘no tax or duty.” Whether 


') 25 U.S. at 445. The Export Clause provides that "No Tax or Duty 
shall be laid on Articles exported,” whereas the Import/Export Clause 
provides that a State may not “lay any Imposts or Duties on Imports or 
Exports” (emphasis added). Obviously, the diversity of language between 
"laid on” and “lay . . . on” does not suggest a substantive difference. 
Chief Justice Marshall was not, however, addressing a different and more 
significant variance between the two clauses -- the use of “Tax or Duty” 
in the Export Clause and “Impost or Duty” in the Import/Export Clause. 
See pages 30-31, 37-39 infra. 


‘* —_ *{I}f the Constitution in its grant of powers is to be so construed that 
Congress shall be able to carry into full effect the powers granted, it 
is equally imperative that where prohibition or limitation is placed 
upon the power of Congress that prohibition or limitation should be 
enforced in its spirit and to its entirety.” 181 U.S. at 289. 


15 


such provision is or is not wise is a question of 
policy with which the courts have nothing to do. We 
know historically that it was one of the compromises 
which entered into and made possible the adoption of 
the Constitution. It is a restriction on the power of 
Congress; and . . . no legislation can be tolerated 
which, although it may not conflict with the letter, 
destroys the spirit and purpose of the restriction 
imposed. If, for instance, Congress may place a 
stamp duty of ten cents on bills of lading on goods to 
be exported it is because it has power to do so, and 
if it has power to impose this amount of stamp duty 
it has like power to impose any sum in the way of 
stamp duty which it sees fit. And it needs but a 
moment’s reflection to show that thereby it can as 
effectually place a burden upon exports as though it 
placed a tax directly upon the articles exported. It 
can, for the purposes of revenue, receive just as 
much as though it placed a duty directly upon the 
articles, and it can just as fully restrict the free 
exportation which was one of the purposes of the 
Constitution. " 


181 U.S. at 290-91. Thus: 


"(T]he freedom of exportation being guaranteed by 
the Constitution it cannot be disturbed by any form of 
legislation which burdens that exportation. The form 
in which the burden is imposed cannot vary the 
substance.” 


Id. at 295. 
The Court reaffirmed this principle in United States v. 
Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1 (1915), and Thames & Mersey Marine 


16 


Ins. Co. v. United States, 237 U.S. 19 (1915). The first 
struck down a federal tax on charter parties to the extent that 
the tax was applied to charters for export shipments. Reject- 
ing the Government’s argument that the tax "only incidentally 
and remotely affected articles exported" and "was not a tax on 
articles exported" (237 U.S. at 4), the Court held that the 
Export Clause "is designed to give immunity from taxation to 
property that is in the actual course of exportation" and "[t}his 
constitutional freedom . . . plainly involves more than mere 
exemption from taxes or duties which are laid specifically 
upon the goods themselves." Jd. at 13. Under the facts of 
the case, 


"(t}he charters were for the exportation; they related 
to it exclusively; they serve no other purpose. A tax 
on these charter parties was in substance a tax on the 
exportation; and a tax on the exportation is a tax on 
the exports." 


Id. at 17. Similarly in Thames & Mersey (about which more 
later, pp. 25-26), the Court struck down a federal excise tax 
on insurance premiums as applied to marine insurance for 
export shipments: “proper insurance during the voyage is one 
of the necessities of exportation,” and thus the excise tax on 
premiums “falls on the exporting process" and hence is 
"within the constitutional prohibition." 237 U.S. at 27." 


'S See also United States v. New York & Cuba Mail S.S. Co., 200 U.S. 
488 (1906), which involved a federal stamp tax on cargo manifests for 
ships bound for foreign ports. The United States conceded that the tax was 
unconstitutional under the authority of Fairbank but nonetheless prevailed 
on the ground that the taxpayer had failed to protest the tax at the time of 
payment. 


17 


This line of Export Clause cases was aptly summarized in 
Willcuts v. Bunn, 282 U.S. 216, 228 (1931): 


"(With respect to federal taxation of articles export- 
ed from any State, the constitutional inhibition gives 
immunity to the process of exportation and to the 
transactions and documents embraced in that process. 
[Citing Fairbank, Hvoslef, and Thames & Mersey.| 
Only on that construction can the constitutional 
safeguard be maintained." 


2. Taxes not specifically directed at 
the export process 


1 Although characterizing the § 4371 tax as having “only an 
incidental and remote relationship to exports and the export 
process" (U.S. Br. 34), the Government does not challenge 
the principle just discussed that the Export Clause applies to 
taxes on the export process as well as to taxes on articles of 
export. Indeed, the Government endorses Fairbank v. United 
States as a correct interpretation of the Export Clause (see 
U.S. Br. 21-23), and Fairbank addresses most fully the 
principle that a tax on the export process is a tax "on Articles 
exported." Instead, the Government argues that the Export 
Clause should be confined to discriminatory taxes that are 
imposed specifically upon exports, and that a generally 
applicable tax should be allowed even to the extent it applies 
to exports. 

On this point too, the Court’s decisions have been 
consistent and unwavering. If a federal tax is applied to or 
during the export process, it violates the Export Clause even 
if non-discriminatory. If, however, the tax applies prior to or 
after the export journey, the tax is unconstitutional if it 
discriminates against exports but constitutional if it does not. 


18 


As for the Government’s argument that non-discriminatory 
taxes may be applied to the export process itself, this Court 
has consistently rejected that position. While the Constitution 
contains other provisions designed to prohibit discriminatory 
federal taxation,’ the Export Clause is an unqualified excep- 
tion from the power to tax. 

Our discussion on this point begins with the first case in 
which the Court was asked to consider an Export Clause 
challenge to a federal revenue measure. In 1868, Congress 
had enacted an excise tax on the manufacturing of tobacco but 
exempted all tobacco intended for export. The same statute 
required, however, that exempted tobacco be packaged with 
an identifying stamp for which the government charged a fee 
of 25 cents. That fee was challenged as violative of the 
Export Clause in Pace v. Burgess, 92 U.S. 372 (1876), but 
the Court rejected the claim on the ground that the fee was not 
a "tax" or “duty” within the meaning of the Clause. The 
stamp was intended only to separate and identify tobacco that 
was exempt from the standard tax, and the fee bore no 
relationship to the quantity or value of the export package and 
was intended only to cover the costs of administering the tax 


© See art. I, § 8, cl. 1 (all duties, imposts, and excises must be 
uniform throughout the United States); at. I, § 9, cl. 6 (no discrimina- 
tion between ports in terms of regulation or revenue). In the License 
Tax Cases, 72 U.S. (5 Wall.) 462, 471 (1867), the Court compared 
“qualifications” on the federal taxing power with the “exception” grant- 
ed for export commerce: 


"(T)he power of Congress to tax is a very extensive power. It is 
given in the Constitution, with only one exception and only two 
qualifications. Congress cannot tax exports, and it must impose 
direct taxes by the rule of apportionment [art. |, § 9, cl. 4) and 
indirect taxes by the rule of uniformity fart. I, § 8, cl. 1].” 


19 


exemption. Thus, the fee was not a “tax" or "duty" subject 
to the constitutional prohibition. '’ 

The same statute returned to the Court in Turpin v. 
Burgess, 117 U.S. 504 (1886). In 1882, Congress repealed 
the exemption stamp fee but in so doing described the fee as 
an "export tax.” Seizing on that terminology, another tobacco 
manufacturer sought to recover past payments. The Court 
rejected the claim, reaffirming its holding in Pace v. Burgess 
that the stamp fee did not amount to a "tax." The Court was 
unimpressed by the subsequent congressional characterization 
of the fee, suggesting that Congress may have unwittingly 
adopted a term proposed by industry lobbyists. /d. at 505-06. 

The Court went on, though, to state an alternative 
rationale -- one that laid the groundwork for all subsequent 
decisions under the Export Clause. In discussing both the 
Export Clause and the Import/Export Clause, the Court stated: 


"The prohibition in both cases has reference to the 
imposition of duties on goods by reason or because 
of their exportation or intended exportation, or whilst 
they are being exported. That would be laying a tax 
or duty on exports, or on articles exported, within 
the meaning of the Constitution. But a general tax, 
laid on all property alike, and not levied on goods in 


Consistent with Pace v. Burgess, the rule has developed that the 
Export Clause does not prohibit user fees or other similar charges that 
are not general revenue measures but instead are regulatory in nature or 
designed only to defray governmental expenses specifically associated 
with export of the products in question. E.g., Head Money Cases (Edye 
v. Robertson), 112 U.S. 580, 595-96 (1884); Moon v. Freeman, 379 
F.2d 382, 391-92 (9th Cir. 1967). Here, the Government has conceded 
that § 4371 is a “tax” in the constitutional sense and does not qualify for 
this regulatory exception. E.g., Pet. App. 6a, 17a-18a, 22a. 


20 


course of exportation, nor because of their intended 
exportation, is not within the constitutional prohi- 
bition.” 


117 U.S. at 507 (emphasis added). 

Thus, the Export Clause would prohibit any tax -- even a 
"general tax" -- if it is levied on goods "whilst they are being 
exported" (or, "in course of exportation"). On the other hand, 
if the tax is imposed prior to commencement of the export 
process, the validity of the tax will depend on whether it is 
specifically directed at exports (i.e., on whether the goods are 
taxed “because of their intended exportation"). This issue of 
discrimination is not relevant, though, if the tax applies during 
or to the export process. Based on this standard, the Turpin 
Court concluded that the tobacco stamp levy was not objec- 
tionable because “the tax (if it was a tax) was laid upon the 
goods before they had left the factory” and thus “were not in 
course of exportation.” /d. at 507. Nor, in the circumstances 
of the case, did the stamp fee discriminate against exports. 
Id. at 507-08." 

The Court applied this identical standard in Cornell v. 
Coyne, 192 U.S. 418 (1904), which considered the consti- 
tutionality of a federal excise tax on the manufacturing of 


* — This latter point was true because the stamp fee permitted exports to 
be charged at a lower rate than domestic goods: 


“A special indulgence was granted to [plaintiffs] (in common with 
others), in reference to the particular tobacco which they declared it 
to be their intention to export... . In this view of the case, the 
plaintiffs not only had no ground of complaint, but they were really 
the objects of favorable treatment on the part of the government, 
which, on the slight and easy conditions referred to, accepted their 
declared intention to export the tobacco in question, before it was 
commenced to be exported, or put in the way of exportation.” 


21 


filled cheese. The tax was non-discriminatory as to cheese 
manufactured for domestic and export markets, but the 
taxpayer argued that the Export Clause nevertheless precluded 
application of the tax to cheese that was manufactured under 
contract for export and that was then in fact exported. The 
Court rejected the taxpayer’s argument, but not simply 
because the tax was non-discriminatory. Rather, the tax was 
constitutional because it was both non-discriminatory and 
applied to the manufacturing process prior to the commence- 
ment of the export journey: 


"A farmer may raise cattle with the purpose of 
exportation, and in fact export them. Can it be that 
he is entitled to a return of all property taxes which 
have been cast upon those cattle? The true construc- 
tion of the constitutional provision is that no burden 
by way of tax or duty can be cast upon the exporta- 
tion of articles, and does not mean that articles 
exported are relieved from the prior ordinary burdens 
of taxation which rest upon all property similarly 
situated. The exemption attaches to the export and 
not to the article before its exportation." 


192 U.S. at 427 (emphasis added). 

Under the Government’s proposed theory of the Export 
Clause, the Court in Cornell reached the right result for the 
wrong reason; because the tax was non-discriminatory, that 
should have been the end of the analysis. However, the Court 
did not apply the Government's proposed analysis but instead 
applied the analysis of Turpin v. Burgess: the tax was 
constitutional only because it was both non-discriminatory and 
was not applicable to the export process. And, in so ruling, 
the Court reaffirmed that the export process itself was exempt 
from any taxation, whether discriminatory or not. 


22 


Hvoslef and Thames & Mersey, both decided eleven years 
after Cornell, were therefore not aberrations or unwitting 
missteps, as the Government suggests, but instead represented 
consistent applications of the standard already announced in 
Turpin v. Burgess and Cornell. Hvoslef involved a non- 
discriminatory federal tax on contracts for ship charters, and 
the Court held that the tax violated the Export Clause to the 
extent it was applied to charters for export shipments: "the 
tax as applied to the [export] charter parties here in question 
was nothing else than a tax on exportation and to this extent 
was in any event invalid." 237 U.S. at 17-18. The tax on 
insurance premiums in Thames & Mersey, while again not 
discriminating against exports, met the same fate to the extent 
the tax was applied to export shipments. In both cases, the 
tax applied to the export process itself and thus, as applied, 
violated the Export Clause even though non-discriminatory . 

The Court’s next Export Clause decision was Peck & Co. 
v. Lowe, 247 U.S. 165 (1918), which held that the new 
federal income tax made possible by the Sixteenth Amendment 
could be applied to all income of a domestic corporation, 
including income derived from exports. The Government 
suggests (U.S. Br. 24-26) that Peck & Co. was in tension with 
Hvoslef and Thames & Mersey, decided just three years 
earlier, and supports the "modern" theory of the Export 
Clause it urges in this case. In support of that suggestion, the 
Government states that Peck & Co. stressed the non-dis- 
criminatory aspect of the tax in question (with citations to 
Turpin and Cornell), whereas non-discrimination had not 
saved the taxes that had been struck down in Hvoslef and 
Thames & Mersey. 

There is no tension, however, because Peck & Co. 
applied precisely the same standard that has been applied in al! 
the Court’s decisions under the Export Clause. Citing both 
Hvoslef and Thames & Mersey and quoting with approval from 


23 


the latter, the Court in Peck reiterated that the Export Clause 
excepts from the federal taxation power 


“articles in the course of exportation, the act or 
occupation of exporting, bills of lading for articles 
being exported, charter parties for the carriage of 
cargoes from state to foreign ports, United States v. 
Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1; and policies of marine insurance 
on articles being exported, -- such insurance being 
uniformly regarded as ‘an integral part of the ex- 
portation’ and the policy as ‘one of the ordinary 
shipping documents,’ Thames and Mersey Insurance 
Co. v. United States, 237 U.S. 19. In short, the 
court has interpreted the clause as meaning that 
exportation must be free from taxation, and therefore 
as requiring ‘not simply an omission of a tax upon 
the articles exported, but also a freedom from any tax 
which directly burdens the exportation.’ Fairbank v. 
United States, {181 U.S.] at 292-293." 


247 U.S. at 173 (emphasis in original; other citations omit- 
ted). 

Applying this standard, the Court upheld the income tax 
in Peck & Co. because the tax was “not laid on articles in 
course of exportation or om anything which inherently or by 
the usages of commerce is embraced in exportation or any of 
its processes.” Jd. at 174. The tax applied only to net 
income, based on all the company’s revenues and costs and 
calculated well after the exportation process was finished. 
The tax was thus analogous to the manufacturing taxes in 
Turpin v. Burgess and Cornell, which were applied prior to 
the start of the export journey. It was in this context -- a tax 
not applied to the export process itself -- that the issue of 
discrimination was relevant. 


24 


The fact that Peck & Co. did not signal a revised con- 
struction of the Export Clause is proven by A.G. Spalding & 
Bros. v. Edwards, 262 U.S. 66 (1923), where five years after 
Peck the Government made and lost precisely the same 
argument that it advances today. Spalding involved a federal 
excise tax on the sale of sporting equipment. Although the tax 
was non-discriminatory, the Spalding company challenged its 
application to sales made in export commerce. The Solicitor 
General, in seeking to defend the tax, argued that discrimina- 
tion was the sole issue: 


"From the history of the Export Clause in the 
Constitution, it will appear that the framers had in 
mind a tax levied directly and deliberately upon the 
act of exportation. They were not considering the 
application of general taxing laws, which might fall 
in individual cases upon merchandise, which might 
thereafter be exported.” 


Id. at 66. The Court, in a unanimous decision by Justice 
Holmes, flatly rejected the Government's argument: 


"The fact that the law under which the tax was 
imposed was a general law touching all sales of the 
class, and not aimed specially at exports, would not 
help the defendant if in this case the tax was ‘laid on 
articles exported from any State’, because that is 
forbidden in terms by the Constitution. Article lI, 
§ 9. United States v. Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1, 18... . 
Articles in course of transportation cannot be taxed. 
William E. Peck & Co. v. Lowe, 247 U.S. [at] 173." 


262 U.S. at 69. The tax in question was applied at the ume 
the goods were delivered to the common carrier for shipment 


25 


abroad, and thus the tax was imposed on the export process in 
violation of the Constitution: 


"To put [the taxable event] at any later point would 
fail to give to exports the liberal protection that 
hitherto they have received; of which an example 
may be seen in Thames & Mersey Marine Ins. Co. v. 
United States, 237 U.S. 19." 262 U.S. at 70. 


B. The Controlling Force of Thames & Mersey 


We see, then, that Thames & Mersey fits squarely within 
the Court’s consistent interpretation of the Export Clause and 
has been frequently relied upon and cited with approval, even 
in cases which the Government suggests are supportive of its 
position. Thames & Mersey involved a non-discriminatory 
federal tax -- an excise tax on casualty marine insurance, 
whether for domestic or export shipments. But, as applied to 
exports, it was held unconstitutional. Insurance “is essential 
to the process of exporting” (Thames & Mersey, 237 U.S. at 
26), “one of the necessities of exportation” (id. at 27). 
poe neg a federal excise tax to such insurance placed an 
impermissible burden on the exportation process: 


"The rise in rates for insurance as immediately 
affects exporting as an increase in freight rates, and 
the taxation of policies insuring cargoes during their 
transit to foreign ports is as much a burden on 
exporting as if it were laid on the charter parties, the 
bills of lading, or the goods themselves. Such 
taxation does not deal with preliminaries, or with 
distinct or separable subjects; the tax falls upon the 
exporting process.” /d. at 27. 


26 


The Government thus concedes, as it must, that Thames 
& Mersey is indistinguishable from this case and -- unless 
overruled -- compels affirmance of the judgment below. The 
§ 4371 tax has been applied to insurance policies that cover 
IBM’s export shipments from the time the products are 
delivered to a common carrier for shipment abroad, to the 
tume the products arrive at their foreign destination. The tax 
varies directly with the value of the exports, because the tax 
is a fixed percentage of the premiums and the premiums in 
turn vary directly with the cargo’s value. In practical effect 
the tax is an ad valorem tax on the cargo’s value and applies 
directly to and throughout the export process. It is therefore 
unconstitutional under Thames & Mersey, even if it does not 


discriminate against exports. 


Il. The Government’s Request that the Court 
Overrule Thames & Mersey Should Be Rejected. 


The Government's argument for overruling Thames & 
Mersey boils down to this: For many years, the Export 
Clause and Import/Export Clause were construed in tandem 
(which is true). Then, in the 1970s, the Court changed its 
interpretation of the Import/Export Clause to permit non- 
discriminatory State taxation of imports and exports (also true, 
to a degree’”). Thus (in the Government's view), this 
“modern doctrine” should now be applied to the Export 
Clause. 

What this argument lacks is analysis of why the Court 
changed its interpretation of the Import/Export Clause, and 


* As discussed in Part Il below (pp. 42-44), the Government's 


reading of the holdings of the new Import/Export Clause cases is 
somewhat more expansive than is merited 


commonly thought that porpoises and tuna were both fish. 
Then, scientists discovered that the porpoise was actually a 
mammal. Therefore, we now know that tuna are mammals as 
well. Obviously, one should not jump to this second conclu- 
sion without first examining the reasons why scientists 
changed their minds about porpoises (warm- rather than cold- 
blooded, etc.) and then considering whether or not those 
reasons apply to tuna. For all practical purposes, the Govern- 
ment’s argument omits consideration of those critical ques- 
tions. 

The explanation for the omission is evident: The reasons 
the Court changed its analysis of the Import/Export Clause are 
not applicable to the Export Clause. To the contrary, those 
reasons confirm rather than refute the Court's long-standing 
conclusion that the Export Clause precludes federal taxation of 
the export process, discriminatory or not.” 


* It is worth noting that the line the Government seeks to draw 
between discriminatory and non-discriminatory taxes will often be hazy 
A facially non-discriminatory tax may be imposed only against products 
that are predominantly exported (¢.g.. mght-hand-drive automobiles), or 
a tax im practical effect may weigh more heavily on exports than domes- 
tic goods. The § 4371 tax is itself an example, because insurance 
premiums (and therefore the tax) will typically be higher for long 
international shipments than for domestic shipments, even when the 
intra-U.S. transportation legs of the two shipments are of the same 
length. 


Similarly, a tax that on its face is specifically directed at exports 
may not seem so discriminatory when viewed in the broader context 
For example, the tax provision in Fairbank applied only to export 

(continued...) 


28 


A. The "Modern Decisions" Under the 
Export and Commerce Clauses _ 


Before turning to the Import/Export Clause cases, we first 
address briefly two other categories of "modern decisions" 
(U.S. Br. 24) which the Government claims support a new 
reading of the Export Clause. The first is itself an Export 
Clause case -- Peck & Co. v. Lowe, 247 U.S. 165 (1918) 
(U.S. Br. 24-26). But, as already discussed (pages 22-24 
supra), Peck & Co. is entirely consistent with the Court's 
historical reading of the Export Clause, and it quotes and cites 
Thames & Mersey with approval. And, in the subsequent 
Spalding decision, the Court flatly rejected the very argument 
for reinterpretation of the Export Clause that the Government 
makes here today. See page 24 supra. Hence, neither Peck 
nor Spalding supports the Government's position. 

The Government's second category of cases is even more 
Startling -- cases under the Commerce Clause in which the 
Court held that the negative implications of that Clause did not 
preclude non-discriminatory State taxation of businesses 
engaged in interstate commerce. E.g.. Western Live Stock v. 
Bureau of Revenue, 303 U.S. 250 (1938); U.S. Br. 26. Quite 
the reverse of the Export Clause, the Commerce Clause is a 
federal grant of power fo the federal government, and -- for 
reasons well known to the Court - that clause has been 
construed by implication to restrict State powers in only 
limited circumstances. The negative implications of the 
Commerce Clause are hardly a valuable guide in construing an 


continued) 

transactions, but it was part of a far broader tax bill that separately 
taxed comparable domestic transactions, albeit in different ways or at 
different rates. See War Revenue Act of June 13, 1898, ch. 448, 30 
Stat. 448. 


29 


express and categorical constitutional limitation on federal 
powers. As the Government elsewhere in its brief concedes, 
"decisions concerning the negative implications of the Com- 
merce Clause are not logically relevant to analysis under the 
Export Clause.” U.S. Br. 22 n.8. 


B. Newer Decisions under the 
Import/Export Clause 


The Government's principal argument for overruling 
Thames & Mersey rests on recent cases under the Import - 
Export Clause, in particular Michelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, 
423 U.S. 276 (1976), and Department of Revenue vy. Associa- 
tion of Washington Stevedoring Cos., 435 U.S. 734 (1978). 
Michelin and Washington Stevedoring held that the Import - 
Export Clause did not prohibit the application of certain non- 
discriminatory State taxes to import and export commerce, and 
the Government now argues that the same analysis should 
govern the Export Clause. But Michelin and Washington 
Stevedoring provide no support for a revised reading of the 
Export Clause. Indeed, the analysis that the Court invoked to 
narrow the protections of the Import/Export Clause with 
respect to State taxation is consistent with and actually 
supports the Court’s long-standing rule of broader protection 
under the Export Clause .*' 


The Government also cites two other Import/Export Clause cases, 
but they can be disposed of quickly. Canton R.R. v. Rogan, 340 US 
S11 (1951) (U.S. Br. 27), upheld a Maryland franchise tax imposed on 
railroads and measured by the carner’s gross receipts apportioned by the 
length of its lines within the State. The taxpayer claimed that the tax 
could not be applied to the extent its lines were used to carry imports 
and exports in the Baltimore harbor. Because the transportation services 

(continued...) 


30 


In Michelin, the Court held that Georgia’s ad valorem 
property tax could be applied to imported goods no longer in 
transit in the same manner that the tax applied to domestic 
goods. The Court reasoned that the Import/Export Clause was 
intended by the Framers to serve three purposes: (1) that the 
federal government speak with one voice in regulating foreign 
commerce; (2) that federal import revenues not be diverted to 
the States; and (3) that State imposts and duties not disrupt 
harmony among the States, particularly between seaboard and 
inland States. 423 U.S. at 285-86. A non-discriminatory 
State property tax, applied equally to domestic and imported 
goods, did not clash with those objectives. 

The Michelin Court then observed that, consistent with its 
limited objectives, the Import/Export Clause was phrased in 
terms of a prohibition only of State "imposts" and "duties," 
and “just as clearly, the Clause is not written in terms of a 
broad prohibition of every ‘tax’." Jd. at 290 (emphasis 
added). Relying on historical sources, the Court found the 
omission from the Import/Export Clause of the term "tax" to 
be important and to signify that the clause should apply only 


(.. .continued) 

in question were provided wholly within the State and the taxpayer was 
not itself engaged in the import/export business (id. at 514), the Court 
found no infringement of the Import/Export Clause. Fairbank, Hvoslef 
and Thames & Mersey were distinguished as more directly involving the 
exportation process, and the Court also noted that those federal tax cases 
had been decided under the Export Clause rather than the Import/Export 
Clause. Id. & n.2. 


Limbach v. Hooven & Allison Co., 466 U.S. 353 (1984) (U.S. Br. 
31-32), was also decided under the Import/Export Clause and applied 
the new construction of that provision adopted in Michelin and Washing- 
ton Stevedoring. Neither the Export Clause nor any of its precedents 
were discussed. 


ee ee ee a ee ee 


31 


to revenue measures that were targeted at goods produced 
abroad. Jd. at 287, 291-93. That is, generally applicable 
State taxes are "“[uJjnlike imposts and duties, which are 
essentially taxes on the commercial privilege of bringing 
goods into a country... ." Id. at 287.” 

This line of reasoning was extended to State taxation of 
exports in Washington Stevedoring. That case involved Wash- 
ington’s business and occupation tax as applied to stevedoring 
activities conducted within the State. The Court reviewed the 
limited purposes of the Import/Export Clause that had been 
identified in Michelin and found here too that the State tax did 
not offend those objectives. As the tax did not discriminate 
between export and domestic commerce and applied only to 
services conducted within the State, the tax caused neither 
disharmony among the States nor disruption of federal foreign 
affairs. Moreover (and a point the Government’s brief in this 
case wholly ignores), a State tax affecting exports would not 
interfere with federal tax revenues because the federal 
government was itself precluded by the Export Clause from 
taxing exports.” The Court then reiterated the “central 
holding" of Michelin: that the Import/Export Clause by its 
terms was a prohibition "only of ‘Imposts or Duties’ and not 
of all taxes." 435 U.S. at 759. A non-discriminatory State 


2 Thus, the Court construed “imposts and duties” in the Import/- 
Export Clause as analogous to the treaty language at issue in /fel Con- 
tainers Int'l Corp. v. Huddleston, 507 U.S. 60, 113 S. Ct. 1095 (1993), 
which applied only to revenue measures “collected on, or in connexion 
[sic] with, the importation of goods" or “chargeable by reason of 
importation,” but not to taxes generally. 113 S. Ct. at 1099. 


*% The Import/Export Clause as applied to exports “does not serve to 
protect federal revenues . . ., because the Constitution forbids federal 
taxation of exports. U.S. Const., Art. I, § 9, cl. 5; see United States v. 
Hvoslef, 237 U.S. 1 (1915)." 435 U.S. at 758 (emphasis added). 


32 


levy on services performed within the taxing state was thus 
held not to be an impost or duty within the meaning of the 
Import/Export Clause. /d. at 761. 


C. The Relevance of Michelin and Washington 
Stevedoring to the Export Clause 


Plainly, Michelin and Washington Stevedoring cannot be 
read as supporting the Government's proposed reinterpretation 
of the Export Clause. Both rulings were based on a textual 
examination of the Import/Export Clause (dealing with imposts 
and duties but "not written in terms of a broad prohibition of 
every ‘tax’"; Michelin, 423 U.S. at 290) and on the limited 
purposes which the Framers intended that clause to serve. 
Both decisions stressed the omission of the word “tax” from 
the Import/Export Clause prohibition and both contrasted that 
language with the Article I, § 8, cl. 1 grant to Congress of the 
"Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and 
Excises." Michelin, 423 U.S. at 290; Washington Stevedor- 
ing, 435 U.S. at 759 (emphasis added). The language of the 
Export Clause similarly contrasts with the Import/Export 
Clause, for the Export Clause provides: “No Tax or Duty 
shall be laid on Articles exported from any State." (Emphasis 
added). The absence of a prohibition on “taxes” in the 
Import/Export Clause was central to the Michelin and Wash- 
ington Stevedoring holdings, and belies the notion that those 
decisions are guidance to interpreting the Export Clause, 
which explicitly does prohibit any federai “tax.” See also 
Limbach v. Hooven & Allison Co. , 466 U.S. 353, 360 (1984) 
("The new focus [under the Import/Export Clause is] on 
whether the tax sought to be imposed is an ‘Impost or 
Duty.’"). 

But the defect in the Government's position is deeper than 
linguistic. Michelin and Washington Stevedoring concluded 


33 


that the objectives of the Import/Export Clause were to ensure 
that the States not intrude on specified federal prerogatives 
(foreign affairs and import revenues) and that maritime states 
not exploit their geographic position against inland states. 
Michelin, 423 U.S. at 285-86; Washington Stevedoring, 435 
U.S. at 752-53. Quite obviously, these were not the objec- 
tives of the Export Clause, which imposes restrictions on the 
federal government (not on the States) and does not deal with 
relations among the State governments. Indeed, the discussion 
in Washington Stevedoring of the Import/Export Clause 
objectives cannot be reconciled with the Government's 
position here. There, the Court noted that one purpose of the 
Import/Export Clause was to ensure that the States did not 
impair federal taxation of imports, which were expected to be 
a major source of revenue for the national government. In 
addressing the relevance of that objective in the export 
context, the Court observed that giving the States greater 
taxing leeway would not impair federal revenues because the 
federal government itself could not tax exports. 435 U.S. at 
758, citing the Export Clause and United States v. Hvoslef.** 
It defies logic for the Government to argue that Washington 
Stevedoring supports new, broader taxing authority for the 
federal government, when the Court’s holding that the States 
could tax exports relied directly on the proposition that the 
federal government could not. 

A sharp distinction between the scope of the Export 
Clause and Import/Export Clause is also compelled by the 
historical record. The principal (although not exclusive) 
purpose behind the Export Clause was to deny Congress the 
power to burden Southern exports of regional crops that were 


* — See note 23 supra. 


34 


not grown in other States (tobacco, indigo, etc.).~ Obvious- 
ly, even a “non-discriminatory” tax on tobacco shipments (for 
example) would have precisely that effect.” So important 
was this issue that the Export Clause was among the most 
actively debated compromises at the 1787 Convention.”’ The 
question whether the federal government could tax exports 
was interwoven with other fundamental issues, including the 
apportionment of direct taxes by population and the status of 
slavery. Some delegates declared emphatically that the Export 
Clause exemption was necessary for their support for any 
federal taxation power,” or indeed for the entire Constitu- 
tion.” 


= Delegates also supported the Export Clause because it would 
encourage export industries and limit the federal government's overall 
taxing power. See pp. 10-11 supra. Fairbank v. United States explicit- 
ly reyected the argument that the Export Clause should be narrowly con- 
strued to apply only in the situation where a tax or duty implicates the 
issue of inter-regional discrimination. 181 U.S. at 292. 


* The vast bulk of the South's Colonial-era tobacco production was 
exported. See Peter V. Bergstrom, Markets and Merchants: Economic 
Diversification in Colonial Virginia, 1700-1775 129-52 (1980); 1 Emory 
R. Johnson, T.W. Van Metre, G.G. Huebner & D.S. Hanchett, History 
of Domestic and Foreign Commerce of the United States 59-60 (1915). 


See, ¢.g., Fairbank v. United States, 181 U.S. 283, 290 (1901) 
(the Export Clause “was one of the compromises which entered into and 
made possible the adoption of the Constitution”). 


* 2 Records, supra note 6, at 305-06 (statement of George Mason of 
Virginia) 


*% Id. at 9S (statement of General Pinckney of South Carolina), 360 
(statement of Hugh Williamson of North Carolina), 360 (statement of 
(continued...) 


35 


The Export Clause was opposed by other delegates, 
however, who wanted a strong federal government and who 
argued that export industries -- which would require a navy 
for their protection -- should be compelled to contribute to 
federal revenues.” The Government's policy argument here 
that exports should pay their fair share of federal revenues 
(U.S. Br. 35-36) was thus considered and rejected by the 
Convention. In the course of that debate, the delegates 
considered but rejected proposals for less than a total ban on 
export taxation, including a requirement of a two-thirds vote 
for such taxes, a proposal that the ban apply only to some 
products, a suggestion that the ban expire after a period of 
years, and a proposal that export taxes be prohibited only if 
imposed "for the purposes of revenue."*' James Madison, 
a Virginian but nevertheless a strong federalist, urged a more 
qualified clause -- some “lesser evil than a total prohibi- 
tion." But a majority rejected all efforts to weaken the 
Clause because many delegates feared that Congress would 
inevitably exercise its taxing power to burden unfairly the 
exports of one region or another.’ The delegates thus 


(continued) 
Pierce Butler of South Carolina: “strenuously opposed to a power over 
exports; as unjust and alarming to the staple States”). 


©  E.g., 2 Records 220 (statement of Rufus King), 306-07 (statement 
of James Madison). 


* 2 id. at 359-63 
2 lid. a 363 
* Elbridge Gerry stated that “the legislature could not be trusted with 


such a power. It might ruin the Country. It might be exercised partial- 
(continued...) 


36 


adopted a bright-line approach that removed exports entirely 
from the federal government's powers of taxation. 

The Import/Export Clause was less controversial and 
more qualified. That Clause was designed principally to 
prevent the "commercial states" (those with major ports) from 
imposing oppressive imposts and duties upon the trade of their 
neighboring non-commercial states.“ This conduct by the 
commercial states was a species of the interstate discrimination 
that gave rise to the Commerce Clause and, accordingly, the 
two provisions were seen as interrelated. Indeed, some 
wondered whether the Import/Export Clause added significant- 
ly to the protections that would be available under the Com- 


(continued) 

ly, raising one and depressing another part of it." 2 id. at 307. As 
Roger Sherman of Connecticut ultimately concluded, “it is best to 
prohibit the National legislature in all cases.” /d. at 361. 


Advocates and opponents alike characterized the Clause as adopted 
as having very broad effect. E.g., id. at 220 (Rufus King: “the hands 
of the legislature were absolutely tied. .. . exports could not be 
taxed"), 361 VJiohn Dickinson of Delaware: the proposed clause “must 
be of dangerous consequence” for it would prohibit export taxation 
“with respect to all articles and for ever"); George Mason, “An Old 
Planter,” Virginia Independent Chronicle, Feb. 20, 1788, reprinted in 8 
The Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitution 397 
(1988) ("Our tobacco, our com, our grain, and al] the productions of 
the earth, are forever exempted from al! taxes or al] duties on exporta- 
ra | 


“ See, ¢.g., 2 Records 306 (statement of James Madison); 3 id 542 
One indication of the differing purposes and background of the Export 
Clause and Import/Export Clause is that Madison was an opponent of 
the former but a supporter of the latter. /d. 


37 


merce Clause.’ There also was ready agreement that the 
Import/Export Clause should not be phrased in sweeping 
terms. For example, States were permitted to impose duties 
or imposts provided that Congress consented and the net reve- 
nues were provided to the federal treasury. Also, the States 
were allowed to impose duties and imposts to cover their costs 
of port inspection. Although the southern States had insisted 
on an unqualified Export Clause, it was the South that urged 
a narrowing of the lmport/Export Clause to allow inspection 
duties. 

Additionally, the Import/Export Clause prohibited only 
"Imposts or Duties,” as compared to the Export Clause’s 
prohibition of "Tax or Duty.” The reason for the different 
treatment of “imposts” is obvious; that term was commonly 
used as meaning a customs fee on imports,”’ and the Im- 
por/Export Clause but not the Export Clause implicated 
imports. “Duty” had a less precise meaning; sometimes it 
was used broadly so as to be virtually synonymous with “tax,” 
whereas it was also often used in the narrower sense of a 
customs levy. For example, in testimony to the British House 
of Commons explaining American opposition to the Stamp Act 
of 1765, Benjamin Franklin observed that the term “duty” had 
a marrower meaning in America than in Britain: “the same 


" 2 id 441 (statement of Gouverneur Morris) 
» 2 id. 588-89 


"Based on historical evidence, the Court in Michelin concluded that, 
as used in the Constitution, “'[i)mposts’ were like customs duties, that 
is, Charges levied on imports at the me and place of importation.” 423 
U.S. at 291. See, ¢.g., 3 Records 203 (“the word imposts extended to 
duties on goods imported”) (emphasis in original), quoted af 423 US at 
291 0.12. See also Brown vy. Marviand, 25 U.S. a 437 


38 


words have not always the same meaning here and in the 
Colonies. By taxes they [the Americans] mean internal taxes; 
by duties they mean customs... ."™ Similarly, in discuss- 
ing the Import/Export Clause during the 1787 Convention, 
Gouverneur Morris used “duty” in the same narrower sense: 


"Mr. Govr Morris . . . did not consider the 
dollar per Hhd laid on Tobo in Virga. as a duty on 
exportation, as no drawback would be allowed on 
Tobo. taken out of the Warehouse for internal 


consumption. "”” 


Thus, a state tax that was applied equally to exports and 
domestic products ("no drawback [rebate] would be allowed 

_.") was not a “duty” as that term was used in the Import/- 
Export Clause. This, of course, is consistent with the Court's 
reading of that clause in Washington Stevedoring.“ 


* 13 The Papers of Benjamin Franklin \56 (Leonard W. Labaree ed. 
1969), quoted in | The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictio- 
nary 730 (1971). Johnson's Dictionary indicates that “duty” was used in 
England in both the broad and narrow sense: “[t]ax; impost; custom; 
toll.” 1 Samuel Johnson, Dictionary of the English Language (1755) 
Franklin highlighted the distinction between “tax” and “duty” because he 
acknowledged that Parliament had the power impose to external taxes on 
the Colonies ("duties"), but he argued that it had no right to impose 
more generally applicable “internal” taxes. See Thomas P. Slaughter. 
The Whiskey Rebellion 17-18 (1986). 


* 2 Records 589. 


“ For other discussions of the distinction between the term “duty” 
and “tax,” see Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co., 158 U.S. @1, 
622 (1895); Pacific Ins. Co. v. Soule, 74 U.S. 433, 445 (1868). Justice 


Thompson, in dissenting in Brown v. Maryland, drew a distinction 
(continued...) 


39 


Significance must be given, then, to the fact that the 
Framers used both “tax” and “duty” in the Export Clause (as 
they did when giving general taxing power to Congress in Art 
I, § 8, cl. 1), but only “duty” in the Import/Export Clause *' 
To use Benjamin Franklin's phrase, the Framers intended that 
even “internal taxes” could not be applied by the federal 
government to the export process. This broader reading of the 
Export Clause is compelled by the text and structure of the 
read as a whole. As James Madison aptly wrote in summariz- 
ing the Convention's extensive debate over the scope of the 
Export Clause: “The result is seen in the Constitution."“ 
Indeed it is: “No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles 
exported from any State.” 


“(__ continued) 
between “tax” and “duty,” arguing that the State licensing fee in that 
case was a “tax” and therefore outside the scope of the Import/Export 
Clause. 25 U.S. a 455-56. Clearly, “tax” was almost always used in 
the broader sense and “duty” often -- but not always - in the narrower, 
customs sense 


“See also the notes of the Committee of Detail, which in adjoining 


paragraphs state “No Taxes on exports” by the federal government but 
“no Duty on exports” by the States. 2 Records 142-43. 


“ ‘Letter of James Madison to Thomas Jefferson (Oct. 24, 1787). 3 
Records at 135 


“Some contended for an unlimited power over trade including 
exports as well as imports, and over slaves as wel! as other im- 
ports; some for such a power, provided the concurrence of two 
thirds of both Houses were required, Some for such a qualification 
of the power, with an exemption of exports and slaves, others for 
an exemption of exports only. The result is seen in the Constitu- 
ton.” 


40 
D. The Compelling Text of the Constitution 


The most fundamental defect in the Government's argu- 
ment is that it can offer no plausible basis for its interpretation 
of this constitutional language: “No Tax or Duty shall be laid 
on Articles exported from any State.” It admits that a "Tax" 
is involved. Also, unquestionably there are “Articles” being 
“exported” from the States. Nor does the Government 
challenge Chief Justice John Marshall's statement in Brown v. 
Maryland or the Court's holding in Fairbank and other cases 
that imposition of a tax on the export process is the same as 
imposition of a tax on “Articles exported.” Accordingly, the 
only textual argument left to the Government is that "laid on" 
means something like “specifically directed at” or “discrimi- 
nate against." See U.S. Br. 34 & 36. 

This position is not supportable. “Laid on” is simply a 
now somewhat archaic way of saying “imposed on” or 
“applied to.” Gouverneur Morris, in the statement quoted on 
page 38 above, thus referred to a tax “laid on Tobo in Virga.” 
in precisely that sense. Likewise, during the Stamp Act crisis, 
a Virginia delegation protested to the British Crown in these 
terms: 


“Your Memorialists conceive it to be a fundamental 
Principle .. . without which Freedom can no Where 
exist, that the People are not subject to any Taxes but 
such as are laid on them by their own Consent 


°43 


“ —_- Virgimia Petitions to King and Parliament (Dec. 18, 1764), quoted 
in Missourt v. Jendans, 495 US. 33, 68 (1990) (opimon of Kennedy. 
J.) 


41 


They were referring to a tax on stamps that imposed burdens 
on the citizenry, irrespective of any element of discrimination. 
More recently, in considering whether a non-discriminatory 
tax could be applied constitutionally to particular persons or 
et asaeaanieniieen ota stanton 
could be "laid on” such persons or property. , New York 
v. United States, 326 U.S. 572, cab ciee Pus tte an 
prepared to say that the national government may constitution- 
ally lay a non-discriminatory tax on every class of property 
and activities of States and individuals alike") (Stone, C.J); 
Mayo v. United States, 319 U.S. 441, 447 (1943) (a non- 
discriminatory Florida inspection fee violated the Supremacy 
Clause to the extent the fee was “laid” on activities of a U.S. 
government agency). Article I, § 8, cl. 1 gave Congress the 
power “To lay and collect Taxes,” with the verb “to lay” 
meaning simply “to impose” or “to enact.”“ 

Finally, the Import/Export Clause also uses the verb “to 
lay,” and yet the Court's analysis in Michelin and Washington 
Stevedoring gave no special significance to that phrase. 
Instead, the Court focused on what forms of revenue measures 
were laid by the States -- were they “taxes” or were they 
“imposts or duties"? The Government's argument here 
necessarily implies that the Court was looking at the wrong 
issue and that the distinction it drew between “tax,” “duty,” 
and “impost” was of no significance. So, here again, the very 


“ See also The Federalist No. 36, at 220 (Alexander Hamilton) 
("The method of laying and collecting ._. . taxes in each State can, in al! 
its parts, be adopted and employed by the federal government.“). 


“ See also Limbach v. Hooven & Allison Co., 466 U.S. 353, 360 
(1984) (“The new focus [under the Import/Export Clause is) on whether 
the tax sought to be imposed is an ‘Impost or Duty.’”) 


42 


cases upon which the Government relies are contrary to its 
proposed analysis. 


As the Court said in Fairbank v. United States, 181 U.S. 
283, 290 (1901): “The requirement of the Constitution is that 
exports should be free from any governmental burden. The 
language is ‘no tax or duty.’" This constitutional command 
cannot be swept aside by arguing that a tax that burdens 
exports is not “laid on" exports. The Framers intended that 
exports “not be made a source of revenue to the National 
Government” and, indeed, that the federal government "should 
put nothing in the way of burden upon such exports.” /d. at 
292-93. Thames & Mersey thus correctly construed and 
applied the Export Clause, and should be reaffirmed. 


Il. Even if the Import/Export Clause Analysis 
Were Relevant to This Case, the § 4371 


Tax Is Still Unconstitutional as Applied. 


For the reasons just discussed, the Export Clause analysis 
should be unaffected by recent decisions under the Import - 
Export Clause. But even if that were not so, the result in this 
case is unchanged. As the Court of Federal Claims ruled in 
its alternative holding, Thames & Mersey and the present case 
are readily distinguishable on their facts from Michelin and 
Washington Stevedoring. Michelin involved a state tax on 
imported goods that were no longer in transit (423 U.S. at 
302), and the stevedoring levy in Washington Stevedoring 
involved a tax “upon a service distinct from the goods and 
their value.” 435 U.S. at 757 (emphasis added). On this 
point, the Court in Washington Stevedoring footnoted Thames 
& Mersey and observed: “In distinguishing that case from the 


43 


taxation of stevedoring activities .. ., one might note that the 
value of goods bears a much closer relation to the value of 
insurance policies on them than to the value of loading and 
unloading ships.” /d. at 756 n.21. 

The § 4371 tax in question here, like the tax in Thames 
& Mersey, applies to the goods while in transit and bears a 
direct relation to the value of the goods. The tax is a percent- 
age of the premium paid, and the premium in turn varies with 
the declared value of the shipment. (Pet. App. 39a) Thus. as 
the lower court held: 


"In the present case, the casualty insurance policies 
were at all times within the export stream and were 
significantly related to the exportation process 
Whether the § 4371 tax would be impermissible even 
without the support of Thames & Mersey is, we real- 
ize, not stated dispositively by the Court [in Washing- 
ton Stevedoring|, but there is nothing in Washington 
Stevedoring that indicates that Thames & Mersey and 
the connection drawn in that case between insurance 
policies and the value of goods have been banished 
into irrelevance.” (Pet. App. 29a) 


On this alternative ground, then, the § 4371 tax as applied 
to IBM's exports is still invalid under the Export Clause, even 
assuming that Michelin and Washington Stevedoring are 
relevant precedents for the Export Clause. For example, in 
Itel Containers International Corp. v. Huddleston, 113 S. Ct 
1095 (1993), the Court rejected an Import/Export Clause 
attack on Tennessee's sales tax applied at the time the empty 
containers were delivered to shippers within the State. Some 
of those containers, in turn, were then used in import and 
export commerce. The Court found no constitutional infringe- 
ment because the tax was “on a business transaction occurring 
within the taxing State” and “does not draw revenue from the 


44 


importation process..." 113 S. Ct. at 1106. Here, by 
contrast, the § 4371 tax varied with the value of IBM’s goods 
and -- by its very nature -- was applied to the exportation 
process. 

Accordingly, the § 4371 tax is unconstitutional even under 
the mode of analysis applied under the Import/Export Clause. 
See Louisiana Land & Exploration Co. v. Pilot Petroleum 
Corp., 900 F.2d 816 (Sth Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 897 
(1990) (non-discriminatory state tax as applied to jet fuel sold 
for export violated Import/Export Clause); Virginia Indonesia 
Co. v. Harris County Appraisal Dist., 910 S.W.2d 905 (Tex. 
1995) (non-discriminatory local ad valorem property tax as 
applied to exports in transit violated Import/Export Clause). 


“© See also 113 S. Ct. at 1108 (Scalia, J., concurring) ("To come 
within this constitutional exemption [the Import/Export Clause], . . . the 
taxed good must be either an import or an export ‘at the time that the 
tax accrued.’") (quoting Richfield Oil Corp. v. State Bd. of Equaliza- 
tion, 329 U.S. 69, 78 (1946)). 


lat all 


45 
CONCLUSION 


The judgment below should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


February 1996 


Andrew W. Singer 

James R. Atwood 

Matthew S. Yeo 
COVINGTON & BURLING 
1201 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
P.O. Box 7566 

Washington, D.C. 20044-7566 
(202) 662-6000 


Attorneys for Respondent 
International Business 
Machines Corporation 


