Morse v. Republican Party of Virginia, 517 U.S. 186 (1996).








LII



Supreme Court









Morse v. Republican Party of Virginia (94-203), 517 U.S. 186 (1996).


Dissent
[ Thomas ]Opinion
[ Stevens ]Concurrence
[ Breyer ]Syllabus
Dissent
[ Scalia ]Dissent
[ Kennedy ]

HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version











No. 94-203





FORTIS MORSE, KENNETH CURTIS BARTHOLOMEW and KIMBERLY J. ENDERSON,
APPELLANTS v. REPUBLICAN PARTY OF VIRGINIA et
al.




on appeal from the united states district court for the western district
of virginia




[March 27, 1996]




Justice Scalia,
with whom Justice Thomas joins, dissenting.




"Any interference with the freedom of a party is simultaneously
an interference with the freedom of its adherents." Sweezy v. New
Hampshire, 354
U.S. 234, 250 (1957). For that reason, we have always treated government
assertion of control over the internal affairs of political parties--which,
after all, are simply groups of like minded individual voters--as a matter
of the utmost constitutional consequence. See, e.g., Democratic
Party of United States, v. La Follette, 450
U.S. 107, 121-122 (1981); Cousins v. Wigoda, 419
U.S. 477, 487-488 (1975); O'Brien v. Brown, 409
U.S. 1, 4-5 (1972) (per curiam). What is at issue in this case,
therefore, is not merely interpretation of §5 of the Voting Rights
Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 1973c but, inextricably bound up with that interpretation, the
First
Amendment freedom of political association.




There are several respects in which both Justice Stevens' and
Justice Breyer's opinion constitute remarkable departures from the settled
course of our First
Amendment jurisprudence. The most obvious, perhaps, is their refusal
to consider the present application of §5 unconstitutional on the
basis of "hypothetical cases unrelated to the facts of this case [that]
might implicate First
Amendment concerns." Stevens, J., at 42. [n.1]
Instead, they "leave consideration of hypothetical concerns for another
day," id., at 43, and reserve such "difficult" questions "for a
case that squarely presents them," Breyer, J., at 5. That is a luxury our
precedents do not allow. It has been a constant of our free speech jurisprudence
that claimants whose First
Amendment rights are affected may challenge a statute, not merely on
the ground that its specific application to them is unconstitutional, but
also on the ground that its application is void in a substantial number
of other contexts that arguably fall within its scope. This principle of
"overbreadth" has been applied not only in the context of freedom of speech
narrowly speaking, but also in the context of the freedom to associate
for the purpose of political speech. See, e.g., United States
v. Robel, 389
U.S. 258, 265-266 (1967); Elfbrandt v. Russell, 384
U.S. 11, 18-19 (1966).




Thus, to satisfy oneself that the particular practice challenged
here lies "well outside the area of greatest `associational' concern,"
Breyer, J., at 5, is to take only the first and smallest step in treating
the weighty constitutional question posed by application of §5 to
political parties. In this First
Amendment context, to "go no further than necessary to decide the case
at hand" means going far enough to assure against overbreadth. We must
do that whenever "rights of association [are] ensnared in statutes which,
by their broad sweep, might result in burdening innocent associations."
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413
U.S. 601, 612 (1973) (citing, inter alia, Keyishian v.
Board of Regents of Univ. of State of N. Y., 385
U.S. 589 (1967)). Justice Stevens does not assert that applying §5
to party activity passes First
Amendment muster except "in the case before us," ante, at 42-43,
and Justice Breyer acknowledges that the First
Amendment may bar application of §5 to other convention activity,
see ante, at 5. Yet despite these indications of overbreadth, neither
opinion attempts to provide what our cases require: a "limiting construction
or partial invalidation" that will "remove the seeming threat or deterrence
to constitutionally protected expression," Broadrick, supra,
at 613.




Besides flouting the doctrine of overbreadth, the opinions' refusal
to provide "[f]urther definition" of §5's application to political
parties, Breyer, J., at 6, leaves political parties without guidance as
to "when [their] activities are, in effect, substitutes for state nominating
primaries," id., at 4, and as to "which party nominating convention
practices fall within the scope of the Act," ibid. [n.2]
Before today, this Court has not tolerated such uncertainty in rules bearing
upon First
Amendment activities, because it causes persons to refrain from engaging
in constitutionally protected conduct for fear of violation. See, e.g.,
Baggett v. Bullitt, 377
U.S. 360,372 (1964). Surely such an effect can be expected here. Party
officials will at least abstain from proceeding with certain convention
activities without notification; and in light of the high degree of uncertainty
they may well decide to hold no conventions at all.




Another respect in which the Court today diverges from our free
speech jurisprudence is even more astounding, if possible, than its disregard
of the doctrines of overbreadth and vagueness. From reading the majority's
two opinions, one would surmise that the only constitutional question at
issue is whether the First
Amendment permits the Federal Government to make unlawful and set aside
party rule changes designed to hinder racial minorities' full participation
in election related functions. But this statute does not present
only that question, any more than a statute establishing a Board of Obscenity
Censors, to which films or books must be submitted for approval before
publication, presents only the question whether the First
Amendment permits the prohibition of obscenity. See, e.g., Freedman
v. Maryland, 380
U.S. 51 (1965); Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372
U.S. 58 (1963). A point entirely ignored by Justices Stevens and Breyer
is that this case involves a classic prior restraint.




Our cases have heavily disfavored all manner of prior restraint
upon the exercise of freedoms guaranteed by the First
Amendment. Although most often imposed upon speech, prior restraints
are no less noxious, and have been no less condemned, when directed against
associational liberty (with which, we have said, freedom of speech "overlap[s]
and blend[s]," Citizens Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Housing
v. City of Berkeley, 454
U.S. 290, 300 (1981)). See Thomas v. Collins, 323
U.S. 516, 539-540 (1945); Carroll v. President and Comm'rs
of Princess Anne, 393
U.S. 175, 180-185 (1968); cf. Healy v. James, 408
U.S. 169, 184 (1972). Today, however, a majority of the Court readily
accepts the proposition that §5 can subject this First
Amendment freedom to a permit system, requiring
its exercise to be "precleared" with the Government even when it is not
being used unlawfully. The Court thus makes citizens supplicants in the
exercise of their First
Amendment rights.




As the five Justices who support the judgment of the Court choose
to read this statute, a political party (or at least one that the State
has awarded a place on the ballot [n.3]
) can make no change in its practices or procedures that might affect
a voter's capacity to have his candidate elected--no matter how race neutral
in purpose and effect--unless it first obtains prior clearance by the
Government, see Stevens, J., at 16-19; Breyer, J., at 3-5. Any change
not precleared--after a proceeding in which the burden rests on the
party to show absence of discriminatory purpose and effect,
see City of Rome v. United States, 446
U.S. 156, 172-173, 183, n. 18 (1980))--can be enjoined. Given that
political parties are organized with the near exclusive purpose of influencing
the outcomes of elections, I think it obvious that as construed today,
§5 requires political parties to submit for prior Government approval,
and bear the burden of justifying, virtually every decision of consequence
regarding their internal operations. That is the most outrageous tyranny.
A freedom of political association that must await the Government's favorable
response to a "Mother, may I?" is no freedom of political association at
all.




There would be reason enough for astonishment and regret if today's
judgment upheld a statute clearly imposing a prior restraint upon private,
First
Amendment conduct. But what makes today's action astonishing and regrettable
beyond belief is that this Court itself is the architect of a prior restraint
that the law does not clearly express. And here is yet another respect
in which today's opinions ignore established law: their total disregard
of the doctrine that, where ambiguity exists, statutes should be construed
to avoid substantial constitutional questions. That has been our practice
because we presume that "Congress, which also has sworn to protect the
Constitution, would intend to err on the side of fundamental constitutional
liberties when its legislation implicates those liberties." Regan
v. Time, Inc., 468
U.S. 641, 697 (1984) (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part). We have in the past relied upon this canon to construe
statutes narrowly, so as not to impose suspect prior restraints. For example,
in Lowe v. SEC, 472
U.S. 181 (1985), we held that a statute requiring all "investment advisors"
to register with the Securities and Exchange Commission, see 15
U.S.C. § 80b-3, does not extend to persons who publish "nonpersonalized"
investment advice such as periodic market commentary--thereby avoiding
the question whether Congress could constitutionally require such persons
to register. Lowe, supra, at 190, 204-205, and n. 50. How
insignificant that prior restraint when compared with the requirement for
preclearance of all changes in self governance by political parties.




What drives the majority to find a prior restraint where the text
does not demand (or even suggest) it is the notion that it "strains credulity"
to think that Congress would enact a Voting Rights Act that did not
reach political party activity, Stevens, J., at 30. Congress, the majority
believes, "could not have intended" such a result, Breyer, J., at 5. I
doubt the validity of that perception; the assumption it rests upon--that
a legislature never adopts half way measures, never attacks the easy part
of a problem without attacking the more sensitive part as well--seems to
me quite false. Indeed, the one step at a time doctrine that we regularly
employ in equal protection cases is based on precisely the opposite assumption.
See, e.g., Williamson v. Lee Optical of Okla., Inc.,
348
U.S. 483, 488-489 (1955).




Moreover, even if one were to accept the majority's question begging
assumption that Congress must have covered political party activity,
and even if one were to credit the majority's sole textual support for
such coverage, today's decision to impose a prior restraint upon purely
private, political party activity would still be incomprehensible. The
sole textual support adduced by the two opinions consists of §14's
reference to elections for "party office," and §2's reference to "the
political processes leading to nomination or election." See Stevens, J.,
at 20-22; Breyer, J., at 2. Justice Thomas gives compelling reasons why
these phrases cannot bear the meaning the majority would ascribe, see post,
at 27-32. But even accepting that they mean what the majority says, all
that the phrase in §14 shows is that some portion of the Act
reaches private, political party conduct; and all that the phrase in §2
shows is that (at least in some circumstances) §2 does so.
Nothing in the text, nor anything in the assumption that Congress
must have addressed political party activity, compels the conclusion
that Congress addressed political party activity in the preclearance,
prior restraint scheme of §5, [n.4]
which is of course the only question immediately before us. Thus, the only
real credulity strainer involved here is the notion that Congress would
impose a restraint bearing a "heavy presumption against its constitutional
validity," Bantam Books, 372 U. S., at 70, in such a backhanded
fashion--saying simply "State[s]" and "political subdivision[s]" in §5,
but meaning political parties as well. Because I find that impossible to
believe, I respectfully dissent.



Notes

1 For
brevity's sake, I cite each of today's opinions by the name of its author.




2 Justice
Breyer apparently thinks that the First
Amendment concerns raised by appellees are minimal because many activities
engaged in by a party at its convention "are very likely not subject to
preclearance." Ante, at 4. Of course, a mere "very likelihood" that
failure to preclear a particular activity will not result in nullification
of the work of the convention is hardly sufficient to induce a party organizer
to take the chance. In any event, I find curious the proposition that certain
subsidiary determinations of the convention, such as " `adoption of resolutions
or platforms outlining the philosophy [of the party],' " ibid.,
are not subject to Government oversight, whereas the determination of who
may attend the convention--upon which all else depends--is subject
to Government oversight. That is a good bargain for the tyrant.




3 Justice
Stevens makes much of the fact that the nominee selected by the Republican
Party of Virginia, by reason of the outcome of prior elections, had automatically
been given a place on the primary ballot, see ante, at 6-11, but
he also explains his interpretation of §5 as "follow[ing] directly
from our decision in Terry [v. Adams, 345
U.S. 461 (1953)]," ante, at 28, a case in which the private
party's nominating election "did not involve the State's electoral apparatus
in even the slightest way," ibid. Justice Breyer alludes to Virginia's
election laws, see ante, at 4, but they are plainly incidental to
his analysis, see ante, at 1-4. So one must assume that what the
Court today holds for parties whose nominees are automatically listed is
true for other parties as well.




4 The
Court majority would respond, perhaps, that the phrase "State or political
subdivision" in §5 should be read to have the same meaning that it
has in §2. Of course it normally should. But if the majority fancies
itself confronted with the choice between departing from that general rule
of construction (which, like all rules of construction, can be overcome
by other indication of statutory intent, see, e.g., Helvering
v. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, 293
U.S. 84, 86-88 (1934)) and violating the inflexible principle that
courts should not needlessly interpret a statute to impose a prior restraint
upon private political activity, it is not debatable where the outcome
must lie. Of course, the imagined conflict between the rule and the principle
disappears if "State or political subdivision" is given its natural meaning
in both §5 and §2, subjecting political parties to neither.
