rT 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


¢ 


METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE COMPANY, 


Petitioner, 


JOHN RAMBO, 
Respondent. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


+ 


BRIEF ON THE MERITS FOR 
RESPONDENT RAMBO 


S 


THomas J. Pierry 

Counsel of Record 

Prerry & MoorHEAD 

301 North Avalon Boulevard 
Wilmington, CA 90744 

(310) 834-2691 or 

(213) 775-8348 


Attorneys for Respondent 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


“IBEST AVAILABLE COPY! 4 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Must a party seeking a 33 U.S.C. Section 922 
Modification of an Award of Permanent Partial Disability 
prove that the Claimant has undergone a change in 
“physical condition”? 


2. Should the employer’s Application For Modifica- 
tion be denied because of the representations of its attor- 


ney to the injured worker that the award would be paid 
for life? (S. Ct. Rule 15.1) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
CHIE I ITED FIR IU SEE ch cccdesvrcnvedsubaseetes i 
SEALERGEINS OF THRE CAGE. ii cccccccccrscevvasess ] 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ................. 7 
ARGUMENT AND AUTHORITIES................. 10 


I. NEITHER THE OPINION OF THE BENEFITS 
REVIEW BOARD NOR THE DIRECTOR IS 
ENTITLED TO DEFERENCE IN THIS CASE... 10 


Il. LEGISLATIVE HISTORY, PRECEDENT AND 
THE PRACTICAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE 
ACT MANDATE THAT THIS COURT AFFIRM 
THE DECISION OF THE NINTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS IN THIS CASE......... 12 


Ill. OTHER ISSUES RAISED BY RAMBO ON 
APPEAL AND ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI... 35 


CPP IO 6.0.0.9 0k conned eudasdenn een tea 36 


ili 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Atlantic Coast Shipping Co. v. Golubiewski, 9 F. 
ue. SIS CUP. 19948)... 2.2 ce ences 16, 17, 19, 20 
Bay Ridge Operating Co. v. Lowe, 14 F. Supp. 280 
air. Diss hn nee NS eee ane Kew A 22 
Burley Welding Works, Inc. v. Lawson, 141 F.2d 964 
ae dss nd ie 39 anes koe Ws awe 21 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc., v. Natural Resources Defense 
acer BM. Gee Sl Gee CEO) oc cc cc cc cece ees 12 
Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs 
v. General Dynamics Corp., 900 F.2d 506 (2nd Cir. 
lg lls tp poe a as ee a 10 
Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation programs v. 
7m, wee bam sor (ore Cit. 1976) .............. 10 


Fleetwood v. Newport Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 776 
F.2d 1225 (4th Cir. 1985)...4, 8, 9, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 


General Dynamics v. Director, Office of Workers’ 
Compensation Programs, 673 F.2d 23 (1st Cir. 
| iy tA RSS ee er a 10, 11, 27 
Jarka Corp. v. Hughes, 299 F.2d 534 (2nd Cir. 1962) .... 22 


McCord v. Cephas, 532 F.2d 1377, 1380-1381 (D.C. 
iy Ve Den 6 


McCormick, S.S. Co. v. United States Employees’ 
Comm’‘n, 64 F.2d 84 (9th Cir. 1933)............ Passim 


Malcomb v. Island Creek Coal Company, 15 F.3d 364 
Es Si sists dn SN HW de 6 a Wags sey 0-0 o's 11 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


Pillsbury v. Alaska Packers Ass‘n, 85 F.2d 758 (9th 
Cir. 1936), rev'd on other grounds, 301 U.S. 174 
3 ct ho errs Serie wr lpem ener te henge: earns 20, 21 


Potomac Electric Power Co. v. Director, Office of 
Workers’ Compensation Programs, 449 U.S. 268 


CUE indn doc ean tp ole hie Re aeae See OER ane nes even 10 
Rizzi v. The Four Boro Contractor Corp. 1 BRB 130 
3g eee ea eee eG wer are comer re oo erie ane a1, 22 
Verderane v. Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc., 772 F.2d 775 
to, Bt Re) reer re ri reer perry he fare 27 
Western v. Luther, 163 U-S. 331 (1896)............. 12, 35 
STATUTES 
a A as ee UN nes ey any ga ae gt wea ae 1, 29 
Be Ge Es ws oe Fees oo eae er eee aes 17 
ee Se I a ies Se ba ae eae ‘1, 27 
3S Oe. > - eee 4, 5, 14, 16, 20, 31, © 
ce | ne rer nnernnr Pere er ae era rs 1] 
OTHER AUTHORITIES 
3 Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation, Sec. : 


81.00 et seq. 15-956-15-1016 (1994) ......... 29; Wy, F 


Conference Report on S. 38, Congressional Record 


- House, September 14, 1984, H. 25495........... ao 
Congressional Record - Senate, 98th Cong., Ist 

ey ae a, | rr ee 23 
Congressional Record - Senate, 98th Cong., Ist | 

Sess., January 26, 1903, S576 ...... 22.22 census 23 ) 


a | 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
Congressional Record - Senate, 69th Cong., 2d. 

Seas. PER 6, Bar es Fi wo as bee eae aes eee 13 
H.R. Rep. No. 1244, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. (1934)...... 16 
H.R. Rep. No. 1767, 69th Cong., 2d Sess. (1927)..... 13 
H.R. Rep. No. 2237, 74th Cong., 2d Sess. (1936)..... 20 
H.R. Rep. No. 98-570, 98th Cong., Ist Sess. (1983) .... 25 
S. Rep. No. 588, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. (1934) ......... 16 
S. Rep. No. 1199, 74th Cong., Ist Sess. (1935) ....... 20 
S. Rep. No. 1988, 75th Cong., 3d Sess. (1938)........ 20 
S. Rep. No. 98-81, 98th Cong., 1st Sess. (1983) 8, 23, 24 


No. 94-820 
* 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


« 
METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE COMPANY, 
Petitioner, 
v. 
JOHN RAMBO, 
Respondent. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


o 


BRIEF ON THE MERITS FOR 
RESPONDENT RAMBO 


o 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The Respondent, John Rambo, (“Rambo”) a long- 
shore frontman was injured within the course and scope 
of his employment on September 9, 1980 while employed 
by Petitioner, Metropolitan Stevedore Company, (“Metro- 
politan”). 


His claim for a non-scheduled permanent partial dis- 
ability pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 901 et seq., the Long- 
shore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act (hereinafter, 
“The Act”) was set for Trial in 1983 before his Honorable 
Administrative Law Judge James J. Butler. Rambo was 


] 


represented by counsel and the employer was repre- 
sented by James J. Wood. Among other things, the parties 


stipulated: 
“2. That ...John Rambo... was employed as 
a longshoreman (frontman) by Metropolitan on 


September 9, 1980, on which occasion he sus- 
tained an injury arising out of and occurring in 
the course of his employment to his back and 


leg.”; and, 
“6. That the employee sustained an overall 
current permanent partial disability equivalent 


to 22 1/2% of the whole person which the par- 
ties recognize as an ‘economic disability’ pro- 
ducing a weekly wage loss of $120.24 per week 
with an equivalent compensation rate of $80.16 
per week for permanent partial disability.” 


(J.A. 3-4). 


On November 28, 1983, his Honorable Administra- 
tive Law Judge, William J. Butler, issued a Decision and 
Order awarding Rambo $80.16 per week permanent par- 
tial disability benefits. (J.A. 2-6) 


On October 30, 1989, “Metropolitan” filed with the 
Department of Labor an “Employer’s Application For 
Modification, Section 922”. (J.A. 7-10) 


The Modification contained no medical evidence and 
did not allege a change in Rambo’s physical condition. 
The sole evidence offered by the employer in support of 
the Modification was Rambo’s post award earning 
records. (J.A. 9-10). The employer alleged, “ .. . that he 
(Rambo) is not entitled to a wage loss of any kind at this 
time and that he has no economic disability as a result of 
this injury.” (J.A. 8). The employer concluded that, 


“ ... we can clearly show simply by the earnings infor- 
mation alone, . . . that this employee does not have a 
wage loss now .. . and that all compensation payments 
should be terminated.” (J.A. 8,9). 


A Formal Hearing on the Modification was convened 
on October 15, 1990 by his Honorable Administrative 
Law Judge Daniel Stewart (“ALJ”). 


At the commencement of the hearing, Rambo moved 
to dismiss the Application for Modification on the ground 
that the “Modification” failed to allege nor was there 
evidence of a change in Rambo’s “physical condition”. 
(J.A. 25-26). 


The employer argued that: 


1. A Section 922 Modification may be based on 
economic grounds (J.A. 28 and J.A. 41, 
Employer’s Trial Brief); and, 


2. Rambo’s earnings demonstrate that there is 
no economic disability in this case. (J.A. 41) 


The only documentary evidence admitted into the 
record was Rambo’s earnings records. Each party’s trial 
brief was made part of the Administrative Record. The 
employer’s only witness was Rambo. 


Rambo testified that he was currently employed as a 
longshoreman in the capacity of a crane operator. (J.A. 
43). It took Rambo 20 years to achieve the seniority 
necessary to become a crane operator. (J.A. 52). A crane 
operator’s job is less physically demanding then other 
longshore work he is eligible to perform. (J.A. 53). 


4 


Rambo testified that his physical condition had not 
changed since the date of the award of compensation 
benefits in 1983. 


(J.A. 54). 


Finally, Rambo testified that he was told by Mr. 
James J. Wood at the 1983 trial that if he accepted the sum 
of $80.16 per week, it would be paid for life. (J.-A. 56-62). 


In Open Court, on the record, Mr. Wood said: 


“Well, I hear what he is saying, Your Honor. | 
will have to call myself as a witness then, I 
guess.” 


(J.A. 58). 


Mr. Wood did not call himself as a witness to deny 
Rambo’s testimony. The only evidence in the record on 
this issue is the testimony of Rambo. 


The “ALJ” granted the Modification and terminated 
Rambo’s benefits. 


Rambo appealed to the Benefits Review Board. 


The Benefits Review Board, citing Fleetwood v. New- 
port Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 776 F.2d 1225 (4th Cir. 
1985), affirmed, stating, “ ... that a mere change in a 
Claimant’s wages could satisfy the ‘change in conditions’ 
requirement for modification.” (J.A. 73). 


Rambo appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of 
Appeals. Only the Solicitor opposed the Appeal. 


On Appeal Rambo raised three issues: 


1. Must the party seeking to reopen a claim by 
filing a 33 U.S.C. Sec. 922 Modification meet a 


threshold burden of showing a change in the 
Claimant’s physical condition? 


2. Should the employer in this case be 
estopped from filing a 33 U.S.C. Sec. 922 Mod- 
ification because of the representation of its 
attorney to Rambo that the award would be 
paid for life? 


3. Given the 1983 Award of benefits and the 
lack of any other evidence at the Modification 
trial except earnings records, should the Admin- 
istrative Law Judge be directed to enter a nomi- 
nal award to preserve Claimant’s rights to 
petition for future modification? 


The Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that, “ ...a - 
party seeking to modify an award must prove that the 


Claimant has undergone a change in his physical condi- 
tion.” (J.A. 77). 


The Ninth Circuit noted that “ . . . (Metropolitan) 
relies exclusively upon the Fourth Circuit’s decision in 
Fleetwood, which held that a mere change in the Claim- 
ant’s wages could satisfy the ‘change in conditions’, 
requirement of 33 U.S.C., Section 922.” (J.A. 77). 


The Ninth Circuit stated that, 


“As the Fleetwood dissent noted, the Fourth Cir- 
cuit’s Rule is in direct conflict with the Ninth 
Circuit’s Rule. See id. at 1235 (Warriner J., dis- 
senting) (noting that beginning with the first 
opinion dealing with the question, (McCormick) 
handed down in 1933, and continuing thereafter, 
the Courts have uniformally interpreted the 
term, ‘change in condition’ in (33 U.S.C. Sec. 
922) to refer exclusively to a change in physical 


condition of the employee receiving compensa- 
tion.” (emphasis added by the Ninth Circuit). 


(J.A. 78). 


The Ninth Circuit also noted that, as the Fleetwood 


dissent points out, “ ... the Fourth Circuit’s rule conflicts 
with the position taken by the First and Fifth Circuits.” 
(J.A. 78). 


After the decision of the Ninth Circuit, the Solicitor 
filed a Petition For Rehearing on behalf of Director. On 
the last page of that Petition the solicitor virtually con- 
ceded that Metropolitan’s Application For Modification 
should be denied in the interest of, “ . . . justice under The 
Act.” The Solicitor noted in a footnote: 


“6. Rambo has also contended throughout that 
the circumstances of the parties’ agreement to 
the 1983 award’s terms included representations 
that the award would not be modified (at least 
not downwards). Modification may be denied, 
despite an adequate demonstration that one of 
the statutory conditions for it exists, where 
changing the award would not ‘render justice 
under The Act.’ McCord v. Cephas, 532 F.2d 1377, 
1380-1381 (D.C. Cir. 1976). In addition, the cir- 
cumstances alleged by Rambo could be con- 
strued to effect an express waiver of the 
employer's right to seek modification of the 
1983 award under Sec. 22. Accordingly, Rambo’s 
contention warrants full consideration.” Petition 
For Rehearing on behalf of the Director, p. 15 
(August 5, 1994) 


SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 


This appeal arises out of a claim made by Rambo 
pursuant to the provisions of the Longshore and Harbor 
Workers’ Compensation Act (The Act). The Act was passed 
by Congress in 1927 to replace the common law remedy 
of tort litigation between maritime workers and their 
employers. The purpose of The Act was to provide 
worker’s compensation benefits to maritime workers 
within admiralty jurisdiction. All worker’s compensation 
systems permit the parties to reopen claims to modify 
previous awards to effect substantial justice between the 
parties. This is a recognition of the policy that no matter 
how competent the original trier of fact’s diagnosis of the 


claimant's condition and earning prospects at the time of — 


the initial hearing, that condition may later change mark- 
edly for the worse, or may improve, or may even clear up 
altogether. Many jurisdictions permit, for policy reasons, 
virtually an unlimited reopening system. That is, either 
party has an unlimited period of time after the initial 
award to seek a modification of the prior award based on 
ANY change in the circumstances upon which the prior 
award was based. 


The Act as passed by Congress and amended ten 
times since 1927 adopted a severely limited reopening 
procedure. The parties have only one year from the last 
payment of compensation or rejection of the claim to 
reopen the claim. The parties may only seek to reopen the 
claim for a change in conditions or a mistake in fact. In 
1938 and again in 1984 Congress had before it amend- 
ments which would have liberalized and revamped the 
reopening process and permitted unrestricted review of 
claims. Both times Congress rejected this liberalization. In 


1983, the Senate Report urging liberalization went so far 
as to point out that although the time limitation for 
reopening was to be eliminated, “ ... the basis on 
grounds for seeking modification remains as under cur- 
rent law.” S. Rep. No. 98-81, 98th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 37 
(1983). 


The first case to interpret the reopening process 
under The Act was decided in 1933. McCormick S.S. Co. v. 
United States Employees’ Comm'n, 64 F.2d 84 (9th Cir. 
1933). That case held in a clear, bright line ruling that in 
order for the parties to reopen a claim, not only must it be 
timely filed, but that there must be a showing that the 
claimant’s “physical condition” had changed since the 
prior award. That clear, bright line rule that the phrase 
“change in conditions” meant a change in the claimant’s 
physical condition was followed in every circuit, in every 
case,,and was adopted by the agency charged with 
administering The Act. That clear, bright line rule was in 
force and effect when each of the ten Amendments to The 
Act were adopted by Congress. The clear intent of Con- 
gress, unbroken since 1927 and implemented by the 
Courts is to severely restrict the reopening of claims. The 
parties may relitigate a claim under The Act only if a 
Petition For Modification is filed within a limited period 
of time and only upon a showing of a mistake in fact or a 
change in the claimant’s “physical condition”. 


In 1985 the agency charged with the Administration 
of The Act changed its position on reopening of claims. 
The Director’s new position adopted the liberal approach 
to reopening claims and urged that claims could be reliti- 
gated for ANY change in circumstances from which a 
trier of fact could conclude that there had been a change 


in the Claimant’s earning capacity. This change in posi- 
tion by the Director lead to the bizarre result in Fleetwood 
v. Newport Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 776 F.2d 1225 (4th 
Cir. 1985), which is a two-judge majority opinion. This 
case is the sole aberration in a sixty-two year line of cases 
that recognizes that Congress’ clear intent in passing and 
amending The Act was to establish a conservative, 
severely restricted procedure for reopening cases. It can- 
not be better stated than by the dissenting Judge in 
Fleetwood when he proclaimed: 
“Fifty years is a long time. And perhaps it 

can be argued that the Board’s, and the Court’s, 

and the CONGRESS’ erstwhile interpretation of 

the phrase was inhumane, or unenlightened, or 

an anachronism, or something else even more 

disparaging. But it cannot be argued, I submit, 

that the prior interpretation was not and is not 

the law.” 


Id. at 1236. 


The Director’s opinion in Rambo is not entitled to 
deference because: 


1. The Congressional intent on the precise issue 
before the Court is patently clear. That intent is the law 
and must be enforced; 


2. The Director in Rambo is appearing as a litigant 
with the adversarial position of protecting the Special 
Fund; 


3. The Director’s inconsistent positions on this issue 
without adequate explanation vitiates deference. 


Therefore, based upon the clear intent of Congress to 
enact a severely limited reopening process, sixty-two 


10 


years of virtually unbroken precedent and the sound 
logic of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, it is respect- 
fully requested that this Court affirm the decision of the 
Court below. 


ARGUMENT AND AUTHORITIES 


I. NEITHER THE OPINION OF THE BENEFITS 
REVIEW BOARD NOR THE DIRECTOR IS ENTI- 
TLED TO DEFERENCE IN THIS CASE. 


The Second Circuit addressed the issue of the defer- 
ence due to interpretations of The Act by the Benefits 
Review Board and the Director in Director, Office of 
Workers’ Compensation Programs v. General Dynamics Corp., 
900 F.2d 506 (2nd Cir. 1990). 


The General Dynamics court noted in Potomac Electric 
Power Co. v. Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Pro- 
grams, 449 U.S. 268, 278 n. 18 (1980), that the Supreme 
Court suggested that the Benefits Review Board’s views 
are not entitled to special deference because it performs 
only an adjudicatory function and is not charged with 
administrating The Act. Jd. at 510. The Court then noted 
that the question of deference to be accorded to the 
Director was less clear. Id. 


The Court found persuasive the reasoning in Director, 
Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs v. O'Keefe, 545 
F.2d 337, 343 (3rd Cir. 1976). The General Dynamics Court 
pointed out that, “ .. . when the Director appears as a 
litigant in an adversarial proceeding before the Board, it 


i a ef 


11 


is inappropriate to grant special deference to the Direc- 
tor’s litigating position . . . ” General Dynamics, supra, at 
510. The Court reasoned that, “If deference were 
accorded under such circumstances, claimants would be 
effectively deprived of the right to impartial review.” Id. 


The General Dynamics court concluded that, “ ... in 
light of the relationship between the roles of the Board 
and the Director in resolving questions of law, and the 
Director’s adversarial position in this litigation, the 
Director’s interpretation of The Act here is not entitled to 
any special deference.” Id. 


In this case Metropolitan was granted 8(f) relief. . 
Rambo’s benefits are being paid by the Special Fund. The 
Secretary is charged with the responsibility of administer- 
ing the Special Fund and defending it. (33 U.S.C. Section 
944). Only the Director appeared in the Ninth Circuit to 
oppose Rambo’s appeal of the decision of the Benefit’s 
Review Board. If the decision of the Ninth Circuit Court 
of Appeals is reversed, the Special Fund would benefit. 
Because of the clear adversarial position of the Director in 
this case, the Director’s interpretation of the Statute 
should be given no special deference. (See also Malcomb v. 
Island Creek Coal Company, 15 F.3d 364 (4th Cir. 1994) 
holding that deference should not be afforded in a black 
lung case where there were different interpretations of 
the Board’s own regulations). 


Finally, an agency’s construction of the statute which 
it administers is entitled to deference only when the 
intent of Congress in enacting the statute is unclear. 
Where Congress has clearly expressed its intent, Courts 


12 


must reject a contrary administrative construction. Chev- 
ron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council Inc., 
467 U.S. 837 (1984). If a court, employing traditional tools 
of statutory construction, ascertains that Congress had an 
intention on the precise question at issue, that intent is 
the law, and must be given effect. Western v. Luther, 163 
U.S. 331, 342 (1896). 


In the case at bar the precise question before the 
Court is whether Congress intended to adopt a severely 
restrictive system for reopening previously litigated 
claims or adopt the “modern approach” allowing contin- 
uous monitoring of claims, forever adjusting the griev- 
ances of the parties, real or imagined. 


The answer as to the intent of Congress can easily be 
ascertained by reviewing the legislative history of Section 
22 and the cases that interpret that Section in a chrono- 
logical order. ; 


II. LEGISLATIVE HISTORY, PRECEDENT AND THE 
PRACTICAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT 
MANDATE THAT THIS COURT AFFIRM THE 
DECISION OF THE NINTH CIRCUIT COURT OF 
APPEALS IN THIS CASE. 


The original Longshoremen’s and Harbor Workers’ 
Compensation Act was enacted by Congress on March 4, 
1927. The Act was to provide worker’s compensation 
benefits to maritime workers within admiralty jurisdic- 
tion. It was the modern substitute for the old common 
law remedy and was recognized as necessary in the inter- 
est of social justice between employers and employees. 


13 


H.R. Rep. No. 1767, 69th Cong., 2d Sess., pp. 19-20 
(1927). 


Section 22 of the Original Act was as follows: 


“Sec. 22. Upon his own initiative, or upon 
application of any party in interest, on the 
ground of a change in conditions, the deputy 
commissioner may at any time during the term 
of an award and after the compensation order in 
respect of such award has become final, review 
such order in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in respect of claims in section 19, and 
in accordance with such section issue a new 
compensation order which may terminate, con- 
tinue, increase, or decrease such compensation. 
Such new order shall not affect any compensa- 
tion paid under authority of the prior order.” 


Congressional Record-Senate, 2d Sess., March 4, 
1927, S.5904. 


It should be noted that Section 22 referred to the 
procedure contained in Section 19, which in turn referred 
to Section 13 which Section sets one year as the limitation 
period for filing claims. 


The first reported case interpreting Section 22 was 
McCormick S.S. Co. v. United States Employees’ Compensa- 
tion Comm'n, 64 F.2d 84 (9th Cir. 1933). 


In this 1933 case, the injured worker suffered a non- 
scheduled industrial injury on February 11, 1928. The 
Deputy Commissioner entered an order awarding the 
worker $3.96 per week permanent partial disability. 


14 


Thereafter the Deputy Commissioner modified the 
award and increased the worker’s benefits to $8.21 per 
week. The Employer Appealed. 


The Ninth Circuit stated that: 


“The Order complained of in this proceeding is 
as follows: 


‘. .. It appearing to the Deputy Commis- 
sioner . . . that his physical condition has 
not changed since the last order, that his 
wages have diminished since said date 
because of decreased stevedore work result- 
ing from depressed conditions.” McCormick, 
supra, at 85. 


The Ninth Circuit held that, “The applicant's petition 

for a Modification of the compensation Order was not 

_ based upon a CHANGE IN HIS PHYSICAL CONDITION 
but upon his decreased EARNINGS. . . . Section 22 of The 
Act (33 U.S.C. Sec. 922) authorizes a modification of the 
order due to a ‘change in conditions’ but we do not think 
this applies to a change in EARNINGS DUE TO ‘ECO- 
NOMIC CONDITIONS’.” Id. at 85. (Emphasis added). 


The Order was vacated and the decision of the Dep- 
uty Commissioner reversed. 


Since the McCormick Court announced its clear, 
bright line rule that the parties can reopen a claim only 
upon first showing a change in the claimant’s condition, 
The Act has been amended ten times. The first Amend- 
ment to The Act was on May 26, 1934. That Amendment 
changed Section 922 to read as follows: 


“Sec. 22. Upon his own initiative, or upon the 
application of any party in interest, on the 


15 


ground of a change in conditions or because of 
a mistake in a determination of fact by the 
deputy commissioner, the deputy commission- 
ers may, at any time prior to one year after the 
date of the last payment of compensation, 
whether or not a compensation order has been 
issued, review a compensation case in accor- 
dance with the procedure prescribed in respect 
of claims in section 19, and in accordance with 
such section issue a new compensation order 
which may terminate, continue, reinstate, 
increase, or decrease such compensation. Such 
new order shall not affect any compensation 
previously paid, except that an award increas- 
ing the compensation rate may be made effec- 
tive from the date of the injury, and if any part 
of the compensation due or to become due is 
unpaid, an award decreasing the compensation 
rate may be made effective from the date of the 
injury, and any payment made prior thereto in 
excess of such decreased rate shall be deducted 
from any unpaid compensation, in such man- 
ner and by such method as may be determined 
by the deputy commissioner with the approval 
of the Commission.” H.R. Rep. No. 1244, 73d 
Cong., 2d Sess., p. 6 (1934). 


The Report of both the House and Senate are identi- 
cal. It is as follows: 


“Sixth Amendment. Section 5 of H.R. 8057 (and 
Section 5 of S. 2794) amends section 22 of the 
existing act so as to broaden the grounds on 
which a deputy commissioner can modify an 
award and also while strictly limiting the 
period, extends the time within which such 
modification may be made . . . The amendment 


16 


is in line with the recommendation of the Com- 
mission except that it limits to 1 year after the 
date of the last payment of compensation the 
time during which such modification may be 
made. The amendment also permits an increase 
or decrease in the compensation under a mod- 
ifying award when changed conditions or a mis- 
take in a determination of fact makes such 
modification desirable in order to render justice 
under The Act, such modifying award to date 
from the time of the accident.” (Emphasis 
added). 


S. Rep. No. 588, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., p. 3 (1934); H.R. 
Rep. No. 1244, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., p. 4 (1934). 


This legislative history unequivocally demonstrates 
that Congress intended to adopt a procedure which 
strictly limits the reopening process. 


Clearly Congress considered whether to allow unre- 
stricted reopenings of claims and rejected that approach. 
The clear, bright line rule of McCormick was in place and 
was precedent when this amendment was enacted. 


The first case to address Section 922 of The Act as 
amended by Congress in 1934 was Atlantic Coast Shipping 
Co. v. Golubiewski, 9 F. Supp. 315 (D.Md. 1934). 


In this case the court stated: 


“The single question presented is whether an 

injured employee who has been receiving com- 

pensation for temporary partial disability under j 
a valid order of the Deputy Commissioner 

ceases to be entitled thereto by reason of his } 
imprisonment in the penitentiary under a sen- 

tence for life consequent upon conviction for 

murder in the first degree.” Id. at p. 315. 


17 


The Deputy Commissioner denied the employer’s 
Petition to Modify pursuant to Section 922. The employer 
appealed and just as Metropolitan in this case, cited 33 
U.S.C. Sec. 902 (10), which defines disability as: 


“Disability means incapacity because of injury 
to earn the wages which the employee was 
receiving at the time of injury in the same or any 
other employment.” 


The District Court which was charged with judicial 
review at that time, noted that the employer’s, “” 
argument is that one confined in the penitentiary is 
thereby precluded from earning wages and therefore it is 
said that the disability for the original injury is no longer 
the effective cause of loss of wages.” Atlantic Coast Ship- 
ping Co., supra, at 316. 


The Court answered this argument by stating: 


“However, in my opinion the exact legal ques- 
tion depends upon the proper construction and 
application of Section 22 of The Act (33 U.S.C. 
Sec. 922) which provides for modification of 
awards.” Atlantic Coast Shipping Co., supra, at 
316. 


In answering this question the Court stated, “Look- 
ing at the context (of Section 922) in relation to the whole 
scope and general purposes of The Act, the most natural 
meaning to be given to the expression ‘change in condi- 
tions’ would seem obviously to refer to a change in the 
PHYSICAL CONDITION of the employee caused by the 
accident.” Atlantic Coast Shipping Co., supra, at 317. 
(Emphasis added). 


18 


After an exhaustive review of domestic cases, English 
cases and treatises, the Court stated: 


“Considered on principle, apart from the above 
authorities, there would seem to be little sup- 
port for plaintiffs’ contention in these cases. 
Their argument seems necessarily to be based 
on the underlying assumption that the pay- 
ments for temporary partial disability are a mat- 
ter of grace rather than of obligation to the 
injured employee. This view is erroneous. The 
legal theory inherent in the Longshoremen’s 
Act, as in Workmen’s Compensation Acts gener- 
ally, is the substitution of a certain amount of 
compensation (variable within limits) to the 
employee for his common law right of action 
which is taken away by the statute. While the 
payments for partial disability are spread over a 
period of time, for considerations of public pol- 
icy, the obligation of the employer arises from 
the fact of the injury in the course of employ- 
ment and accrues at the time of the injury. The 
subject matter has been heretofore discussed to 
some extent by the Circuit Court of Appeals for 
this Circuit in Wheeling Corrugating Co. v. 
McManigal, 41 F. (2d) [sic] 593, 595; United States 
Casualty Co. v. Taylor, 64 F.2d 521 and Bowen v. 
Hockley, 71 F.2d 781; also in the opinion of this 
court in Pyrites Co. v. Davison Chemical Co., 4 F. 
Supp. 294, 297 (affirmed sub. nom. Hockley v. 
Wilson (C.C. A.) [sic] 70 F.2d 108), where it was 
said: 


‘It is a statutory substitute for the common law 
right of action by the employee which might 
culminate in a judgment for a capital sum as 
damages. The obligation of the employer to 
indemnify for the loss is in its nature a single 


19 


entity just as was the common law chose in 
action of the employee. That it is to be liqui- 
dated in periodic partial payments does not 
transmute its legal nature from an entire obliga- 
tion into several separate obligations each aris- 
ing from the several periodic payments required 
to be made, until the whole is paid.’ ” Atlantic 
Coast Shipping Co., supra, at 318. 


The Court concluded by stating: 


“Finally it may be observed that the employee’s 
confinement in the penitentiary will not, of 
course, preclude the employer from further pro- 
ceedings before the Deputy Commissioner for 
modification of the award under section 922 of 
33 U.S.C.A. when the employee’s change in 
physical condition, with respect to his capacity 
to earn wages if he were free, may justify a 
discontinuance of the payments for temporary 
partial disability or reduction in the amount 
thereof. 


I conclude, therefore, that the orders of the 
Deputy Commissioner in both the cases are in 
accordance with the law and should not be set 
aside.” Atlantic Coast Shipping Co., supra, at 
318-319. 


In 1935 and 1936 Congress considered amending The 
Act. The report of both Houses regarding the effect of the 
proposed amendments of Section 922 is as follows: 


“Section 9, In the amendment of Section 22 of 
the Longshoremen’s Act as contained in The Act 
of May 26, 1934, no provision was made for the 
application of the enlarged authority therein 
provided to cases in which the action of the 
deputy commissioner has been a rejection of the 


20 


claim. In such a case, in which there has been no 
‘payment of compensation’, the amendment 
failed to provide for reopening. Experience indi- 
cates that the same reasons for reopening, as 
provided for in this section, may exist where the 
claim has been rejected as in the case where 
compensation has been paid either with or with- 
out an award. The purpose of this amendment is 
to extend to such cases the same provisions 
which now apply in connection with other cases 


sioner.” 


S. Rep. No. 1199, 74th Cong., Ist Sess., p. 4 (1935); 
H.R. Rep. No. 2237, 74th Cong., 2d Sess., p. 5 (1936). 


While this Amendment was being considered by 
Congress, the Ninth Circuit decided Pillsbury v. Alaska 
Packers Ass‘n, 85 F.2d 758, (9th Cir. 1936), rev’d on other 
grounds, 301 U.S. 174 (1937). In that decision, referring to 
Sec. 922, the Ninth Circuit noted that, “The expression 
‘change in conditions’ refers to a change in the physical 
condition of the employee.” Pillsbury, supra at 960 citing, 
Atlantic Coast Shipping Co. v. Golubiewski, 9 F. Supp. 315, 
317 (D.C. Md. 1934). 


In 1938 Congress amended Section 922 and its reports 
were identical to the paragraph attached to its proposed 
amendment in 1935 and 1936 set forth above. S. Rep. No. 
1988, 75th Cong., 3d Sess., p. 13 (1938). 


Again Congress clearly considered the issue of allow- 
ing unrestricted reopening of claims. It rejected unre- 
stricted reopenings and limited to one year the time limit 
to reopen after the initial claim was rejected. The clear, 
bright line rule of McCormick had been in place for five 


Na eeeicnienieienneieaeaaeel 


21 


years and had been judicially approved in two subse- 
quent court rulings. 


On April 11, 1944 the 5th Circuit decided Burley v. 
Welding Works, Inc., v. Lawson, 141 F.2d 964 (5th Cir. 1944). 
In that case the injured employee suffered a non-sched- 
uled injury on November 23, 1940. The Deputy Commis- 
sioner entered an Order on July 29, 1942 awarding the 
Claimant permanent partial disability benefits at the rate 
of $8.00 per week. On August 5, 1942 the employer filed a 
Section 922 Modification supported by the injured 
worker’s increased earnings records. Modification was 
denied. The employer appealed. 


The 5th Circuit stated: 


“It has been uniformly held that the term 
‘change in conditions’ in Section 22 of The Act, 
which authorizes the modification of a previous 
award, means a change in the employee’s physi- 
cal condition, and not other conditions.” Burley 
Welding Works, Inc., supra, at 966, citing McCor- 
mick, supra, and Pillsbury, supra. 


The Order of the Deputy Commissioner was affirmed 
and the Petition For the Modification dismissed. 


On October 9, 1974 the Benefits Review Board 
decided Rizzi v. The Four Boro Contractor Corp., 1 BRB 130 
(1970). 


In this case the injured worker in 1966 was awarded a 
non-scheduled award for permanent partial disability. In 
1971 he filed a Section 922 Petition For Modification 
alleging permanent total disability. At trial the Adminis- 
trative Law Judge denied the Modification finding that 


22 


the Claimant’s total disability was unrelated to his indus- 


trial injury. 
The Benefits Review Board stated: 


“The Act provides that a compensation order 
may be reviewed on grounds of change in con- 
ditions or because of mistake in a determination 
of fact by the deputy commissioner. 33 U.S.C. 
Sec. 922. The term, ‘change in condition’, means 
alteration of the physical condition of the 
employee caused by the accident. Bay Ridge 
Operating Co. v. Lowe, 14 F. Supp. 280 (S.D. N.Y. 
1936). Further, to qualify for additional benefits, 
such change in condition must have occurred 
between the time of the award which is being 
modified and the time of application for mod- 
ification. Jarka Corp. v. Hughes, 299 F.2d 534 (2nd 
Cir. 1962).” 


Rizzi, supra at p. 131. 


The Board affirmed the order of the Administrative 
Law Judge and the Modification was denied. It should be 
noted that in this case the agency charged with the 
administration of The Act took the opposite position to 
the present interpretation of “change in conditions” now 
taken by the Director in the instant case. 


On May 14, 1981, Senate Bill 1182 amending The Act 
was introduced. It was identical with H.R. 25 also pro- 
posed in the 97th Congress. The Senate passed Senate Bill 
1182 on July 27, 1982. When received by the House of 
Representatives, the bill was referred to the Committee 
on Education and Labor. The 97th Congress adjourned 


2a NN oR AS HN oa cn 


23 


without enacting any amendments to The Act. Congres- 
sional Record — Senate, 98th Cong., Ist Sess., January 26, 
1983, S.576. 


On January 26, 1983 Senate Bill 38 was introduced in 
the Senate and was virtually identical with Senate Bill 
1182. Congressional Record — Senate, 98th Cong., 1st 
Sess., January 26, 1983, $.570. On June 16, 1983, Senate 
Bill 38 again passed the Senate. H.R. Rep. No. 98-570, 
98th Cong., Ist Sess. pp. 1-2 (1983). 


With regard to Section 22 of The Act the Senate 
Report of May 9, 1983 stated at p. 37: 


“MODIFICATIONS 


Consistent with the change made in section 8(h) 
on the issue of wage earning capacity, the one 
year time limit for modification of awards has 
been eliminated. Although the time limit has 
been changed, the basis or grounds for seeking 
a modification remains as under current law. It 
is the committee’s intent that this amendment 
also will preclude any future proceeding for 
modification of a settled case in accordance with 
section 22: This amendment promotes equity by 
permitting ail parties to apply for modification 
of awards at any time after an award is 
entered. The one year limitation was unreasona- 
bly short in light of the long term effects of the 
major industrial injuries sustained by workers 
covered by The Act. As a consequence, adminis- 
trative law judges felt compelled to award bene- 
fits for wage loss at the rate of 1 percent in cases 
where rejection of the claim would have 
required a request for modification within a 
year, whether or not such a new claim was 
justified. The new approach is far more realistic, 


24 


allowing claimants, for example, to apply for 
increased benefits for wage loss or for greater 
physical disability at a time when the full effects 
of an injury may manifest themselves. Requests 
for modification will no longer be necessary 
simply to keep the statute of limitations from | 
running.” (Emphasis added). S. Rep. No. 98-81, | 
98th Cong., Ist Sess. pp. 37-38 (1983). | 


At p. 36 of the same Senate Report, Section 8(h) was | 
discussed as follows: 


“WAGE EARNING CAPACITY 


Section 8(h) was amended by deleting the 
phrase ‘as it may naturally extend into the 
future.’ The remainder of the section is 
unchanged. The deletion is intended to reduce 
speculation on the part of fact finders as to the 
extent of future loss of wage earning capacity. 
The result will be a realistic assessment of the 
claimant’s current loss of wage earning capacity 
along with a concomitant predictability which 
will lead to ease of insurability.” 


a i ee ee a 


Specifically the proposed amendment to Section 22 
was: 


“MODIFICATION OF AWARDS 


SEC. 14. Section 22 is amended by striking all 
after ‘the deputy commissioner may’ through 
‘rejection of claim’.” S. Rep. No. 98-81, supra p. 
11. 


ee ee eee 


In the House of Representatives Report of November 
18, 1993 in its Section by Section analysis of Section 22 it 
is stated: 


“Section 14 amends section 22 of The Act to ) 
permit the modification of an award or review 


mmceine + 


25 


of a compensation claim at any time on the 
grounds of changed circumstances or mistakes. 
(Emphasis added). H.R. Rep. No. 98-570, 98th 
Cong., 1st Sess., p. 29 (1983). 


After different versions of the Amendments 
passed both houses of Congress, the bills were 
referred to Conference Committee. 


In the Conference Report of September 14, 
1984, the Amendment of Section 8(h) was with- 
drawn. Conference Report on S. 38, Congres- 
sional Record —- House, September 14, 1984, 
H.25495. 


Section 22 was amended as follows: 
“MODIFICATION OF AWARDS 
SEC 16. Section 22 is amended - 


(1) by inserting “(including an employer or 
carrier which has been granted relief under sec- 
tion 8(f))” after “party in interest”; 


(2) by inserting “(including a case under which 
payments are made pursuant to section 44(i))” 
after “review a compensation case”; and 


(3) by adding at the end thereof the following 
new sentence: “This section does not authorize 
the modification of settlements”. Id. at p. 25497. 


In the Joint Explanatory Statement of the Committee 
of Conference it is stated: 


“SPECIAL FUND 


Conference substitute .. . 


By permitting an employer or carrier to remain 
a party in a special fund case, the conferees do 
not intend to expand or contract the rights of 


26 


an employer or carrier beyond those prevailing 
in a non-special fund case. (Emphasis added). 
Id. at $.25502. 


On September 20, 1984 the report of the Committee 
of Conference was placed before the Senate. Conference 
Report on S.38, Congressional Record — Senate, Septem- 
ber 20, 1984, S.26296. 


Mr. Hatch noted that, “ . . . this measure is the 
product of literally a decade of intense debate, close 
scrutiny, and hard negotiation . . . Senate Bill 38 reflects a 
fragile consensus carefully crafted over the last several 
years.” Id. at $.26297. 


As enacted the 1984 Amendments rejected the origi- 
nal version of both the Senate and House bill which 
permitted unlimited reopening of claims by the parties to 
adjust or terminate benefits previously awarded. Con- 
gress clearly and specifically chose to retain the then 51 
year system that permitted reopening of claims only 
based upon a change in the Claimant’s physical condition 
and then only within the one year period. Congress 
expressly rejected the original amendments that con- 
tained the philosophy of a never ending open period for 
reopening claims. Congress clearly expressed its will to 
retain a restrictive system, limiting the reopening of 
claims after a prior award had become final. The clear, 
bright line rule of McCormick and its progeny was 51 
years old when the amendments became law and the 
Congressional scheme adopted in 1984 retained the then 
existing system of severely restricting the reopening of 


claims. 


27 


While Congress was in the middle of amending The 
Act, on March 19, 1982 the First Circuit decided General 
Dynamics v. Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Pro- 
grams, 673 F.2d 23 (1st Cir. 1982). 


In this case the employer sought to reopen Under 
Section 922 in order to raise the defense of 8(f) relief. The 
Court stated, “Since there was no change in claimant's 
physical condition, (Footnote 6), in order to reopen the 
case the employer must show that there was a mistake in 
the determination of a fact”. Id. at 25. 


“Footnote 6. Courts uniformally have held that 
a ‘change in conditions’ means a change in the 
employee's ‘physical condition’, not other con- 
ditions. E.g. Burley Welding Works, Inc., v. Law- 
son, 141 F.2d 964 (5th Cir. 1944).” Id. at 25. 


It is of interest that the Court noted: 


“We are not insensitive to the employer’s claim 
that reopening here might be said to be in the 
interest of justice. Nevertheless, we hold that 
such a reopening would not serve the orderly 
administration of justice which depends in no 
small part upon finality of judicial determina- 
tions.” Id. at 26. 


Verderane v. Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc., 772 F.2d 775 
(11th Cir. 1985) was decided on September 30, 1985 by the 
11th Circuit. In this case the Administrative Law Judge 
found the Claimant permanently and totally disabled. 
The employer appealed and the Benefits Review Board 
agreed the Claimant was permanently and totally dis- 
abled but remanded on the issue of coverage under The 
Act. At the Deputy Commissioner level the employer 
attempted to raise 8(f) relief. The Administrative Law 


28 


Judge denied 8(f) relief for failure to timely raise this 
defense and found that the Claimant was covered under 
The Act. While this case was pending a United States 
Supreme Court decision intervened on coverage and the 
Board ruled that the injured worker was covered under 
The Act. The Board reinstated the original permanent and 
total award. The employer appealed on the issue of 8(f). 
The employer argued that it could reopen under Section 
922 and raise 8(f) for: 


1. change of conditions, or, 


2. mistake in determination of fact. (Presumably the 
change of conditions was the intervening decision of the 
U.S. Supreme Court). 


The 11th Circuit noted: 


“A ‘change in conditions’, for purposes of Sec- 
tion 22 refers to a change in an employee’s 
physical condition.” Citing General Dynamics, 
supra. 


The Court concluded that, “Because the Claimant's 
physical condition has not been shown to have changed 
during the time he received the awards, the inquiry 
advances to the second issue: whether there was a mis- 
take in the determination of a fact.” The Court concluded 
there had been none and affirmed the Board’s ruling. 


This review of legislative history and case precedent 
provides a framework with which to examine the author- 
ity relied upon by Petitioner. 


Rambo agrees that Professor Larson’s work is 


instructive on the issue of reopening of compensation 


BW beta 


29 


claims. This work does address the competing philoso- 
phies concerning the reopening of previously litigated 
claims. (See 3 Larson, The Law of Workmens’ Compensation, 
Sec. 81.00 et seq. (1994)). However, it is respectfully sub- 
mitted that the author’s entire analysis, not merely por- 
tions, should be considered. The relevant sections of 
Larson are: 


“Sec. 81. REOPENING AWARDS 


Sec. 81.00 At the administrative level, awards 
can be reopened by the compensation board for 
modification to meet changes in claimant's con- 
dition, such as increase, decrease or termination 
of disability. For reasons of administrative prac- 
ticality, time limits within which such petitions 
may be brought are usually imposed. On a 
reopening for changed condition, no other 
issues may be relitigated, and the claimant’s 
evidence. must bear directly upon the compari- 
son between his former and his present disabil- 
ity. A few jurisdictions afford their commissions 
broad power to reopen cases in the interest of 
justice or for any good reason. Larson, supra, p. 
15-956. 


Sec. 81.10 Summary of reopening problems 


In all states, some kind of provision is made for 
reopening and modifying awards. This provi- 
sion is a recognition of the obvious fact that, no 
matter how competent a commission's diagnosis 
of claimant's condition and earning prospects at 
the time of hearing may be, that condition may 
later change markedly for the worse, or may 
improve, or may even clear up altogether. 
Under the typical award in the form of periodic 
payments during a specified maximum period 


30 


or during disability, the objectives of the legisla- 
tion are best accomplished if the commission 
can increase, decrease, revive, or terminate pay- 
ments to correspond to claimant’s changed con- 
ditions. Theoretically, then, commissions ought 
to exercise perpetual and unlimited jurisdiction 
to reopen cases as often as necessary to make 
benefits meet current conditions. But the admin- 
istrative and practical difficulties of such a 
course have led to severe limitations on the 
power to reopen and alter awards. The most 
serious administrative problem lies in the neces- 
sity of preserving the full case records of all 
claimants that have ever received any kind of 
award, against the possibility of a future 
reopening. Moreover, any attempt to reopen a 
case based on an injury ten or fifteen years old 
must necessarily encounter awkward problems 
of proof, because of the long delay and the 
difficulty of determining the relationship 
between some ancient injury and a present 
aggravated disability. Another argument is that 
insurance carriers would never know what kind 
of future liabilities they might incur, and would 
have difficulty in computing appropriate 
reserves.” Id. at pp. 15-956-15-957. 


With respect to reopening an award for change in 
condition, Larson states: 


“Sec. 81.30 Reopening for change in condition. 
Sec. 81.31 What constitutes change in condition. 


Sec. 81.31(a) Basic rule: change in physical con- 
dition required. 


The ‘change in condition’ which justifies 
reopening and modification is ordinarily a 


oP alate a La 3: 


Pht haa nn A nla 


31 


change, for better or worse, in claimant’s physi- 
cal condition.” (Citing 17 pages of footnotes) Id. 
at pp. 15-988-15-1016. 


The author’s exhaustive review of virtually every 
state’s reopening system emphasizes that there are essen- 
tially two competing concepts regarding reopening of 
claims. Both concepts are grounded on conflicting policy 
considerations. On the one hand some jurisdictions per- 
mit unlimited reopening of claims for an unlimited 
period of time based upon virtually any change in cir- 
cumstances. On the other hand some jurisdictions 
severely limit reopening of claims to a short period of 
time and only if there has been a change in the 
employee’s physical condition since the prior award. 


The Petitioner also relies upon Fleetwood v. Newport 
Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 776 F.2d 1225 (4th Cir. 1985) 
which was decided November 5, 1985 by the 4th Circuit 
Court of Appeals after the 1984 Amendments were 
enacted. 


The decision is a two-Judge majority opinion with a 
vigorous dissent. In its opening paragraph the majority 
notes that Claimant received an award for a back injury 
that occurred on July 11, 1975 and an award was made 
pursuant to The Act and as, “ .. . amended at 33 U.S.C. 
Sec. 901-950 in 1982.” (Sic). 


The Court stated, “ ... about two years... ”, after 
the award, “” .. . the employer applied for a modification 
of the compensation order, arguing that a ‘change in 
conditions’ had occurred in that Fleetwood had acquired 
new job skills and was working as a production coordina- 
tor. See 33 U.S.C. Sec. 922 (‘employer or employee may 


32 


obtain modification of award based upon a change in 
conditions’).” Id. at p. 1227. 


The majority stated that, “Fleetwood argued that his 
original award could not be modified because under Sec- 
tion 22 of the statute the term ‘change of conditions’ 
included only a change in the worker’s physical condi- 
tion and the fact that a worker was earning higher wages 
in his new job than in his pre-injury job was irrelevant as 
long as there was no improvement in the condition of his 
back” Id. at p. 1227. 


The majority opinion held that a change in an 
employee’s wage earning capacity could be the basis for a 
Sec. 22 Modification without a change in the employee’s 
physical condition, “ .. . because (this) is consistent with 
the statute’s purpose and is a reasonable view of the 
statutory language.” Id. at p. 1228. 


The majority in rejecting the clear bright line rule of 
McCormick comments: 


“We reject this reading of the statute because it 
is not in keeping with the purpose of The Act, 
which is to compensate workers for injuries that 
affect their wage-earning capabilities.” Id. at p. 
1229. 


This does not advance the ball! 


The issue is not whether to compensate for injures 
but rather the issue is what has Congress said about 
permitting parties to reopen claims and relitigate finished 
business. Congress clearly in the 1938 and 1984 Amend- 
ments rejected unrestricted reopening of claims. Congress 
had before it this very issue in 1981, 1983 and 1984. 
Congress chose not to allow the Department of Labor and 


33 


the Office of the Administrative Law Judges to build their 
empire by scrutinizing each claim ad infinitum. Congress 
retained a severely restricted system of reopening claims. 
The Fleetwood majority by rejecting the clear, bright line 
rule of McCormick attempts by judicial decision to enact 
the philosophy for reopening of claims clearly rejected by 
Congress. 


The majority’s tortured attempt to distinguish fifty- 
two years of case precedent and its citation of cases that 
do not involve the reopening procedure is ingenuous at 
best. 


In a further anachronism, the Fleetwood majority 
stated that, “ . . . the statute itself provides that at an 
initial determination hearing, at a modification hearing as 
well, any factors which may affect the future earnings of 
the Claimant are to be taken into consideration.” Id. at p. 
28. 


It is respectfully submitted that at the initial hearing 
the beginning and end all inquiry is, has the industrial 
worker suffered a physical injury that was caused by his 
employment? If the answer is NO, that ends all inquiries. 
If the answer is YES, in a non-scheduled case, the Fleet- 
wood majority is correct and the factors they cite are 
addressed to determine if there has been a loss of wage 
earning capacity. 


In spite of its statement to the contrary, the Fleetwood 
majority uses two different methods in considering 
claims at the initial hearing and at the reopening hearing. 
In fact they invert the process at the reopening hearing 
and permit modification without regard to a consider- 
ation of the claimant’s physical condition. 


34 


Under the McCormick approach which implements 
the Congressionally approved system, at the reopening 
hearing the focus is initially directed at the employees 
physical condition. If there has been no change in the 
claimant’s physical condition, reopening is denied; just as 
at the initial hearing if there was no physical injury, the 
claim is dismissed. Only if there has been a change in the 
Claimant's physical condition under the McCormick-Con- 
gressional scheme does the reopening hearing proceed to 
a consideration of loss of wage earning capacity. Thus the 
McCormick-Congressional approach makes parallel 
inquiries at both the initial hearing and the reopening 
hearing. 


The Fleetwood majority in tacit recognition that it was 
adopting a liberal reopening policy in contradiction of the 
Congressional approach comments that, “We cannot solve 
the problem of the short statute of limitations by com- 
pletely excluding modifications on the basis of a change 
in wage-earning capacity.” 


This is precisely what Congress did! Congress chose 
to retain the Statute of limitations AND the fifty-one year 
old clear, bright line rule that severely LIMITS the ability 
of the PARTIES to reopen cases. 


One can therefore only feel empathy for Judge War- 
riner’s frustration when he states in his dissent: 


“Fifty years is a long time. And perhaps it can 
be argued that the Board’s, and the Courts’, and 
the Congress’ erstwhile interpretation of the 
phrase was inhumane, or unenlightened, or an 
anachronism, or something else even more dis- 
paraging. But it cannot be argued, I submit, that 


35 


the prior interpretation was not and is not the 
law.” Id. at 1236. 


In summary the clear intent of Congress was to adopt 
a severely limited reopening procedure and this intent 
has been followed in all cases except the Fleetwood major- 
ity. It is respectfully submitted that the Fleetwood majority 
opinion is an aberration that should not be followed. 
Likewise, in the face of the clear intent of Congress to 
severely limit reopening of claims the opinion of the 
Director should not be afforded deference. Western v. 
Luther, supra. 


Ill. OTHER ISSUES RAISED BY RAMBO ON 
APPEAL AND ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Rambo raised three issues on Appeal to the Ninth 
Circuit. The defining legal issue before the Ninth Circuit 
as well as this Court is of course the question of under 
what circumstances can a claim be reopened under 33 
U.S.C. Section 922. The other two issues raised by Rambo 
that became moot by the Ninth Circuit’s decision were: 


1. Should the employer be estopped from fil- 
ing a 33 U.S.C. Sec. 922 Petition For Modifica- 
tion because of the representation of its attorney 
to “Rambo” that the award would be paid for 
life? 


2. Given the 1983 Stipulated Decision and 
Order Awarding Permanent Disability Benefits, 
“in the interest of justice”, should this case be 
remanded for the entry of a nominal award of 
loss of wage earning capacity? 


36 


Should this Court decide that the prerequisites to 
- reopen a claim were satisfied in this case, a determination 
of Rambo’s alternative grounds for appeal should be 
addressed. It is respectfully requested in this event that 
this Court remand this case to the Ninth Circuit Court of 
Appeals for resolution of the remaining issues in this 
case. 


CONCLUSION 


The Director’s change in position to one advocating a 
liberal reopening process is of course explicable. This 
modern liberal approach will without doubt lead to more 
people being employed by the Department of Labor to 
forever monitor claims. What is inexplicable is that the 
insurance industry and the employers groups support a 
liberalization of the Congressional scheme. The Fleetwood 
majority decision opens the door to virtually unrestricted 
reopening of prior awards. It is wondered if the insurance 
industry and the employer groups will be willing to 
accept the modern, liberal Fleetwood approach when 
future petitions to reopen are based simply on a showing 
of decreased earnings. 


Finally, it should be emphasized that when the par- 
ties in this case stipulated to Rambo’s original award, the 
clear, bright line rule of McCormick was fifty years old. 
Fleetwood was two years in the future. Clearly, when the 
parties made their agreement, their expectations were 
that the arrangement would only be modified if there 
were a change in Rambo’s physical condition. Based on 
this expectation, coupled with the fact that Congress 


37 


clearly intended to adopt a restricted reopening process 
and the fact that the Courts have implemented this intent 
for sixty-two years, this Court should affirm the Ninth 
Circuit’s judgment herein. 


Therefore, for the aforesaid reasons, the Court should 
affirm the Ninth Circuit’s judgment herein. 


Respectfully submitted, 


THomas J. Pierry 
Calif. State Bar No. 36973 


Prerry & MoorHeap 

301 North Avalon Boulevard 
Wilmington, CA 90744 

(310) 834-2691 


Counsel for Respondent 


March 21, 1995 


