In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1993 


+ 
ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 
Petitioner, 
V. 


FEDERICO PENA, Secretary of Department of 
Transportation; THOMAS D. LARSEN, Administrator 
of the Federal Highway Administration; LOUIS N. 
MACDONALD, Administrator Region VIII of the 
Federal Highway Administration; and JERRY BUDWIG, 
Division Engineer of the Central Federal 
Lands Highway Division, 


Respondents. 
* 
Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 


To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Tenth Circuit 


¢ 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
¢ 


WILLIAM Perry PENDLEY* 

*Counsel of Record 
Topp S. WELCH 
MounrTAIN STATES LEGAL FOUNDATION 
1660 Lincoln Street, Suite 2300 
Denver, Colorado 80264 
(303) 861-0244 


Attorneys for Petitioner 


ISSUES PRESENTED 


1. Whether a congressional race-based set aside pro- 
gram for awarding highway construction contracts sur- 
vives an as applied constitutional challenge when that 
program seeks to remedy alleged broad-based societal 
discrimination, rather than clearly identifiable discrimi- 
nation perpetuated by the governmental entity seeking to 
remedy the discrimination? 


“ 


2. Whether “strict scrutiny,” as opposed to “a 
lenient standard, resembling intermediate scrutiny,” is 
the proper standard of review for determining the consti- 
tutionality of a race-based, program adopted by Con- 
gress? 


3. Whether the Fifth Amendment requires a federal 
agency, in implementing a federal race-based, set aside 
program and when exceeding the goals adopted by Con- 
gress, to conduct the inquiry set forth in City of Richmond 
v. J.A. Croson, Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989)? 


ii 
LIST OF PARTIES 


Adarand Constructors, Inc. (“Adarand”) was Plaintiff 
in the United States District Court for the District of 
Colorado and Appellant before the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. Adarand is a corporation 
organized under the laws of the State of Coloiado. 
Adarand has no parent or subsidiary corporations. 


The following were Defendants in the United States 
District Court for the District of Colorado and Appellees 
before the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth 
Circuit: Samuel K. Skinner, in his official capacity as 
Secretary of the Department of Transportation (Mr. Skin- 
ner has since been replaced in his official capacity by 
Federico Pena); Robert E. Farris, in his official capacity as 
Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration 
(Mr. Farris has since been replaced in his official capacity 
by Thomas D. Larsen); Louis N. MacDonald, in his offi- 
cial capacity as Administrator of Region VIII of the Fed- 
eral Highway Administration; and Jerry Budwig, in his 
official capacity as Division Engineer of the Central Fed- 
eral Lands Highway Division. 


ee 


iii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
UD FIs 0 od ccnccncecesscnccunabeusesta i 
LEE Gr CUSED cbc cccccccccsccenentchboususeeses ii 
CP Ce oo ois ccscnesvcceveacvapaveeseanns 1 
PF SOG co cv ccccwdecsns dasweheuesieebeonene 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED...... 2 
STADE DOV cee vepessiecssdsc Wicker 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE.............ccceeeeees 2 
STARTERS GP TCU cock isc kcvctvtnkedcsdceecns 4 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........... 7 


I. A TRUE, DIRECT, AND IRRECONCILABLE 
CONFLICT EXISTS BETWEEN THE DECISION 
BELOW AND DECISIONS RENDERED BY THIS 
HONORABLE COURT. ............. cece eeeees 7 


A. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS, THAT THE PROPER 
STANDARD OF REVIEW OF A RACE- 
BASED CONGRESSIONALLY-MANDATED 
PROGRAM IS “INTERMEDIATE SCRU- 
TINY,” IS IN DIRECT CONFLICT WITH 
DECISIONS OF THIS HONORABLE COURT 


B. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS, REGARDING THE 
“PRINCIPAL LESSON OF FULLILOVE,” IS 
IN DIRECT CONFLICT WITH THIS 
COURT’S DECISION IN FULLILOVE....... 14 


iv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 


Page 


1. THE STATUTE IN QUESTION CON- 
TAINS NO WAIVER PROVISION AS 
REQUIRED BY THE DECISIONS OF 
yy, Bee |» i rererrr rrr Tree er 


2. THE STATUTE IN QUESTION IS NOT 
“NARROWLY TAILORED” AS 
REQUIRED BY DECISIONS OF THIS 
Cn ioc nevcecesceseberdorsecrcesoee 


C. THE HOLDING OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS THAT CONGRESS 
“CAN ENGAGE MORE FREELY IN AFFIR- 
MATIVE ACTION THAN STATES AND 
LOCALITIES” IS IN CONFLICT WITH 
DECISIONS OF THIS COURT ............. 


Il. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS RAISES IMPORTANT 
CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES ..............-+4-. 


CIEE cccccoccncdassenceconncaseccanevcens 


14 


17 


20 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Skinner, 790 F. Supp. 

SP EE Us nse vccbuvsepesedocscece vecve diets 1 
Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497 (1954)............. 10, 21 
City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson, Co., 488 U.S. 469 

Ts, -pireod bauasbadedaes /Weksbeeeeneheecetus passim 
Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 (1980)........ passim 


Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214 (1944)..... 9, 10 
Metro Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547 (1990)... passim 
University of California Regents v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 


BY Gs 0. un 4040's Kédvncns sel bevescevecccosees 10, 11 
Virginia v. Loving, 388 U.S. 1 (1967) .............6... 10 
Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education, et al., 476 U.S. 

 aavkk das Cod ndanes avec tes aeasnanetneia 18, 19 


UnNrtep States CONSTITUTION 


cid caicpanséhees sees enennbeaked 2 
so 6s par cccsvesctecencs cebbaues 2 
STATUTES 

ee I a civ cucuecuansasctnndseeeietcees 3 
Be IE, 0. 5c Se adncts soneseeceneeeeues 6 
FP ce acdcpetctvccccevencesctbooesses 2, 15 
Es op cccncsecdvvctevcescsesacnss 5, 16 


I co. . es dss canapansbeoeueey 16 


\ . No. 
vi 


¢ 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued In The 
ag ° 
Supreme Court of the United States 
28 U.S.C. §1254(1) ......ceeeeeee ee eeene ee ee eens ences 2 | Octave Them, 0008 
42 US.C. GIDE... 2c ec ececeeeccseececeeeeeeeneeeees 3 | R 
42 U.S.C. §2000(d) PrrerTTTTTTrT TC heh ee, 3 ' ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 
Petitioner, 
V. 


FEDERICO PENA, Secretary of Department of 
Transportation; THOMAS D. LARSEN, Administrator 
of the Federal Highway Administration; LOUIS N. 
MACDONALD, Administrator Region VIII of the 
Federal Highway Administration; and JERRY BUDWIG, 
Division Engineer of the Central Federal 
Lands Highway Division, 


Respondents. 
. 


Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Tenth Circuit 


¢ 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
SJ 


OPINIONS BELOW 


Review is sought of the, as yet unpublished, opinion 
of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, dated February 16, 
1994, appearing at pages App. 1 to App. 26 of the Appen- 
dix. The opinion and order of the District Court, dated 
April 21, 1992, Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Skinner, 790 F. 


1 


Supp. 240 (D.Colo. 1992), appear at pages App. 26 to 
App. 38 of the Appendix. 


JURISDICTION 


Petitioner seeks review of the opinion and judgment 
issued by the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals on February 
16, 1994. The Supreme Court has jurisdiction to review 
this opinion pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §1254(1). 


¢ 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. 
Constitution are at issue in this Petition for Writ of Cer- 
tiorari. 


STATUTE INVOLVED 


The statute involved in this appeal is §502 of the 
Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. §644(g). App. 39 to 40. 


¢ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


On August 10, 1990, Adarand Constructors, Inc. filed 
an action in the United States District Court for the 
District of Colorado challenging the use, by the Central 
Federal Lands Highway Division (CFLHD), of a contract 
provision referred to as the “Subcontracting Compensa- 
tion Clause” (SCC). The express purpose of the SCC is to 


induce prime contractors on federal highway projects to 
hire subcontractors based upon the race or gender of the 
owners rather than the amount of the bids of those sub- 
contractors. The SCC authorizes bonus payments to the 
prime contractors as the mechanism to induce the award 
of subcontracts to minorities and women.! 


This case presents a challenge to the Small Business 
Act of 1953, as amended (SBA), 15 U.S.C. §631 et seq., 
which provides the sole source of statutory authority for 
the SCC program.? Adarand asserts that the SCC program 
adopted in accordance with the SBA, violates the xight of 
equal protection guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment, as incorporated by the Fifth Amendment. Adarand 
further asserts that the SCC program violates the privi- 
leges and immunities secured by 42 U.S.C. §1983 and 42 
U.S.C. §2000(d).3 


1 The size of the bonus offered under the SCC program 
equals 10% of the final amount of the Disadvantaged Business 
Enterprise (“DBE”) subcontracts, not to exceed 2% of the final 
prime contract amount (1.5% if the prime contractor only con- 
tracts with one DBE subcontractor). Moreover, the CFLHD 
requires prospective prime contractors to include a bid item 
amount to be awarded to the prime contractor under the SCC 
program regardless of whether the prime contractors intend to 
collect that money. Thus, a prime contractor cannot gain an 
advantage over other prime contractors by agreeing to forego 
the benefits available under the SCC. 


2 A second statute, the Surface Transportation and Uniform 
Relocation Assistance Act of 1987 (STURAA), Pub. L. 100-17, 
101 Stat. 132 (1987), is implicated only in that it provided the 
funding for the construction project at issue in this case, the 
West Dolores Project. Adarand does not challenge the constitu- 
tionality of STURAA in this case. 


3 Different from other cases recently presented to this 
Court to resolve these and other concerns regarding the issue of 


Cross Motions For Summary Judgment were filed on 
April 24, 1991. On April 21, 1992, the District Court 
issued an opinion and order denying Adarand’s Motion 
For Summary Judgment and granting the United States’ 
Motion For Summary Judgment. 


On August 5, 1992, after obtaining a timely Motion 
For Extension Of Time To File Appeal, Adarand filed a 
Notice Of Appeal with the Tenth Circuit Court of 
Appeals. The matter was decided in an opinion dated 
February 16, 1994. This Petition for Writ of Certiorari 
follows. 


STATEMENT OF FACTS 


Adarand is a highway construction company. Randy 
Pech, who is a white male, is part owner and serves as 
general manager of Adarand. In this capacity, he is 
responsible for the company’s day-to-day operations. 


The CFLHD is an agency within the United States 
Department of Transportation (DOT). Its function is to 
supervise the construction and maintenance of highways 
on federally-owned lands within its geographic region.4 


the use of race in federal decision making, Adarand has not 
stipulated that the underlying statute is constitutional. Adarand 
has challenged the statute and the SCC program upon which it 
is based both facially and as applied. 


* The geographic region of the CFLHD includes all or part 
of the following states: Colorado, Nebraska, North Dakota, Cal- 
ifornia, Wyoming, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, South 
Dakota, Nevada, Kansas, and Hawaii. 


On August 10, 1989, the CFLHD issued a solicitation 
for bids for the construction of a 4.7 mile section of 
highway to be located in the San Juan National Forest 
(the West Dolores Project) in southern Colorado. Section 
108 of the contract for the West Dolores Project is the 
“Subcontracting Compensation Clause.” The SCC Pays a 
monetary bonus to all prime contractors who hire “disad- 
vantaged” subcontractors to perform work constituting 
more than 10% of the overall contract amount. 


On September 15, 1989, the CFLHD awarded the 
prime contract for the West Dolores Project to Mountain 
Gravel & Construction Company (Mountain Gravel). 
Shortly thereafter, Adarand submitted the lowest bid for 
the guardrail portion of the project to Mountain Gravel. 
However, Mountain Gravel awarded the subcontract to a 
certified DBE, the Gonzales Construction Company. The 
sole reason for the decision of Mountain Gravel to award 
the subcontract to the Gonzales Construction Company, 
rather than to Adarand, was to obtain the $30,000.00 
bonus payment from the CFLHD. 


The CFLHD highway contracting program has, as its 
statutory basis, the SBA, which applies to all federal 
procurement activities and requires the President to set 
an annual “goal” of awarding not less than 5% of all 
contracts to small businesses owned and controlled by 
“socially and economically disadvantaged individuals.” 
15 U.S.C. §644(g)(1). However, the SBA also provides: 


Notwithstanding the Government-wide goal, 
each agency shall have an annual goal that pre- 
sents, for that agency, the maximum practicable 
Opportunity for . . . small business concerns 


owned and controlled by socially and economi- 
cally disadvantaged individuals to participate in 
the performance of contracts let by such agency. 


Id. The term “socially and economically disadvantaged 
individuals” is also defined by the statute.° 


S 


5 As used in this contract, the term “small business 
concern” shall mean a small business as defined pur- 
suant to section 3 of the Small Business Act and rele- 
vant regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. The 
term “small business concern owned and controlled 
by socially and economically disadvantaged individ- 
uals” shall mean a small business concern - 

(i) which is at least 51 per centum owned by one 
or more socially and economically disadvantaged 
individuals; or, in the case of any publicly owned 
business, at least 51 per centum of the stock of 
which is owned by one or more socially and eco- 
nomically disadvantaged individuals; and 
(ii) whose management and daily business 
operations are controlled by one or more of such 
individuals. 
The contractor shall presume that socially and eco- 
nomically disadvantaged individuals include Black 
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, 
Asian Pacific Americans, and other minorities, or any 
other individual found to be disadvantaged by the 
Administration pursuant to section 8(a) of the Small 
Business Act. 
15 U.S.C. §637(d)(3)(C). Businesses owned or operated by white 
males are not presumed to be “disadvantaged.” 


7 \ 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


I. A TRUE, DIRECT, AND IRRECONCILABLE CON- 


- oe 


FLICT EXISTS BETWEEN THE DECISION BELOW 
AND DECISIONS RENDERED BY THIS HONOR- 
ABLE COURT. 


A. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS, THAT THE PROPER 
STANDARD OF REVIEW OF A RACE- 
BASED CONGRESSIONALLY-MANDATED 
PROGRAM IS “INTERMEDIATE SCRUTINY,” 
IS IN DIRECT CONFLICT WITH DECISIONS 
OF THIS HONORABLE COURT. 


The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals applied an 


improper standard of review to the race-based program 
challenged herein: 


[I]f Congress has expressly mandated a race- 
conscious program, a court must apply a lenient 
standard, resembling intermediate scrutiny, in 
assessing the program’s constitutionality. 


App. 15. The Court reached its conclusion by combining 
the opinion authored by Chief Justice Burger with the 
concurring opinion authored by Justice Marshall.® This 
holding of the Tenth Circuit is in conflict with the deci- 
sions of this Honorable Court. A “lenient standard, 
resembling intermediate scrutiny” is not the standard set 
forth by a majority of the Justices in the Fullilove decision, 


© “A majority of the [Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 
(1980)] Court agreed that strict scrutiny is not the proper test for 
evaluating a race-conscious remedial program authorized by an 
act of Congress.” App. 15, fn. 10. 


vf 


7 


nor is it the standard set forth in previous or later deci- 
sions of this Court.” 


Although there is some question regarding whether 
Chief Justice Burger’s opinion was based upon a “strict 
scrutiny” standard,’ he clearly required use of a standard 
higher than intermediate scrutiny: 


We recognize the need for careful judicial evalua- 
tion to assure that any congressional program 
that employs racial or ethnic criteria to accom- 
plish the objective of remedying the present 
effects of past discrimination is narrowly tailored 
to the achievement of that goal. 


Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 480. (Emphasis added.) Furthermore 
Chief Justice Burger wrote: 


7 The concurring opinion authored by Justice Marshall sup- 
ports an “intermediate scrutiny” standard for the Fullilove fac- 
tual situation because Justice Marshall rejected both “strict 
scrutiny” and “the minimally rigorous rational-basis standard 
of review.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 519. The constitutional test is 
met, wrote Justice Marshall, when the program is “designed to 
further remedial purposes [which] serve important governmen- 
tal objectives and are substantially related to achievement of 
those objectives.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 519. But Justice Marshall 
was joined by only two other Justices, i.e. Justice Brennan and 
Justice Blackmun. 

8 “The principal opinion in Fullilove, written by Chief Jus- 
tice Burger, did not employ ‘strict scrutiny’... . ” Croson, 488 
U.S. at 487. Although this part of the decision was authored by 
Justice O’Connor, it should be noted that the language from this 
portion of the Croson decision did not draw support from a 
majority of the Court. 


Any preference based on racial or ethnic criteria 
must necessarily receive a most searching exam- 
ination to make sure that it does not conflict 
with constitutional guarantees. 


Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 491. (Emphasis added.) “Careful 
judicial evaluation,” “narrow tailor[ing]” and “most 
searching examination” indicate a level of scrutiny much 
closer to “strict scrutiny” than to “intermediate scrutiny.” 


Chief Justice Burger set forth a two step analysis for 
reviewing the Public Works Employment Act (PWEA) 
program reviewed in Fullilove. However, there is nothing 
in that analysis from which to infer that he intended any 
standard other than strict scrutiny. In fact, just the oppo- 
site is true as shown by the language quoted above and 
by the second step of Chief Justice Burger’s analysis: 


the limited use of racial and ethnic criteria in the 
context presented, is a constitutionally permiss- 
ible means for achieving the congressional objec- 
tives and does not violate the equal protection 
component of the Due Process Clause of the 
Fifth Amendment. 


Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 473. (Emphasis in original.) 


This Honorable Court has always used “the most 
rigid scrutiny” in considering “violation{s] [of] the equal 
protection component of the Due Process Clause of the 
Fifth Amendment.” Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 
214, 216 (1944).° “Most rigid scrutiny” is “strict scrutiny.” 


9 “All legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a 
single racial group are immediately suspect. It is not to say that 
all such restrictions are unconstitutional. It is to say that courts 


10 


Even Justice Marshall, in his concurring opinion in Full- 
ilove, recognized that the “conventional” test is “strict 
scrutiny.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 519. 


The standard of review articulated by Chief Justice 
Burger was not, contrary to the holding of the Tenth 
Circuit, “a lenient standard, resembling intermediate 
scrutiny,” but rather the “conventional” “strict scrutiny” 
standard.'!° Therefore, the Tenth Circuit’s opinion is in 


must subject them to the most rigid scrutiny.” Korematsu v. United 
States, 323 U.S. at 216. (Emphasis added.) See also University of 
California Regents v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 299 (1978) (when deci- 
sion making touches upon an individual’s race or ethnic back- 
ground, he is entitled to a judicial determination that the burden 
he is asked to bear because of his race or ethnic background is 
precisely tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest); 
Virginia v. Loving, 388 U.S. 1, 11 (1967) (the Equal Protection 
Clause demands that racial classifications be subjected to the 
“most rigid scrutiny”); and Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497, 500 
(1954) (“[c]lassifications based solely upon race must be scruti- 
nized with particular care since they are contrary to our tradi- 
tions and hence constitutionally suspect”). 


10 The conclusion that Chief Justice Burger’s standard of 
review is the conventional standard or strict scrutiny is bol- 
stered by the concurring opinion of Justice Powell. 


Although I would place greater emphasis than the 
Chief Justice on the need to articulate judicial stan- 
dards of review in conventional terms, | view his 
opinion announcing the judgment as substantially in 
accord with my own views. Accordingly, I join that 
opinion and write separately to apply the analysis set 
forth by my opinion in University of California Regents 
v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978). 


. * * 


a . a 
as 3 . 
7 . 


11 


conflict with the decisions of this Honorable Court when 
the Tenth Circuit holds that “[a] majority of the Fullilove 
Court believed that an intermediate scrutiny analysis 
should be used to determine whether a congressionally- 


mandated program passes constitutional muster.” App. 
16, (continuation of fn. 10). 


The Tenth Circuit held that Metro Broadcasting v. FCC, 
497 U.S. 547, 564 (1990): 


put to rest any lingering doubts about the continu- 
ing vitality of Fullilove: . .. “that race- 
conscious classifications adopted Congress to 
address racial and ethnic yar are subject 
to a different standard than such classifications 
prescribed by state and local governments.” 


App. 19. The Tenth Circuit then concluded: 


the Metro Broadcasting majority held that even 
non-remedial race-conscious measures manda- 
ted by Congress are constitutionally permissible 
if they satisfy intermediate scrutiny. 


App. 19. Again the holding of the Tenth Circuit is in 
conflict with the decisions of this Honorable Court. 


means of advancing a compelling governmental interest. 
(Citing Bakke) For the reasons stated in my Bakke opin- 
ion, I consider adherence to this standard as impor- 
tant and consistent with precedent. 


* * * 


Racial classifications must be assessec’ onder the most 
stringent level of review. . . . 


Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 496. (J. Powell, concurring.) (Emphasis 


added.) Compelling governmental interest and the most strin- 


[The PWEA] employs a racial classification that is 
gent level of review are “strict scrutiny.” 


constitutionally prohibited unless it is a necessary 


12 


Only four Justices in Metro Broadcasting agreed “that 
race-conscious classifications adopted by Congress to 
address racial and ethnic discrimination are subject to a 
different standard than such classifications prescribed by 
state and local governments” and that “intermediate 
scrutiny” is the proper standard of review. Four Justices 
do not constitute a majority holding." 


Justice Stevens’ concurring opinion can not be cited 
as a basis for weakened scrutiny since he demands that 
the reasons for racial classifications be “clearly identified 
and unquestionably legitimate.” Metro Broadcasting v. 
FCC, 497 U.S. at 601, citing his dissenting opinion in 
Fullilove. In his dissenting opinion in Fullilove, Justice 
Stevens wrote “[uJnless Congress clearly articulates the 
need and basis for a racial classification, and also tailors 
the classification to its justification, the Court should not 
uphold this kind of statute.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 545 
(Justice Stevens dissenting).'2 Since Justice Stevens dis- 
sented in Fullilove and Justice Marshall concurred, it can- 
not be argued that Justice Stevens’ view of the proper 


11 Those four justices were Brennan, White, Marshall and 
Blackmun. Justice Stevens wrote a concurring opinion by which 
he joined in the decision, but through which he set forth a 
different standard of review from the standard set forth by 
Justice Brennan. Justice Stevens’ standard of review is much 
closer to “strict scrutiny” than to “intermediate scrutiny.” Metro 
Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 U.S. at 601-602 (concurring opinion of 
Justice Stevens). 


12 Congress has done neither. It has not “clearly articu- 
late[d] the need and basis for [the] racial classification” and has 
not “tailor[ed] the classification to its justification.” “The Court 
should not uphold this . . . statute.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 545 
(Justice Stevens dissenting). 


13 


standard of review is the same as that set forth by Justice 
Marshall in Fullilove. 


While Justice Stevens listed several situations where 
race-based measures are “unquestionably legitimate,” the 
list does not include highway construction or government 
contracts. Metro Broadcasting, 497 U.S. at 601-602.13 Justice 
Stevens’ failure to include contracting as an “unques- 
tionably legitimate” race-based measure and his dissent 
in Fullilove appear to manifest his view that contracting 
requires a different level of scrutiny than, for example, 
public broadcasting, and that congressionally-mandated 
public works laws are subject to a more rigorous standard 
of review, i.e. strict scrutiny. 


As this Court has held on numerous occasions, strict 
scrutiny is the only standard of review to be applied to 
race-based programs like the one at issue in this case, 
even if the program is mandated by Congress. Since the 
decision of the Tenth Circuit is in direct, intolerable and 
irreconcilable conflict with the decisions of this Honor- 
able Court regarding the proper standard of review for 
race-based programs, it is imperative that this Honorable 
Court grant this Writ of Certiorari to resolve the conflict. 


13 That list is “extremely narrow” and includes “broadcast 
diversity”; “an integrated police force”; “a public school fac- 
ulty”; and “the student body of a professional school.” Metro 
Broadcasting, 497 U.S. at 601-602. 


14 


B. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS, REGARDING THE 
“PRINCIPAL LESSON OF FULLILOVE,” IS IN 
DIRECT CONFLICT WITH THIS COURT’S 
DECISION IN FULLILOVE. 


The Tenth Circuit held: 


The splintered Fullilove Court did not uphold 
the challenged federal program because a speci- 
fic percentage set-aside was mandated by Con- 
gress, but rather because the program, in spite of 
the racial and ethnic preference, satisfied equal 
protection requirements. 448 U.S. at 480 (Opin- 
ion of Burger, C.J.) In reaffirming Fullilove as the 
proper standard for assessing the constitu- 
tionality of benign race-conscious measures, the 
Court in Metro Broadcasting noted that, notwith- 
standing the “’great weight’” given to the deci- 
sions of Congress, even congressionally- 
mandated benign race-conscious measures must 
satisfy equal protection requirements. 110 S. Ct. 
at 3011 (citation omitted). 


App. 21-22. (Emphasis in original.) The Tenth Circuit 
opinion is in error and is in direct conflict with decisions 
of this Honorable Court. 


1. THE STATUTE IN QUESTION CONTAINS 
NO WAIVER PROVISION AS REQUIRED 
BY THE DECISIONS OF THIS COURT. 


In Fullilove, in response to a facial challenge of a race- 
based, set-aside program, this Court upheld the constitu- 
tionality of that federal program. However, the federal 
program was upheld, in large part, because of the flexible 
nature of the program, specifically a “waiver” provision 


15 


ca 
if 
we 


allowing states to opt out of the -race-based, set-aside 
federal program “where application of the program is not 
feasible.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 468; see Croson, 488 U.S. at 
488-489 .14 


This Court has established the need for a waiver 
provision if a race-based program is to withstand consti- 
tutional scrutiny. As noted in Croson, it was the presence 
of the waiver provision which ensured the constitu- 
tionality of the PWEA when challenged, facially, in Full- 
ilove..5 Thus, the waiver provision does not exist for 
administrative tidiness and nicety, but to ensure that the 
only basis that permits resort to a race-based standard - 
that is, to remedy prior state-sponsored discrimination - 
is not circumvented. This Court held that the waiver 
provision was to be used to prevent the unconstitutional 
application of the race-based remedy set forth in the 
PWEA.'6 


There is no waiver or similar provision in the Small 


Business Act (15 U.S.C. §644(g)) or the SCC. As noted by 
the Tenth Circuit: 


The Small Business Act provides the statutory 
authority for agencies to establish specific utili- 
zation goals for disadvantaged small businesses. 
15 U.S.C. §644(g). In compliance with section 
502 of the Small Business Act, the heads of the 
various federal agencies, including the DOT, 


14 “[A]n amorphous claim that there has been past discrim- 
ination in a particular industry cannot justify the use of an 
unyielding racial quota.” Croson, 488 U.S. at 499. 

15 Croson, 488 U.S. at 489. 


16 Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 481-482. 


16 


must esiablish annual goals for small business 
participation in federal procurement contracts. 
Id. §644(g)(2). These goals must present the 
“maximum practicable opportunity” for small 
business concerns, including those “owned and 
controlled by socially and economically disad- 
vantaged individuals.” Id. §644(g)(1). 


App. 5-6. (Emphasis added.) The continued use of the 
word “shall” throughout the statute and the Tenth Cir- 
cuit’s use of the word “must” underscores the inflex- 
ibility of this race-based program. There is no language in 
the SBA or the SCC which can be construed as a waiver 
provision, let alone specific language which meets the 
standard required by Fullilove.'” 


Since the statute in question contains no “waiver” 
provision, the decision of the Tenth Circuit that this pro- 
gram passes constitutional muster is in direct conflict 
with the decisions of this Honorable Court. Therefore, 
this Petition should be granted to remedy the conflict. 


17 The Tenth Circuit states: “Because Adarand stipulates 
that section 502 satisfies the evidentiary requirements of Full- 
ilove, the only question to be resolved is whether the SCC pro- 
gram implemented by the CLFHD is narrowly tailored to 
achieve the remedial purpose of section 502.” App. 22. This is a 
mischaracterization of Adarand’s Reply Brief. The Brief states: 
“ Adarand concedes, for the sake of discussion, that the evidence is 
sufficient to satisfy the evidentiary requirements of Fullilove. 
However this concession is not enough to save the Federal 
Defendants’ argument.” App. 43. (Emphasis added.) By adding 
the language “for the sake of discussion,” Adarand was stating 
that for purposes of the discussion it could be assumed that the 
evidence met the requirements of Fullilove. This is much differ- 
ent from a stipulation. Adarand simply did not stipulate as 
indicated by the opinion of the Tenth Circuit. 


ee ae 


17 


2. THE STATUTE IN QUESTION IS NOT 
“NARROWLY TAILORED” AS REQUIRED 
BY DECISIONS OF THIS COURT. 


To pass constitutional scrutiny, the governmental 
body using the race-based remedy must show a “compel- 
ling governmental interest.” In addition, the use of the 
limited race-based program must be “narrowly tailored” 
to meet the “compelling governmental interest” thus 
identified. In spite of the decisions of this Court, the 
Tenth Circuit held that the “significant governmental pur- 
pose of providing subcontracting opportunities for small 
disadvantaged business enterprises” meets the test. App. 
23. (Emphasis added.) There are several problems with 
this holding. First, “significant governmental purpose” is 
not what the government must show. The proper stan- 
dard to be met, according to the decisions of this Court is 
a “compelling governmental interest.” There is no “com- 
pelling governmental interest” identified for the use of a 
race-based program in the SBA.'8 


Furthermore, the statute in question is not narrowly 
tailored. Narrow tailoring requires that the race- 
based remedy “will not last longer than the discriminatory 
effects it is designed to eliminate.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 523 
(Powell, concurring). In other words, the CFLHD must, as a 
result of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, determine 
whether the means chosen to effectuate a clearly identified 


. “[A] generalized assertion that there has been past dis- 
crimination in an entire industry provides no guidance for a 
legislative body to determine the precise scope of the injury it 
aay o — It ‘has no logical stopping point.’ ” Croson, 488 

S.a 


18 


compelling governmental interest are “narrowly tailored to 
the achievement of that goal,” that is, “limited in scope and 
duration.” Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education, et al., 476 U.S. 
267, 285 (1986). 


In finding the PWEA program challenged in Fullilove 
constitutional, Chief Justice Burger focused on the fact 
that the program under review was “a short-term mea- 
sure to alleviate the problem of national unemployment.” 
Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 457.19 Without a statutory provision 
establishing a limited time period for the use of the race- 
based remedy, the program cannot be said to be narrowly 
tailored. 


The statute challenged in this Petition has been in 
place since 1968 and shows signs of lasting forever.7° The 


19 “The MBE provision may be viewed as a pilot project, 
appropriately limited in extent and duration. .. .” Fullilove, 448 
U.S. at 489 (Opinion of Burger, C.J.) “The . . . set-aside is not a 
permanent part of federal contracting requirements. As soon as 
the PWEA program concludes, this set-aside program ends. The 
temporary nature of this remedy ensures that a race-conscious 
program will not last longer that the discriminatory effects it is 
designed to eliminate.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 513 (Concurring 
opinion of Powell, J). 


20 Not only does that program appear to be here to stay, it is 
also a “monster” program. The statute requires a minimum of 
5% for minority participation in all of the federal government's 
procurement activities and demands that the level of participa- 
tion be established at “the maximum practicable opportunity” 
for DBEs, which could represent up to 100% of the total federal 
government procurement contracts. Even 5% has to represent 
billions of dollars which are awarded based on race. Obviously, 
this program is in conflict with this Court’s opposition to race- 
based programs which are “ageless in their reach into the past, 
and timeless in their ability to affect the future.” Wygant, 476 


19 


law contains no automatic sunset provision and there is 
no reason to believe that the matter will be revisited by 
Congress in the near future, as indicated by the Tenth 
Circuit: 


[T]he SCC program is “appropriately limited in 
extent and duration” because federal procure- 
ment and construction contracting practices are 
subject to regular “reassessment and reevalua- 
tion by Congress.” 


App. 23. If this statement is true then every action of 
Congress is “appropriately limited in extent and dura- 
tion.” This does not provide the protection this Court has 
held that the Constitution requires. 


A second aspect of narrow tailoring is that the pro- 
gram must be designed to remedy clearly identifiable 
discrimination.?) Yet, since there are no findings that 
identify the discrimination this program seeks to rem- 
edy,”* it suffers from the same problem Justice O’Connor 
identified in Croson: 


U.S. at 276. Mr. Budwig: “I’m not aware that [the Government’s 
DBE program’s] end is in sight.” App. 46-47. 

21 “This Court never has held that societal discrimination 
alone is sufficient to justify a racial classification. Rather, the 
court has insisted upon some showing of prior discrimination 
by the governmental unit involved before allowing limited use 


of racial classifications in order to remedy such discrimination.” 
Wygant, 476 U.S. at 274. (Emphasis added.) 


22 This is the a problem recognized by Justice Powell in his 
concurring opinion in Fullilove: 
Although the set-aside is pegged at a reasonable fig- 
ure, its effect might be unfair if it were applied rigidly 


20 


[I]t is almost impossible to assess whether the 
Richmond Plan is narrowly tailored to remedy 
prior discrimination since it is not linked to 
identified discrimination in any way. 


Croson, 488 U.S. at 498. 


Failure of this race-based program to provide the 
necessary flexibility, i.e. waiver, and a time limit for its 
use, proves that the program at issue is not narrowly 
tailored. 


If the program is not narrowly tailored it is uncon- 
stitutional under the strict scrutiny standard required by 
the decisions of this Honorable Court. For these reasons 
this Petition must be granted. 


C. THE HOLDING OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS THAT CONGRESS 
“CAN ENGAGE MORE FREELY IN AFFIRMA- 
TIVE ACTION THAN STATES AND 
LOCALITIES” IS IN CONFLICT WITH DECI- 
SIONS OF THIS COURT. 


The Tenth Circuit held: 


The lesson that we glean from Fullilove and 
Croson is that the federal government, acting 


in areas of the country where minority group mem- 

bers constitute a small percentage of the population. 
Fullilove, 448 U.S. 514 (Justice Powell, concurring opinion). Col- 
orado, the location of the contract at issue in this case fits within 
the areas of the country described by Justice Powell. Defendant 
Budwig testified he didn’t believe there had ever been any 
discrimination in the highway construction industry in Colo- 
rado. App. 45-46. 


21 


under congressional authority, can engage more 
freely in affirmative action than states and 
localities. 


App. 18. This statement is in direct, true and irreconcil- 
able conflict with the holdings of this Court: 


In view of our decision that the Constitution 
prcehibits the states from maintaining racially 
segregated public schools, it would be unthink- 
able that the same Constitution would impose a 
lesser duty on the Federal Government. 


Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. at 500. The holding of the Tenth 
Circuit with regard to the relationship of Fullilove, Croson, 
and Metro Broadcasting is in error. Since none of the 
opinions written in Fullilove was a plurality, let alone a 
majority opinion, Fullilove cannot be read to overrule 
previous Supreme Court precedence. 


Although Metro Broadcasting had a plurality, it did 
not have the necessary majority to overrule prior 
Supreme Court precedence. Nor was Bolling v. Sharpe, 
addressed by Justice Brennan in the Metro Broadcasting 
case. This Honorable Court would not overrule such an 
important constitutional precedent by implication. 


Finally, the portion of the Croson decision which is 
cited in Metro Broadcasting for the proposition that Con- 
gress is treated differently by the Constitution than other 
governmental bodies, was not a plurality opinion nor a 
majority opinion. There are no majority Supreme Court 
decisions that support the holding of the Tenth Circuit in 
the case at bar. The decision of the Tenth Circuit is clearly 
in conflict with Bolling v. Sharpe. 


22 


To resolve this true and direct conflict with Bolling v. 
Sharpe, this Petition must be granted. 


II. THE DECISION OF THE TENTH CIRCUIT COURT 
OF APPEALS RAISES IMPORTANT CONSTITU- 


TIONAL ISSUES. 


This is an important challenge to the constitutionality 
of a race-based, set-aside program adopted by Con- 
gress. It asks unanswered questions as to the exact 
relationship among the decisions of this Court in Fullilove 
v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 (1980); City of Richmond v. J.A. 
Croson, Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989) and Metro Broadcasting v. 
FCC, 497 U.S. 547, 564 (1990). 


While Fullilove upheld, in strictly a facial challenge, 
the ability of Congress to adopt race-based, set-aside 
programs; while Croson struck down a race-based, set- 
aside program adopted by a city; and while Metro Broad- 
casting, appears to have established an intermediate stan- 
dard of review for congressionally-mandated acts; 
unanswered are the questions regarding an “as applied” 
challenge posed by the instant Petition, which Chief Jus- 
tice Burger stated in Fullilove would have to await future 
challenges.?4 This is that “future case[ ].” 


23 “Under our Constitution, any official action that treats a 
person differently on account of his race or ethnic origin is 
inherently suspect and presumptively invalid.” Fullilove, 448 
U.S. at 523, (Justice Stewart, dissenting opinion). 

24 “We are not presented here with a challenge involving a 
specific award of a construction contract or the denial of a waiver 
request; such questions of specific application must await future 
cases.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 486. (Emphasis added.) 


23 


This case presents the unanswered questions: (1) 
Whether, in a facial and as applied constitutional chal- 
lenge, a law that is an equal protection violation when 
enacted by a state is transformed into an equal protection 
guarantee when enacted by Congress?25 (2) Whether 
“strict scrutiny” as opposed to “a lenient standard, 
resembling intermediate scrutiny” is the proper standard 
of review for determining the constitutionality of a race- 
based program adopted by Congress? (3) Whether the 
Fifth Amendment requires a federal agency, in imple- 
menting a federal race-based, set aside program, to con- 
duct the inquiry set forth in City of Richmond v. J.A. 
Croson, Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989), especially when the level 
of minority participation set by the agency far exceeds 
the level of participation required by Congress? At the 
time of the West Dolores contract award, the CFLHD’s 
goal was set at 12% to 15% of its annual construction 
budget, that is, 7% to 10% higher than set by Congress in 
the SBA. App. 49. 


Croson commands that a governmental unit, even if 
implementing a congressionally-mandated program, con- 
duct an inquiry in order to ascertain that the 


25 In stating a concern with the holding of the Court in 
Fullilove, Justice Kennedy, in a concurring opinion in Croson, 
stated: “The process by which a law that is an equal protection 
violation when enacted by a State becomes transformed to an 
equal protection guarantee when enacted by Congress poses a 
difficult proposition for me; but as it is not before us, any 
reconsideration of that issue must await some further case.” 
Croson, 488 U.S. at 518. 


24 


implementation of a race-based program above that set 
by Congress meets the requirements of the Constitution.”¢ 


While the SBA may require the CFLHD to implement 
a race-based remedy, when the CFLHD exceeds that level, 
it must do so in a constitutional manner. The Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution compel 
the CFLHD to make the decision to raise the level at 
which the race-based quota is set in a constitutional man- 
ner. The constitutional method is set forth in Croson. The 
failure of the CFLHD to determine whether 12 to 15% as 
opposed to 5% was constitutionally permissible renders 
the CFLHD program unconstitutional. 


This Court should grant certiorari in order to end the 
Constitutional abuse now sanctioned by the decision 
below. 


26 As this Court made clear in Croson, a state must: (1) 
search for and find a history of state-sponsored discrimination; 
(2) assert the compelling state interest sought to be served by 
the race-based remedy; and (3) narrowly tailor the race-based 
remedy both as to: (a) the beneficiary of the racial bias, that is, 
applying the remedy to one who has been a victim of such state- 
sponsored discrimination; and (b) the duration of the race- 
based remedy. Croson, 488 U.S. 469. 


25 


CONCLUSION 


For all of the above reasons, this Court should grant 
the petition of Adarand in this matter and review the 
erroneous decision of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit. 


Respectfully submitted, 


WiiuiaM Perry PeNnpDiey* 

*Counsel of Record 
Topp S. WetcH 
Mountain States LEGAL FouNDATION 
1660 Lincoln Street, Suite 2300 
Denver, Colorado 80264 
(303) 861-0244 


Attorneys for Petitioner 
Dated: May 17, 1994. 


App. 1 


PUBLISH 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
TENTH CIRCUIT 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, 

INC., a Colorado corporation, 
Plaintiff-Appellant No. 92-1242 

v. 


FEDERICO PENA, Secretary of 
Department of Transportation; 
THOMAS D. LARSON, 
Administrator of the Federal 
Highway Administration; LOUIS 
N. MACDONALD, Administrator 
of Region VIII of the Federal 
Highway Administration; and 
JERRY BUDWIG, Division Engineer 
of the Central Federal Lands 
Highway Division, 


Defendants-Appellees 


i a 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Colorado 
(D.C. No. 90-C-1413) 


(Filed Feb. 16, 1994) 


William Perry Pendley, Mountain States Legal, Founda- 
tion (Todd S. Welch, John G. Nelson, with him on the 
brief), Denver, Colorado, for Plaintiff-Appellant. 


App. 2 


Lisa J. Stark, Attorney, Civil Rights Division, United 
States Department of Justice (James P. Turner, Acting 
Assistant Attorney General, David K. Flynn, Lisa C. 
Wilson, Attorneys, Civil Rights Division, United States 
Department of Justice, on the brief), Washington, D.C., 
for Defendants-Appellees. 


Before HOLLOWAY, GARTH* and McKAY, Circuit 
Judges. 


GARTH, Circuit Judge. 


This appeal involving a reverse discrimination chal- 
lenge requires us to review the constitutionality of a 
federal program designed to provide contract awards for 
disadvantaged business enterprises. 


Appellant Adarand Constructors, Inc. (“Adarand”) 
appeals an order of the district court granting summary 
judgment in favor of the Government appellees [hereinaf- 
ter “Government” ]. 790 F. Supp. 240. On appeal, Adarand 
raises three arguments. First, it argues that the district 
court erred in holding that the proper standard to be 
applied is found in Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 
(1980), rather than in City of Richmond v. ].A. Croson, Co., 
488 U.S. 469 (1989). 


* The Honorable Leonard I. Garth, Senior United States 
Circuit Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Third 
Circuit, sitting by designation. 


ee 


App. 3 


Second, relying on Croson, Adarand asserts that the 
Central Federal Lands Highway Division (CFLHD) must 
make specific findings of past discrimination in order to 
justify its reliance on the disadvantaged business enter- 
prise (DBE) program which furnishes the necessary crite- 
ria for the federal agency’s implementation of a race- 
conscious subcontracting compensation clause (“the SCC 
program”). 


Third, Adarand contends that section 502 of the 
Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. § 644(g), which provides 
the statutory authorization for the challenged SCC pro- 
gram, is unconstitutional as applied because it imper- 
missibly delegates to federal agencies the authority to 
develop minority-participation goals and the means for 
achieving those goals. 


Our jurisdiction is invoked under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, 
and we affirmed the district court’s judgment of April 21, 
1992 for the Government. We do so, however, on grounds 
different from those relied upon by the district court.! 


I. 


Adarand, a highway construction company run by a 
white male, sought declaratory and permanent injunctive 
relief against officials of the federal Department of Trans- 
portation (DOT) and other DOT officials on the grounds 
that the SCC program utilized by the CFLHD violates the 


! Helvering v. Gowran, 302 U.S. 238, 245 (1937) (“[T]he rule is 
settled that if the decision below is correct, it must be affirmed, 
although the district court relied upon a wrong ground or gave 
a wrong reason”). 


App. 4 


equal protection guarantees of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments and the privileges and immunities guaran- 
teed by 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and 42 U.S.C. § 2000d (Title VI).? 
Adarand’s complaint erroneously alleged that the statu- 
tory authorization for the SCC program was provided by 
two transportation assistance acts: the Surface Transpor- 
tation Assistance Act of 1982, Pub. L. No. 97-424, § 105(f), 
96 Stat. 2097, 2100 (STAA), and its successor, the Surface 
Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 
1987, Pub. L. No. 100-17, § 106(c), 101 Stat. 132, 145 
(STURAA). Both Adarand and the Government filed 
cross motions for summary judgment with the district 
court. The district court also mistakenly determined that 
the challenged program was authorized by STAA and 
STURAA. For purposes of this appeal, both parties stipu- 
late that the SCC program is authorized by section 502 of 
the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. § 644(g), and that the 
constitutionality of STAA and STURAA are not at issue. 


2 For ease in reading the various references to acts and 
agencies referred to within this opinion, we list the following 


acronyms: 
Central Federal Lands Highway Division = CFLHD 
Federal Lands Highway Program = FLHP 
Federal Highway Administration = FHWA 
Federal Department of Transportation = DOT 
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise = DBE 
Subcontracting Compensation Clause = SCC 
Surface Transportation Assistance 
Act of 1982 = STAA 
Surface Transportation and Uniform 
Relocation Act of 1987 = STURAA 


App. 5 


A. 


The Small Business Act provides the statutory 
authority for agencies to establish specific utilization 
goals for disadvantaged small businesses. 15 U.S.C. 
§ 644(g). In compliance with section 502 of the Small 
Business Act, the heads of the various federal agencies, 
including the DOT, must establish annual goals for small 
business participation in federal procurement contracts.3 
Id. § 644(g)(2). These goals must present the “maximum 


* Section 502 of the Small Business Act provides: 
The President shall annually establish Govern- 
ment-wide goals for procurement contracts awarded 
to small business concerns and small! business con- 
cerns owned and controlled by socially and economi- 
cally disadvantaged individuals. The Government- 
wide goal for participation by small business con- 
tracts shall be established at not less than 20 percent 
of the total value of all prime contract awards for each 
fiscal year. The Government-wide goal for participa- 
tion by small business concerns owned and controlled 
by socially and economically disadvantaged individ- 
uals shall be established at not less than 5 percerit of 
the total value of all prime contract and subcontract 
awards. Notwithstanding the Government-wide goal, 
each agency shall have an annual goal that presents, for 
that agency, the maximum practicable opportunity for 
small business concerns and small business concerns 
owned and controlled by socially and economically disad- 
vantaged individuals to participate in the performance of 
contracts let by such agency. The Administration and 
the Administrator of the Office of Federal Procure- 
ment Policy shall, when exercising their authority 
pursuant to paragraph (2), insure that the cumulative 
annual prime contract goals for all agencies meet or 
exceed the annual Government-wide prime contract 


App. 6 


practicable opportunity” for small business concerns, 
including those “owned and controlled by socially and 
economically disadvantaged individuals.” Id. § 644(g)(1). 


The SCC program was implemented in 1979 by the 
Federal Lands Highway Program (FLHP) of the Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA), an agency within the 
DOT, to satisfy the agency goals requirement of the Small 
Business Act. CFLHD and the other two regional offices 
of FLHP utilize the SCC program as a means of meeting 
their respective apportioned shares of the DOT goal for 
disadvantaged small business participation. Under the 
SCC program, a Subcontracting Compensation Clause is 
included in small-value contracts or where the prime 
contractor is a small business. Prime contractors whose 


goal established by the President pursuant to this 
paragraph. 
15 U.S.C. § 644(g)(1) (emphasis added). These obligations were 
first codified in 1978 as an amendment to the Small Business 
Act. See Pub. L. No. 95-507, 92 Stat. 1770. 
Pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 644(g)(2): 
The head of each Federal agency shall, after con- 
sultation with the Administration establish goals for 
the participation by small business concerns, and by 
small business concerns owned and controlled by 
socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, 
in procurement contracts of such agency. Goals estab- 
lished under this subsection shall be jointly established 
by the Administration and the head of each Federa 
agency and shall realistically reflect the potential of small 
business concerns and small business concerns owned and 
controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged 
individuals to perform such contracts and to perform sub- 
contracts under such contracts. * * * 
Id. (emphasis added). 


App. 7 


DBE subcontracts exceed 10% of the overall contract 
amount are eligible for incentive payments of up to 1.5% 
of the original contract amount for utilization of one DBE, 
or up to 2% for hiring two or more DBEs. Small business 
prime contractors are not required to hire DBEs as a 
contractual condition of eligibility for award of the prime 
contract. Rather, the SCC program provides prime con- 
tractors with the option of either hiring DBE subcontrac- 
tors and receiving commensurate incentive payments, or 
ignoring the option entirely. 


To qualify for eligibility under the SCC program, 
small businesses must demonstrate through an annual 
certification process that they are indeed socially and 
economically disadvantaged. The Subcontracting Com- 
pensation Clause and the eligibility criteria comport with 
section 502 of the Small Business Act. The eligibility 
criteria, however, are derived from the DBE regulatory 
program implemented pursuant to two transportation 
funding authority acts: STAA and its renewal act, 
STURAA.* A subcontractor thus qualifies for the SCC 
program if it qualifies for DBE status under STURAA 
regulations. 


* The regulations promulgated by the DOT following 
enactment of STAA in 1983 created the DBE regulatory pro- 
gram. Both STAA and STURAA were intended to achieve 
minority business participation goals primarily through the use 
of set-asides for qualified subcontractors. S. Rep. No. 4, 100th 
Cong., lst Sess. 11-12 (1987), reprinted in 1987 U.S.C.C.A.N. 66, 
76. STURAA allocates $55 million annually for forest highway 
construction projects undertaken by federal agencies. The bulk 
of funds appropriated under STURAA, however, is granted to 
state and localities for federally-assisted highway programs. 


App. 8 


As an agency within the federal DOT, CFLHD is not 
itself subject to STURAA implementing regulations. See 
54 Fed. Reg. 43835-01; 45 Fed. Reg. 21172 (1980); 49 C.F.R. 
23.2. Consequently, small business prime contractors 
awarded contracts let directly by the CFLHD do not have 
to satisfy the 10% DBE set-aside required of states and 
localities who receive STURAA funds for federally- 
assisted highway contracts. 


STURAA, and previously STAA, define “socially and 
economically disadvantaged individuals” with reference 
to the Small Business Act. 15 U.S.C. § 637(d).5 Under the 
Small Business Act, a small business must be at least 51% 
owned and controlled by individuals who are socially 
and economically disadvantaged. Id. Members of certain 
minority racial and ethnic groups and women are pre- 
sumed socially and economically disadvantaged.°® Id. That 


5 Under the Act, “[sJocially disadvantaged individuals are 
those that have been subject to racial or ethnic prejudice or 
cultural bias because of their identity as a member of a group 
without regard to their individual qualities.” 15 U.S.C. 
§ 637(a)(5). “Economically disadvantaged individuals are those 
socially disadvantaged individuals whose ability to compete in 
the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished 
capital and credit opportunities as compared to others in the 
same business area who are not socially disadvantaged.” Id. 
§ 637(a)(6)(A). These definitions also are incorporated into 
STAA and STURAA. 

6 These racial minority groups are: “Black Americans, His- 
panic Americans, Native Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, 
and other minorities * * * .” 15 U.S.C. § 637(d)(3)(C). Both 
STURAA and the Small Business Act also extends federal pro- 
curement opportunities to women-owned small businesses. 


App. 9 


presumption is rebuttable under the DBE criteria incorpo- 
rated into CFLHD’s SCC program. Both minority-owned 
small disadvantaged business enterprises (DBEs) and 
women-owned small business enterprises (WBEs) may be 
decertified if it can be established that they are not 
socially and economically disadvantaged. Non-minority- 
owned small businesses also are eligible for DBE certi- 
fication by the Small Busiriess Administration, provided 
that they satisfy the same eligibility criteria as minority- 
owned small businesses. See 15 U.S.C. § 637(a). 


B. 


On September 15, 1989, the CFLHD awarded a $1- 
million-plus prime contract to a small business contractor, 
Mountain Gravel & Construction Company, for a federal 
highway project in Colorado known as the West Dolores 
project.” Funding for the West Dolores project was allocated 
to CFLHD under STURAA. Because the contract was let by 
an agency within the DOT, Mountain Gravel was not required 
to hire DBEs as part of its contractual obligation for the West 


? CFLHD includes within its jurisdiction the following 
states: Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Kansas, 
Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Texas, Utah and Wyoming. At the time of the contract award for 
the West Dolores Project, CFLHD’s apportioned goal was 
between 12% and 15% DBE participation in al! contracts let by 
the agency. The percentage goal represents the portion of dol- 
lars of CFLHD’s total procurement program. Neither CFLHD 
nor any other federal agency is subject to sanctions for failing to 
satisfy its annual goal. The head of each federal agency, how- 
ever, is required to justify any such failure in an annual report to 
the Small Business Administration. 15 U.S.C. § 644(h). 


App. 10 


Dolores project. However, anticipating that Mountain Gravel 
would use DBEs as subcontractors, CFLHD followed its 
usual practice and added 1% of the bid as a contingent sum 
to the prime contractor’s bottom-line bid. This contingent 
amount would be paid to the prime contractor only if 10% of 
the subcontracts on the West Dolores Project was with DBEs. 
The Subcontracting Compensation Clause included in the 
contract read: 


Monetary compensation is offered for awarding 
subcontracts to small business concerns owned 
and controlled by socially and economically dis- 
advantaged individuals * * * Compensation is 
provided to the Contractor to locate, train, uti- 
lize, assist, and develop DBEs to become fully 
qualified contractors in the transportation facili- 
ties construction field. The Contractor shall also 
provide direct assistance to disadvantaged sub- 
contractors in acquiring the necessary bonding, 
obtaining price quotations, analyzing plans and 
specifications, and planning and management of 
the work. * * * The Contractor will become eligi- 
ble to receive payment under this provision 
when the dollar amount * * * of the DBE sub- 
contract(s) awarded exceeds [10% for Colorado] 
of the original [prime] contract award. 


Shortly thereafter, Adarand submitted a subcontract 
bid to Mountain Gravel seeking to construct the guardrail 
portion of the West Dolores project. Adarand is not a 
certified DBE.* Although Adarand was the lowest bidder, 
Mountain Gravel exercised the option provided by the 


oF 


8 The record gives no indication of the racial composition of 
Adarand’s ownership, although its general manager is a white 
male and its stockholders include the general manager’s wife 
and two other women. 


App. 11 


SCC program and awarded the subcontract for the guard- 
rail systems to a certified DBE who had submitted a 
higher bid than Adarand’s. By subcontracting with the 
DBE, Mountain Gravel thereby became entitled to a 
bonus payment of approximately $10,000. 


Adarand challenged the constitutionality of the SCC 
program in a lawsuit filed August 10, 1990. The com- 
plaint, inter alia, sought an injunction prohibiting further 
use of the SCC program. Believing that the SCC program 
was instituted pursuant to STAA and STURAA, 
Adarand’s complaint attacked the constitutional validity, 
both facially and as applied, of those two transportation 
assistance acts. The complaint alleged that the use of race 
and gender as factors in awarding federal procurement 
contracts in Colorado, without any findings of past dis- 
crimination in the state, violated the equal protection 
guarantees of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments and 
the privileges and immunities guaranteed by 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1983 and 42 U.S.C. § 2000d (Title VI). 


In its brief in support of its cross motion for sum- 
mary judgment, Adarand argued that CFLHD’s use of the 
SCC program to facilitate federal contracting oppor- 
tunities for DBEs could not withstand strict scrutiny 
under Croson. The Government countered in its brief that 
Fullilove (involving federal remedial programs), and not 
Croson (involving state and local entities), provided the 
controlling standard. The Government also argued that 
Adarand did not have standing, in any event, to chal- 
lenge the regulatory program by which STURAA is 
implemented, because the SCC program was instituted 
pursuant to section 502 of the Small Business Act, 15 
U.S.C. § 644(g), and not STURAA. In its reply brief, 


App. 12 


Adarand acknowledged that the SCC program was 
implemented to response to the agency goals requirement 
of the Small Business Act. 


Relying on the parties’ briefs, the district court 
granted summary judgment in favor of the Government 
and denied Adarand’s summary judgment motion. 790 F. 
Supp. at 245. The district court assumed, without expla- 
nation, that the case presented a challenge to the constitu- 
tionality of the DBE regulatory program promulgated 
under provisions of STAA and STURAA. Id. at 242. Its 
opinion did not address the standing issue urged upon us 
by the Government, and made no reference to the SCC 
program. The existence of the Small Business Act and the 
Act’s mandate of agency goals for socially and economi- 
cally disadvantaged small business participation were 
virtually ignored by the district court. Rather, the district 
court concluded, erroneously, that CFLHD “was required 
by the federal regulations under which CFLHD operates” 
to adopt STAA’s and STURAA’s 10% set-aside.? Id. at 244. 


Based on its finding that “the challenged regulations 
and actions involve only federal actors acting pursuant to 
congressional mandate,” the district court determined 
that the relaxed standard of Fullilove —- and not the strict 
scrutiny test of Croson — governed this case. 790 F. Supp. 


9° The 10% (7% for Wyoming) threshold of CFLHD’s sub- 
contracting compensation clause, although modeled on 
STURAA’s set-aside, is an optional goal, not a set-aside. As 
discussed supra in text, it is entirely at the discretion of the 
prime contractor whether to exercise its option under the Sub- 
contracting Compensation Clause, or to ignore it and forego the 
monetary reward CFLHD offers for hiring DBEs as subcontrac- 
tors. 


Pet 


App. 13 


at 244. Applying Fullilove to the fects of this case, the 
district court found that congressional policies related to 
remedying discrimination supported the Government's 
position. Because “the challenged programs are narrowly 
tailored to achieve their legitimate purpose,” the district 
court concluded that the challenged program satisfies the 
requirements of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. 
Id. at 245. 


II. 


As a threshold matter, we reject the Government's 
argument that Adarand does not have standing to chal- 
lenge section 502 of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 
§ 644(g), because Adarand had not charged in its com- 
plaint that section 502 was unconstitutional. We are satis- 
fied that Adarand is entitled to attack the constitutional 
validity of the legislation authorizing the very program 
which was challenged in its complaint, even though 
Adarand did not identify section 502. 


Adarand and the Government, in their briefs to the 
district court, both identified section 502 as the statutory 
basis for the SCC program. As the Government itself 
points out, the analysis of the constitutionality of the SCC 
program under the authority of the Small Business Act is 
the same as that applied by the district court to STAA and 
STURAA. Furthermore, because we conclude that the 
district court reached the correct conclusion, its order 
denying Adarand’s motion for summary judgment and 
granting summary judgment in favor of the Government 
can be affirmed, even though premised on an analysis 
different from the analysis we employ. Helvering v. 


App. 14 


Gowran, 302 U.S. 238, 245 (1937), reh’g denied, 302 U.S. 781 
(1938); Robert-Gay Energy Enters., Inc. v. State Corp. 
Comm'n of Kansas, 753 F.2d 857, 862 n.5 (10th Cir. 1985). 


The Government is on firmer footing when it attacks 
Adarand’s standing to challenge the provisions of the 
SCC program pertaining to women-owned business 
enterprises (WBE). The issue of whether a congressional 
mandate exists for WBEs as disadvantaged businesses 
under the SCC program also was raised in Adarand’s 
complaint. Both parties, however, proceeded before the 
district court on the apparently shared assumption that 
the instant controversy concerned only the racial prefer- 
ence aspect of the SCC program. Because Adarand never 
argued the point in its motion for summary judgment, the 
district court was never afforded an opportunity to evalu- 
ate the merits of the WBE claim. Moreover, Adarand did 
not press this point during arguments before us. 


More significantly, Adarand has made no showing 
that it has a personal stake in the WBE provisions. It 
offers no evidence whatsoever that it has been denied a 
federal subcontract because of a WBE, or that the gender 
preference of the SCC program prevents it from now 
bidding on an equal basis for federal subcontracts. For 
these reasons, we limit our review only to the constitu- 
tionality of the SCC program’s racial preference. See 
Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated Gen. Contrac- 
tors of America v. City of Jacksonville, 113 S. Ct. 2297, 2303 
(1993). 


: 
; 
: 
; 


We turn now to the merits of the appeal. Once again 
we are asked to determine the proper constitutional test 
for a race-conscious program implemented pursuant to a 
congressional command. As in Ellis v. Skinner, 961 F.2d 
912 (10th Cir.), cert. denied sub nom. Ellis v. Card, 113 S. Ct. 
374 (1992), resolution of this appeal turns on the question 
of whether the district court erred in applying the Full- 
ilove standard, rather than the Croson test, to the facts of 
this case. Our decision in Ellis provides the answer: Full- 
ilove controls. 


In Fullilove, 448 U.S. 448 (1980), the Supreme Court 
approved the use of a 10% minority business enterprise 
(MBE) set-aside mandated by Congress. In rejecting a 
facial challenge to the constitutionality of the statute 
authorizing the MBE program, the Court found that Con- 
gress acts within its unique and broad powers under the 
Commerce Clause and section 5 of the Fourteenth 
Amendment when it imposes an affirmative action pro- 
gram to remedy nationwide discrimination in the con- 
struction industry. Under Fullilove, if Congress has 
expressly mandated a race-conscious program, a court 
must apply a lenient standard, resembling intermediate 
scrutiny, in assessing the program’s constitutionality.1 


10 The test of Chief Justice Burger’s opinion for the Court is: 
(1) whether “the objectives of this legislation are within the 
power of Congress”; and (2) whether “the limited use of racial 
and ethnic criteria, in the context presented, is a constitutionally 
permissible means for achieving the congressional objectives 
and does not violate the equal protection component of the Due 


App. 16 


In Ellis, we applied the Fullilove test in upholding the 
constitutionality of the DBE program, as applied by the 
Utah Department of Transportation as a prerequisite to 
the receipt of federal funds. 961 F.2d at 916. In Ellis, we 
were called upon to decide “whether Utah’s failure to 
seek a waiver is equivalent to a local government enact- 
ing its own set-aside program, thus implementing the 
fact-finding requirements of Croson.” Id. at 915. We held 
that it was not. 


Although our analysis in Ellis focused on the waiver 
provisions of the DBE program established by STAA and 
renewed by STURAA, our opinion made clear that Full- 
ilove provides the proper test for determining the consti- 
tutionality of a race-conscious measure authorized by 
Congress. Because the white contractor in Ellis stipulated 
that both STAA and STURAA and their implementing 
regulations were facially constitutional, we necessarily 
concluded that Utah was simply obeying a valid congres- 
sional command. Holding that Utah had complied with 
federal law, we stated that, under such circumstances, 
“‘TWle do not see how the state can be thought to have 
violated the Constitution.’ ” 961 F.2d at 916 (quoting Mil- 
waukee County Pavers Ass‘n v. Fiedler, 922 F.2d 419 (7th 


Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 
473 (Opinion of Burger, C.J.). Three other members of the Full- 
ilove Court believed that an intermediate scrutiny analysis 
should be used to determine whether a congressionally-manda- 
ted program passes constitutional muster under the Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendments. /d. at 519 (Marshall, J., concurring in 
judgment). A majority of the Fullilove Court therefore agreed 
that strict scrutiny is not the proper test for evaluating a race- 
conscious remedial program authorized by an act of Congress. 


EO Me -* 


eh UO EU ane 


; 
: 


App. 17 


Cir.), cert. denied, 111 S. Ct. 2261 (1992)); accord Tennessee 
Asphalt Co. v. Farris, 942 F.2d 969, 975 (6th Cir. 1991). 


In the instant case, Adarand acknowledges that if the 
CFLHD is merely doing what Congress ordered it to do, 
the agency’s action is constitutional unless the underly- 
ing legislation is unconstitutional. For purposes of this 
appeal, Adarand has stipulated that section 502 of the 
Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. § 644(g)) provides the statu- 
tory authority for the SCC program, and that section 502 
satisfies the evidentiary requirements of Fullilove. 
Adarand also concedes that the CFLHD’s utilization of 
the SCC program is not beyond the agency’s delegated 
power under section 502. The gravamen of Adarand’s 
argument is that the CFLHD must make particularized 
findings of past discrimination to justify its race-con- 
scious SCC program under Croson because the precise 
goals of the challenged SCC program were fashioned and 
specified by an agency and not by Congress. 


We disagree with Adarand’s argument that Croson 
prevents the CFLHD from playing the role envisaged for 
it by the Small Business Act. The question of congres- 
sional action was not before the Court in Croson. In 
Croson, the Supreme Court held that a strict level of 
scrutiny must be applied to state or local public minority 
preference programs. Justice O’Connor’s opinion, joined 
by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice White, explicitly 
distinguished Fullilove on the grounds that state and local 
governments have no constitutional mandate similar to 
or equal to Congress’s specific constitutional mandate 
under section 5 to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment. 
Rather, section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment took 


App. 18 


power away from the states and gave it to Congress. 488 
U.S. at 490 (Opinion of O’Connor, J.). 


Adarand cites no authority, nor do we know of any, 
to support the proposition that a federal agency must 
make independent findings to justify the use of a benign 
race-conscious program implemented in accordance with 
federal requirements.'' In contrast to the situation in 
Croson, no state procurement or minority business policy 
is implicated by Adarand’s claims. If particularized find- 
ings to justify implementation of a federal remedial pro- 
gram are not required of a state, Ellis, 961 F.2d at 916, 
they clearly are not required of a federal agency, such as 
CFLHD, which Adarand concedes is obligated to admin- 
ister the remedial program. 


The lesson that we glean from Fullilove and Croson is 
that the federal government, acting under congressional 
authority, can engage more freely in affirmative action 
than states and localities. Ellis, 961 F.2d at 915-16. The 
validity of that proposition was reaffirmed in Metro 
Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547, reh’g denied, 497 


1! The principal circuit opinion upon which Adarand relies 
~ H.K. Porter Co. v. Metropolitan Dade County, 975 F.2d 762 (11th 
Cir. 1992) —- was recently vacated on the joint motion of the 
parties and remanded for dismissal of the action by the district 
court. 998 F.2d 892 (11th Cir. 1993). That case, in any event, was 
inapposite; it dealt with a local set-aside program and never 
addressed the issue of a federal agency's implementation of a 
statutory directive. 


App. 19 


U.S. 1050 (1990), where the Court put to rest any linger- 
ing doubts about the continuing vitality of Fullilove: 


Croson cannot be read to undermine our deci- 
sion in Fullilove. In fact, must of the language 
and reasoning in Croson reaffirmed the lesson of 
Fullilove that race-conscious classifications 
adopted by Congress to address racial and eth- 
nic discrimination are subject to a differen’ =tan- 
dard than such classifications prescribed by 
state and local governments.” 


Id. at 565. Indeed, the Metro Broadcasting majority held 
that even non-remedial race-conscious measures manda- 
ted by Congress are constitutionally permissible if they 
satisfy intermediate scrutiny. !? 


Cc. 


By its enactment of section 502, Congress accorded 
broad discretion to agencies to implement the remedial 
goals of the Small Business Act. Although Congress did 
not dictate specific percentayre goals for agencies to meet, 
the language of section 502 clearly contemplates that 


12 Metro Broadcasting concerned two programs through 
which the Federal Communications Commission chooses the 
owner of a broadcast station partly on the basis of an applicant's 
race, ethnicity, or surname. In sustaining the program against an 
equal-protection attack, the Supreme Court first considered the 
stated aim of the government’s program (“enhancing broadcast 
diversity”) and held that this interest qualifies as a sufficiently 
important governmental goal. 110 S. Ct. at 3008-09. Because the 
program was substantially related to achievement of that objec- 
tive, it satisfied equal protection requirements. 


App. 20 


agencies will exceed the government-wide DBE participa- 
tion goal of “not less than 5 percent.” 15 U.S.C. § 644(g)(1) 
(emphasis added). The legislative history also evidences 
Congress’s intention that each agency establish DBE goals 
above the 5% government-wide goal established by the 
President. H.R. Rep. No. 100-1070, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 
73 (1988), reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5401, 5507. The 
SCC program is promulgated pursuant to this specific 
congressional delegation. In implementing the SCC pro- 
gram, CFLHD thus did exactly what Congress explicitly 
directed it to do: provide a means to ensure “the maximum 
practicable opportunity” for disadvantaged small business 
participation in federal procurement. 15 U.S.C. § 644(g) 
(emphasis added). 


Adarand’s argument that the racial preference of the 
SCC program is a discretionary agency action ignores the 
entity which created the presumption of minority disad- 
vantage. The challenged SCC program derives its eligi- 
bility criteria from STAA and STURAA, which in turn 
incorporated the presumption of section 8(d) of the Small 
Business Act, 15 U.S.C. § 637(d)). Under section 8(d), a 
small “socially and economically disadvantaged” busi- 
ness is one that is at least 51% “owned by one or more 
socially and economically disadvantaged individuals,” 
and “whose management and daily business operations 
are controlled by one or more of such individuals.” Id. 
§ 637(d)(3)(C). Section 8(d) presumes “that socially and 
economically disadvantaged individuals include Black 
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, 
Asian Pacific Americans, and other minorities ** * .” Id. 
By incorporating that presumption into STAA and 
STURAA, Congress reaffirmed its mandate that federal 


2 eat ht alte tear Binet Ciatatne Mt tiled. se, 1a 


App. 21 


procurement opportunities be made more readily avail- 
able to qualified minority-owned business enterprises. 
That rebuttable presumption also is found in the chal- 
lenged SCC program. The SCC program thus provides 
subcontracting opportunities for the very type of small 
businesses that Congress had in mind when it enacted 
section 502 of the Small Business Act. 


The conclusion that the CFLHD is acting within the 
bounds of the statutory authority of the Small Business 
Act is impelled by Adarand’s own concession that the 
CFLHD’s implementation of the SCC program was not 
beyond the agency’s delegated power under section 502. 
Because the SCC program comports with the legislative 
design of the Small Business Act to increase subcontract- 
ing opportunities for minority-owned small businesses, it 
is reasonably related to the purposes of the enabling 
legislation. Cf. Hecla Mining Co. v. United States, 909 F.2d 
1371, 1375-76 (10th Cir. 1990) (“[W]hen Congress explic- 
itly or implicitly delegates to agencies the power to eluci- 
date a specific provision of a statute, the resulting agency 
action is entitled to deference”) (citing Chevron U.S.A., 
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 
843-44 (1984)). 


We also disagree with Adarand’s argument that Con- 
gress must mandate precise percentage goals for minority 
small business participation. Such a position ignores the 
principal lesson of Fullilove. The splintered Fullilove court 
did not uphold the challenged federal program because a 
specific percentage set-aside was mandated by Congress, 
but rather because the program, in spite of the racial and 


App. 22 


ethnic preference, satisfied equal protection require- 
ments. 448 U.S. at 480 (Opinion of Burger, C.J.). In reaf- 
firming Fullilove as the proper standard for assessing the 
constitutionality of benign race-conscious measures, the 
Court in Metro Broadcasting noted that, notwithstanding 
the “ ‘great weight’ ” given to decisions of Congress, even 
congressionally-mandated benign race-conscious mea- 
sures must satisfy equal protection requirements. 110 S. 
Ct. at 3011 (citation omitted). 


D. 


Because Adarand stipulates that section 502 satisfies 
the evidentiary requirements of Fullilove, the only ques- 
tion to be resolved is whether the SCC program imple- 
mented by the CFLHD is narrowly tailored to achieve the 
remedial purpose of section 502. We hold that it is. 


The program upheld in Fullilove was the model for 
the DBE program implemented by the DOT pursuant to 
STAA and STURAA, and utilized in the SCC program 
challenged by Adarand. Although the district court mis- 
takenly treated the challenged program as being autho- 
rized STAA and STURAA, its analysis is equally 
applicable in assessing the constitutionality of the SCC 
program under the authority of section 502 of the Small 
Business Act. 


The district court found that the challenged program 
satisfied Fullilove because it serves important govern- 
mental objectives and is substantially related to achieve- 
ment of those objectives. 790 F. Supp. at 244. The district 
court concluded that the challenged program was nar- 
rowly tailored to achieve its statutory objectives because 


ede Ailes ~~ ee err ey) 


App. 23 


it does not mandate its provisions in an inflexible man- 
ner. It ensures minimum impact on non-DBEs because 


[t]o qualify for DBE status a business must dem- 
onstrate, via the annual certification process, 
that it is a bona fide DBE, eligible to participate 
in the program. This annual certification mecha- 
nism is reasonably calculated to insure legiti- 
mate, qualified participants, so that the program 
does not become overinclusive in the sense of 
tolerating abuse of the program by non-DBE’s. 
Likewise the program is not underinclusive 
since it provides that businesses not entitled to 
the presumption of DBE status may apply for 
certification and establish their qualifications to 
participate. 


Id. 


We hold that the SCC program is constitutional 
because it is narrowly tailored to achieve its significant 
governmental purpose of providing subcontracting 
opportunities for small disadvantaged business enter- 
prises, as required under section 502 of the Small Busi- 
ness Act. The qualifying criteria of the SCC program is 
not limited to members of racial minority groups. 
Because eligibility is based on economic disadvantage, 
non-minority-owned businesses also are eligible to par- 
ticipate. The SCC program is not overinclusive since 
minority businesses that do not satisfy the economic cri- 
teria cannot qualify for DBE status. Furthermore, the SCC 
program is “appropriately limited in extent and dura- 
tion” because federal procurement and construction con- 
tracting practices are subject to regular “resassessment 
and reevaluation by Congress.” See Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 
489 (Opinion of Burger, C.]J.). 


App. 24 


Significantly, the SCC program does not require small 
business prime contractors to submit and adhere to a 
subcontracting plan with specific DBE goals. The prime 
contractor in this case had the option, not the obligation, 
of subcontracting with a DBE; it exercised its own judg- 
ment (albeit attracted by CFLHD’s monetary inducement) 
in rejecting Adarand’s bid for the subcontract. Because 
the SCC program induces, rather than compels, prime 
contractors to hire DBE subcontractors, it cannot be said 
to violate equal protection requirements. As Fullilove 
teaches, “[i]t is not a constitutional defect in this program 
that it may disappoint the expectations of nonminority 
firms.” 448 U.S. at 484. 


IV. 


Having rejected Adarand’s arguments, and having 
held that the district court did not err in relying on 
Fullilove rather than Croson, that accordingly, no Croson 
findings were necessary, and that the Small Business Act 
which authorized the SCC program meets constitutional 
requirements, we will affirm the district court’s order of 
April 21, 1992 in favor of the Government. 


AFFIRMED. 


App. 25 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
TENTH CIRCUIT 
OFFICE OF THE CLERK 
C404 UNITED STATES COURTHOUSE 
DENVER, COLORADO 80294 
(303) 844-3157 


ROBERT L. HOECKER PATRICK FISHER 
CLERK CHIEF DEPUTY 


February 16, 1994 


Mr. James P. Turner 

Mr. John R. Dunne 

Ms. Lisa C. Wilson 

Mr. David K. Flynn 

Ms. Lisa J. Stark 

United States Department of Justice 
Civil Rights Div., Appellate Section 
P.O. Box 66078 

Washington, DC 20035-6078 


Ms. Marybeth Martin 

Mr. Richard S. Ugelow 

United States Department of Justice 
Employment Litigation Section 

P. O. Box 65968 

Washington, DC 20035-5968 


Mr. Stephen D. Taylor 

Office of the United States Attorney 
Civil Division 

1961 Stout Street 

Suite 1100 Drawer 3608 

Denver, CO 80294 


Mr. John G. Nelson 

Mr. Todd S. Welch 

Mr. William Perry Pendley 
Mountain States Legal Foundation 
1660 Lincoln Street 

Suite 2300 

Denver, CO 80264 


App. 26 App. 27 
Re: 92-1242, Adarand Constructors v. Skinner IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
Lower docket: 90-C-1413 | FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 
Dear Counsel: CASE NO. 90-C-1413 
Enclosed is a copy of the opinion of the court in the ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 


captioned case. Judgment in accordance with the opinion 


has been entered today. Plaintiff, 
v. 
Please call this office if you have questions. 
SAMUEL K. SKINNER, et al., 
Senay, Defendants. 
ROBERT L. HOECKER 
Clerk 
By: /s/ Beth Morris MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER 
Deputy Clerk | 
RLH:mb (Filed Apr. 21, 1992) 
:mbm 
cc: CARRIGAN, J. 


ble Jim R. Carrigan, District Judge 
oe ® : Plaintiff Adarand Constructors, Inc. (Adarand), a 


Colorado corporation, commenced this action to chai- 
lenge the constitutionality of the federal Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprise (DBE) program. Defendants are Sam- 
uel K. Skinner, Secretary of the Department of Transpor- 
i tation (DOT); Thomas D. Larson, Administrator of the 

Federal Highway Administration (FHA); Louis N. Mac- 

Donald, Administrator of Region VIII of the FHA; and 

Jerry Budwig, Division Engineer of the Central Federal 

Lands Highway Division (CFLHD). Presently pending is 

the plaintiff's motion for summary judgment seeking a 

permanent injunction against the DOT, the FHA and the 

CFLHD and a declaratory judgment ruling the federal 

DBE program unconstitutional both on .ts face and as 

applied. Also pending is the defendants’ cross motion for 


App. 28 


summary judgment seeking a ruling that the DBE pro- 
gram and its implementation are constitutional. 


The parties have fully briefed the issues and oral 
argument would not materially facilitate the decision pro- 
cess. An amicus curiae brief has been filed by The Rocky 
Mountain Enterprise Legal Defense Fund. Jurisdiction 
exists under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and § 1343. 


I. Facts and Procedure. 


On September 11, 1989, Adarand', a non-DBE guard- 
rail subcontracting business submitted the lowest sub- 
contract bid for a portion of guardrail work on the West 
Delores County, Colorado highway project. Plaintiff's bid 
was rejected and a DBE who had submitted a higher bid 
was awarded the subcontract. 


This action was brought under 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 
2000(d) to challenge the constitutional validity of the DBE 
program promulgated under federal highway funding 
provisions of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 
1982, Pub. L. No. 97-424 § 105(f), 96 Stat. 2097 (STAA) and 
the Surface Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assis- 
tance Act of 1987, Pub.L. No. 100-17 § 106(c), 101 Stat. 132 
(STURAA). See also 49 C.F.R. §§ 23 et seq. Specifically, the 
plaintiff challenges the DBE program? as administered by 
the CFLHD within Colorado. 


! Adarand is managed by Randy Pech, a white male. Its 
stockholders include Valery J. Pech (Randy Pech’s wife), Steven 
M. Goeglein, Ruth Pech and Linda Cosden. 


2 The challenged DBE program is not exclusively a race- 
conscious program. The program includes women owned busi- 
nesses as well as other “disadvantaged” businesses. Thus, the 


App. 29 


Il. Analysis. 


STAA and STURAA create federal programs 
designed to benefit socially and economically disadvan- 
taged business enterprises. Section 105(f) of STAA and 
§ 106(c) of STURAA both provide in pertinent part: 
“le]xcept to the extent that the Secretary determines 
otherwise, not less than 10 per centum of the amounts 
authorized to be appropriated under this Act shall be 
expended with small business concerns owned and con- 
trolled by socially and economically disadvantaged indi- 
viduals as defined by section 8(a) of the Small Business 
Act (15 U.S.C. § 637(a)).” Pub.L. 97-424 § 105(f), Pub.L. 
100-17 § 106(c). 


The CFLHD, as a recipient of federal highway funds, 
participates in this program.* Discrimination based on 
race, color, national origin or sex in the award or perfor- 
mance of federal contracts under STAA and STURAA is 
prohibited, and participating agencies are directed to 
“take all necessary and reasonable steps . . . to ensure that 
minority business enterprises have the maximum oppor- 
tunity to compete for and perform contracts.” 49 C.F.R. 
§§ 23.7 and 23.43. States or federal agencies may award 
less than ten percent of such contracts to DBE‘s upon 
application to and approval by the Secretary of Transpor- 
tation. 49 C.F.R. §§ 23.64(e), 23.65 and Part 23 Subpart D, 
Appendix D (1989). 


plaintiff’s contention that the DBE program awards contracts 
solely on the basis of race is incorrect. 


3 The CFLHD includes all or parts of Arizona, California, 
Colorado, Hawaii, Kansas, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, 
North Dakota, South Dakota, Texas, Utah and Wyoming. 


App. 30 


Federal regulations promulgated in response to 
STAA and STURAA define DBE’s as small businesses 
which are at least fifty-one percent owned and managed 
by disadvantaged individuals.* 49 C.F.R. § 23.62. These 
businesses qualify for DBE designation as well as prefer- 
ential consideration in the award of subcontracts on fed- 
eral highway projects. Id. Such businesses must be 
certified annually as “disadvantaged” and they maintain 
that status unless and until decertified by the participat- 
ing state or agency. 49 C.F.R. § 23.51. Businesses not 
entitled to be presumed eligible for DBE status may apply 
and, upon sufficient showing, become certified by the 
Small Business Administration or the state as qualified 
for that status. Small Business Act § 8(a), 15 U.S.C. 
§ 637(a). 


Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment seeks a 
declaratory judgment and permanent injunction against 
the DOT, the FHA and the CFLHD until specific findings 
of discrimination are made by the defendants as allegedly 
required by City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 U.S. 469 
(1989). Defendants’ motion for summary judgment seeks 
a ruling that the DBE program and its implementation are 
constitutional under Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 
(1980) and Metro Broadcasting v. F.C.C., 110 S.Ct. 2997 
(1990). 


4 The category of disadvantaged individuals under 49 
C.F.R. § 23.62 is rebuttably presumed to include “women, Black 
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Asian- 
Pacific Americans, [and] Asian-Indian Americans.” 


App. 31 


Summary judgment is proper if the pleadings, depo- 
sitions and affidavits, if any, show that there is no genu- 
ine issue of material fact and that the moving party is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex Corp. v. 
Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322 (1986); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The 
party opposing a properly supported summary judgment 
motion may not rest upon the mere allegations of the 
complaint, but must set forth specific facts showing that 
there is a genuine issue for trial. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248-49 (1986). Because no genuine 
issues of material fact are here disputed, this matter is 
ripe for decision on the pending cross motions for sum- 
mary judgment. 


In Croson, the Supreme Court held that, when insti- 
tuting race-conscious measures, states and local govern- 
ment entities must make findings of prior discrimination. 
Croson, 488 U.S. at 490. Because no specific findings were 
made as to past discrimination, the City of Richmond’s 
thirty percent minority set-aside program failed to satisfy 
strict scrutiny analysis and, therefore, was held uncon- 
stitutional. 


Defendants distinguish Croson from the instant case 
noting that, unlike Croson, the defendants here are all 
federal actors. Defendants not that Justice O’Connor, in 
part of the Croson opinion in which she was joined by 
Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice White, distinguished 
Croson from Fullilove by noting that “Congress may iden- 
tify and redress the effects of society-wide discrimination 
[and] need not make specific findings of discrimination.” 
Id. Defendants argue that Fullilove controls here. 


App. 32 


In Fullilove, the Court, in upholding a federal funding 
program, stated that deference to the legislative authority 
of Congress under the Commerce Clause, the Spending 
Clause and the Civil War Amendments was appropriate. 
Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 475-478 (citations omitted). The 
Court specifically stated that: 


“[a] program that employs racial or ethnic crite- 
ria, even in a remedial context, calls for close 
examination; yet we are bound to approach our 
task with appropriate deference to the Congress, 
a co-equal branch charged by the Constitution 
with the power to ‘provide for the general Wel- 
fare of the United States’ and ‘to enforce, by 
appropriate legislation’ the equal protection 
guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment”. Id. 
at 472 (citations omitted). 


Similarly, in the more recent decision of Metro Broad- 
casting, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of 
a federal agency minority preference program stating 
that: 


“benign race-conscious measures mandated by 
Congress - even when those measures are not 
‘remedial’ . . . are constitutionally permissible to 
the extent that they serve important government 
objectives within the power of Congress and are 
substantially related to the achievement of those 
objectives.” Metro Broadcasting, 110 S.Ct. at 3000. 


The Court found of “overriding significance” the fact that 
the minority program was “specifically approved - 
indeed, mandated — by Congress.” Id. at 3008-09. See also 
Michigan Road Builders Ass‘n, Inc. v. Blanchard, 761 F.Supp. 
1303, 1314 (W.D.Mich. 1991) (upholding a state’s applica- 
tion of the STAA and STURAA programs). 


App. 33 


Croson is readily distinguishable from Fullilove and 
Metro Broadcasting. Croson did not address the issue of 
congressional action but decided what procedures state 
and local government entities must follow in evaluating 
minority public works programs. Croson specifically pro- 
vided “[t]hat [because] Congress may identify and 
redress the effects of society wide discrimination does not 
mean that, a fortiori, the States and their political subdivi- 
sions are free to decide that such remedies are appropri- 
ate.” Croson, 488 U.S. at 490. 


It is clear under these cases that race-conscious clas- 
sifications established by Congress are subject to a stan- 
dard of review different from that applicable to similar 
classifications prescribed by state and local governments. 
The Supreme Court has declared: 


“Croson cannot be read to undermine [the] deci- 
sion in Fullilove. In fact much of the language 
and reasoning in Croson reaffirmed the lesson of 
Fullilove that race-conscious classifications 
adopted by Congress are subject to a different 
standard than such classifications prescribed by 
state and local governments.” Metro Broadcast- 
ing, 110 S.Ct. at 3009. 


The overriding distinction between the program 
upheld in Fullilove and the instant program, when com- 
pared to the program held unconstitutional in Croson, is 
undoubtedly the congressional mandate behind the Full- 
ilove program and this one. Further, the ruling and effect 
of Fullilove are clearly acknowledged in Croson. Croson, 
488 U.S. at 491. 


Thus Fullilove, Croson and Metro Broadcasting teach 
that “the federal government can, by virtue of the 


App. 34 


enforcement clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, 
engage in affirmati-e action with a freer hand than states 
and municipalities.” Michigan Road Builders, 761 F.Supp. 
at 1314 (citing Milwaukee County Pavers Association v. 
Fiedler, 922 F.2d 419, 423-24 (7th Cir. 1991)). Nothing in 
the above cases demands that the federal government 
assess incidents of past discrimination in all areas of the 
country where federal programs apply. 


Rather these and other cases recognize that Congress 
is specifically empowered to remedy the effects of dis- 
abling discrimination, remove such barriers and “enforce, 
by appropriate legislation,” the equal protection guaran- 
tees of the Fourteenth Amendment. Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 
456-472, 476; Croson, 488 U.S. at 484-508. See also Wygant v. 
Jackson Board of Education, 476 U.S. 267, 277 (1985) (plu- 
rality opinion); Michigan Road Builders, 761 F.Supp. at 
1313-14; Ellis v. Skinner, 753 F.Supp. 329 (D. Utah 1990). 


The STAA, STURAA and DBE programs whose con- 
stitutionality is here attacked were authorized by Con- 
gress and mandated for all agencies and states which 
receive funds under them. Neither CFLHD nor its sub- 
parts in Colorado independently adopted the ten percent 
set-aside. Rather, it was required by the federal regula- 
tions under which CFLHD operates. Thus the mere fact 
that CFLHD implements a federal program within Colo- 
rado does not convert it into a state program requiring 
Croson-type analysis. Accordingly, Croson is not control- 
ling here because the challenged regulations and actions 
involve only federal actors acting pursuant to congres- 
sional mandate. Rather Fullilove and Metro Broadcasting 
control. 


. a nt A - — ~~ —— eS a . 


App. 35 


In determining the constitutionality of the challenged 
DBE program, it must be demonstrated that the program 
serves important governmental objectives and that it is 
substantially related to achievement of these objectives.5 
See Fullilove, 488 U.S. at 473-475 and 480-492. Although 
Congress made no specific findings on the subject, the 
Court in Fullilove was satisfied, as I am here, that Con- 
gress had “abundant historical basis from which it could 
conclude” such findings sufficient to demonstrate impor- 
tant governmental objectives underlying the program. Id. 
at 478. 


Because I am satisfied that the instant program 
serves appropriate governmental objectives, the question 
becomes whether it is narrowly tailored to achieve the 
objectives of STAA and STURAA without violating con- 
Stitutional guarantees. The DBE program must be 
analyzed to assure that it does not mandate its provisions 
in an inflexible manner and that it successfully ensures 
minimum impact on non-DBEs. See Id. at 480; Metro 
Broadcasting, 110 S.Ct. at 3027-28. 


To qualify for DBE status a business must demon- 
Strate, via the annual certification process, that it is a 
bona fide DBE, eligible to participate in the program. 49 
C.FR. § 23.62 and Part 23, Subpart D, Appendix C. This 
annual certification mechanism is reasonably calculated 


5 The Supreme Court in Fullilove noted that “[section] 5 [of 
the Fourteenth Amendment] is a positive grant of legislative 
power authorizing Congress to exercise its discretion in deter- 
mining whether and what legislation is needed to secure the 
guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment.” Fullilove, 448 U.S. at 
476. 


App. 36 


to .nsure legitimate, qualified participants, so that the 
program does not become overinclusive in the sense of 
tolerating abuse of the program by non-DBE’s. Likewise 
the program is not underinclusive since it provides that 
businesses not entitled to the presumption of DBE status 
may apply for certification and establish their qualifica- 
tions to participate. Id. Finally, waiver of the mandatory 
ten percent minimum is provided through a state or 
agency's application to and approval by the Secretary of 
Transportation. 49 C.F.R. §§ 23.64(e), 23.65 and Part 23, 
Subpart D, Appendix D. 


Plaintiff correctly points out that the CFLHD. is 
required to comply fully with the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the constitution. However, the plaintiff’s 
assertion that CFLHD has failed to comply with applica- 
ble regulations is not supported by evidence. 


It is significant that the instant legislation and result- 
ing programs were modeled after the programs upheld in 
Fullilove. 1 conclude that the DOT, FHA and CFLHD’s 
policies do not violate equal protection since they are 
supported by longstanding congressional policies related 
to achieving the important governmenta! objective of 
remedying discrimination. Additionally, the challenged 
programs are narrowly tailored to achieve their legiti- 
mate objectives. I therefore conclude that the administra- 
tive program under which the defendants have acted 
meets the requirements of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments. 


Accordingly, it is ORDERED that: 


(1) the defendants’ motion for summary judg- 
ment is granted; 


App. 37 


(2) the plaintiff's motion for summary judg- 
ment is denied; and 


(3) the plaintiff’s claims and action are dis- 
missed with prejudice. 


Dated at Denver, Colorado April 21, 1992. 


BY THE COURT: 


/s/ Jim R. Carrigan 
JIM R. CARRIGAN 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT 
JUDGE 


ENTERED 
ON THE DOCKET 


APR 22 1992 


JAMES R. MANGBEAKER 
BY JM CLERK 


App. 38 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 
JUDGE JIM R. CARRIGAN 


CERTIFICATE OF MAILING 


I certify that I mailed a true and correct copy of the 
Order signed by Judge Carrigan to: 


William Pendley, Esq. 
1660 Lincoln st. #2300 
Denver, CO 80264 


Stephen Taylor, Esq. 
Assistant U.S. Attorney 


John Dunne, Esq. 

Assistant Attorney General 
U.S. Department of Justice 
P.O. Box 65968 
Washington, DC 20035-5968 


Magistrate Abram 


/s/ Lucy Stis 
Deputy Clerk 


Dated: April 21, 1992 
Re: 90-C-1413 


App. 39 


15 USC § 644(g) 


(g) Goals for participation of small business concerns 
in procurement contracts. (1) The President shall annu- 
ally establish Government-wide goals for procurement 
contacts awarded to small business concerns and small 
business concerns owned and controlled by socially and 
economically disadvantaged individuals. The Govern- 
ment-wide goal for participation by small business con- 
cerns shall be established at not less than 20 percent of 
the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal 
year. The Government-wide goal for participation by 
small business concerns owned and controlled by socially 
and economically disadvantaged individuals shall be 
established at not less than 5 percent of the total value of 
all prime contract and subcontract awards for each fiscal 
year. Notwithstanding the Government-wide goal, each 
agency shall have an annual goal that presents, for that 
agency, the maximum practicable opportunity for small 
business concerns and small business concerns owned 
and controlled by socially and economically disadvan- 
taged individuals to participate in the performance of 
contracts let by such agency. The Administration and the 
Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Pol- 
icy shall, when exercising their authority pursuant to 
paragraph (2), insure that the cumulative annual prime 
contract goals for all agencies meet or exceed the annual 
Government-wide prime contract goal established by the 
President pursuant to this paragraph. 


(2) The head of each Federal agency shall, after consul- 
tation with the Administration, establish goals for the 
participation by small business concerns, and by small 
business concerns owned and controlled by socially and 


App. 40 


economically disadvantaged individuals, in procurement 
contracts of such agency. Goals established under this 
subsection shall be jointly established by the Administra- 
tion and the head of each Federal agency and shall real- 
istically reflect the potential of small business concerns 
and small business concerns owned and controlled by 
socially and economically disadvantaged individuals to 
perform such contracts and to perform subcontracts 
under such contracts. Whenever the Administration and 
the head of any Federal agency fail to agree on estab- 
lished goals, the disagreement shall be submitted to the 
Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Pol- 
icy for final determination. For the purpose of establish- 
ing goals under this subsection the head of each Federal 
agency shall make consistent efforts to annually expand 
participation by small business concerns from each indus- 
try category in procurement contracts of the agency, 
including participation by small business concerns 
owned and controlled by socially and economically dis- 
advantaged individuals. The head of each Federal agency, 
in attempting to attain such participation, shall consider - 


(A) contracts awarded as the result of unre- 
stricted competition; and 


(B) contracts awarded after competition 
restricted to eligible small business concerns 
under this section and under the program estab- 
lished under section 8(a) [15 USCS § 637(a)]. 


App. 41 


No. 92-1242 


In the UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


» 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 


FEDERICO PENA, Secretary of Department of 
Transportation, et al., 


Defendants-Appellees. 


APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT 
COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


APPELLANT’S REPLY BRIEF 


RECEIVED 

United States Court of Appeals 
Tenth Circuit 

Feb. 17, 1993 


ROBERT L. HOECKER 
Clerk 


: 
: 


App. 42 


William Perry Pendley 

Todd S. Welch 

John G. Nelson 

MOUNTAIN STATES LEGAL 
FOUNDATION 

1660 Lincoln Street, Suite 2300 
Denver, Colorado 80264 

(303) 816-0244 


x + * 


work. Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Education, 476 U.S. 267, 275 
(1986) (plurality opinion). Instead, its only possible func- 
tion is simply to increase the amount of business going to 
minority-owned firms. This is “discrimination for its own 
sake”, which is the very essence of a constitutional viola- 
tion. Regents of the Univ. of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 267, 
305 (1978) (opinion of Powell, J.). 


The factor which determines the level of preference 
under the SBA is the capacity of minority-owned firms to 
do work. This factor has no connection whatsoever to the 
level of discrimination identified, or to the appropriate 
remedy therefore [sic]. Indeed, this structure actually 
inverts the normal operation of a remedial program. 
Under a true remedial program, the level of preference 
accorded to the favored group should bear a relationship 
to the amount of discrimination members of the group 
have suffered. However, under the “maximum practica- 
ble” rule, as the level of pre-existing discrimination (and 
hence of the need for a remedy) decreases, the level of the 
goals for minority participation will actually increase. 


App. 43 


Federal Defendants assert that the SBA is, in fact, 
remedial because Congressional files contained some evi- 
dence of discrimination against minorities when Con- 
gress enacted the goals provision. Brief for the Federal 
Appellees at 35. Adarand concedes, for the sake of dis- 
cussion, that this evidence is sufficient to satisfy the 
evidentiary requirements of Fullilove. However, this con- 
cession is not enough to save Federal Defendants’ argu- 
ment. The reason is that Federal Defendants still must 
show that the provision is sufficiently well tailored to 
satisfy the requirements of Fullilove. This they cannot do. 


In sum, the plain language of the SBA goals provi- 
sion convincingly shows that it is not remedial in nature 
or intent. Adarand has already shown that the inclusion 
of the “maximum practicable” language in the SBA goals 
provision renders the provision unconstitutional under 
both strict and intermediate scrutiny. See Appellant's 
Opening Brief at 36-38 (strict scrutiny); Appellant’s Open- 
ing Brief at 41 (intermediate scrutiny). The same conclu- 
sion applies even if Fullilove is chosen as the proper 
standard of review. 


© Much of this evidence is not part of the legislative history. 
See Brief for the Federal Appellees at 32-35. Consideration of 
this evidence is permissible under Fullilove. Fullilove, 448 U.S. 
448, 502-503 (opinion of Powell, J.). However, strictly speaking, 
it is not proper in this case, because this evidence was not 
introduced in the district court and is not part of the administra- 
tive record. See Fed. R. App. P. 10(a). 


App. 44 


CONCLUSION 


Based upon the foregoing reasoning and authorities, 
Appellant Adarand Constructors, Inc. respectfully 
requests this Court to reverse the decision of the District 
Court and grant judgment for Adarand in this case. 


* * * 


es 
s 
‘ 


App. 45 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 90-C-1413 

ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, 
Plaintiff, 

vs. 


SAMUEL K. SKINNER, Secretary of the Department of 
Transportation; ROBERT E. FARRIS, Administrator of the 
Federal Highway Administration; LOUIS N. Mac- 
DONALD, Administrator of Region VIII of the Federal 
Highway Administration; and JERRY BUDWIG, Division 
Engineer of the Central Federal Lands Highway Division, 


Defendants. 


DEPOSITION OF JERRY BUDWIG 
MARCH 19, 1991 


* * 7” 


[p. 23] A. No. No, I’m not capable. 


Q. Do you know how many DBE contractors there 
are in the state of Colorado? 


A. No. 


Q. Do you know how many 8(a) DBE contractors 
there are in Colorado? 


A. No. 


Q. Do you know whether or not there has ever been 
any discrimination by the Central Division or its prede- 
cessors in the highway construction industry in the state 
of Colorado? 


App. 46 


A. I would say that there has not been. 


Q. Has your boss or anyone above him ever asked 
you to make a study or report about any alleged discrimi- 
nation in the highway construction industry in this divi- 
sion? 


A. No. 


Q. Do you know what percentage of the highway 
contracts are generally subcontracted? 


A. I know it’s not supposed to exceed 50 percent 
under the terms of our contracts. 


Q. But you don’t - you don’t - okay. Mr. Robinson 
testified that if —- that meeting certain requirements, 
which I’m not going to go through with you, because I 
don’t think it’s relevant 


* * * 


[p. 35] Q. In discussing the effects - evaluating the 
effects of the subcontracting compensation clause, do you 
know who that clause burdens in terms of the construc- 
tion industry? 


A. No. 
Q. Do you know who it benefits? 


A. I would think that it would benefit the recipients 
of the work under the provisions of the clause and proba- 
bly benefits the prime contractors who avail themselves 
of the bonus provisions of that clause. 


Q. So it would - if I understand you correctly, it 
would benefit the prime contractor who availed himself 


App. 47 


of that provision and the DBE who received the sub- 
contract as a result of that; is that correct? 


A. I certainly wouldn’t expect it in every instance 
that’s the way it would work out, but I think overall it 
works out that way. 


Q. And it would probably burden the subcontrac- 
tors who are not DBEs who do that same kind of work? 


A. That’s a line of reasoning I won’t argue with. 
There is some logic tnere. 


Q. Do you know how long the subcontracting [p. 
36] compensation clause will be used? 


A. I’m not aware that its end is in sight. 


Q. Have there been any discussions about a need to 
end the use of that provision? 


A. Not that I’ve been a part of it. 


Q. Okay. Has anyone ever reported to you, and I’m 
talking about a person that reports to you that they’ve 
been discriminated against in the highway industry? 


A. No. 


Q. Are special skills required in the construction 
industry? 


A. Yes. 


Q. Have you attempted to use any programs in - to 
include DBEs in construction contracts or — well, in con- 
struction contracts that are not race based? 


App. 48 


A. I think the answer is no, unless you want to - 
again, want to do the woman-owned businesses, that’s 


not race based, not necessarily anyway. 


Q. Other than women. 


A. Other than women I think the answer to that 
would be no. 


App. 49 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 90-C-1413 

ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, 
Plaintiff, 

vs. 


SAMUEL K. SKINNER, Secretary of the Department of 
Transportation; ROBERT E. FARRIS, Administrator of the 
Federal Highway Administration; LOUIS N. Mac- 
DONALD, Administrator of Region VIII of the Federal 
Highway Administration; and JERRY BUDWIG, Division 
Engineer of the Central Federal Lands Highway Division, 


Defendants. 


DEPOSITION OF JAMES L. ROBINSON 
MARCH 19, 1991 


+ * * 


[p. 45] development of the West Dolores project contract 
documents? 


A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Is that correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What was the goal at that time? 


A. I would have to look in the files to get the exact 
number, but I would say the total goal was in the range of 
12 to 15 percent. 


Q. What does the 12 to 15 percent represent? 


A. 


App. 50 


Dollars of our program. Typically our contract 


awards will be about $40 million per year, so the goal for 
the DBE then is in the range of four or five million 
through those three means of counting the numbers. 


Q. 
A. 
Q. 
A. 
Q. 


What happens if you don’t meet that goal? 
Mr. Budwig receives a chat from the supervisor. 
Does it change from year to year? 

In recent years it hasn’t changed greatly. 


Do you know if that goal is different for this 


division than it is for the other two 


* * * 


