FOR ARGUMEAL @) eee 5 
MAR 24 199 


No. 94-455 ei 
= OFFICE GF HE CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


* 


TYSON JOHNSON, ROBERT DEEVEY 
AND JOHN PAYNE, 


Petitioners, 


HOUSTON JONES, 
Respondent. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 


o 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENT 


¢ 


ANTHONY PINELLI Epwarp G. Proctor, JrR.* 
Attorney at Law SANDMAN, Levy and PetricH 
221 North LaSalle Street 134 North LaSalle Street 
Suite 2100 Suite 1323 

Chicago, Illinois 60601 Chicago, Illinois 60602 
(312) 641-0590 (312) 726-1692 


*Counsel of Record 


——————==Sa===—=—_= 
COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a district court’s refusal to grant summary 
judgment to a defendant who asserts a defense premised 
entirely upon a denial of committing any wrong, 
although otherwise unappealable, may be appealed 
immediately as a collateral order if the defendant is a 
public official who also asserts a qualified immunity 
defense. 


il 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF ALTE E Ue 6 occ ccewsccaccsscceetars iv 
JEST WIN a aks cc occvccssanueeaeraneeeeus 1 
PPO IRIE 5 652 6 wes dducwsewde vis eake manana: ] 
PES STO VEPU UD one 5 cnx es haan eunweee es Ore 2 
| err ern rere rer OPEC 2 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT....................... 7 
PAINS 0606694 canes bide hee eee 10 


A. PETITIONERS’ ASSERTION THAT A DEFEN- 
DANT WHO DENIES VIOLATING THE LAW 
AT ALL MAY ASSERT QUALIFIED IMMU- 
NITY AT BEST IS AN INCOMPLETE STATE- 
MENT OF THE APPLICABILITY OF 
QUALIFIED IMMUNITY OR IF TAKEN IN ITS 
BROADEST SENSE, A DEFENDANT WHO 
DENIES VIOLATING THE LAW IS SIMPLY 
ASSERTING A DEFENSE OF NO WRONG 
DOING AND IS NOT COLLATERAL TO THE 
MERITS AND THEREFORE IS NOT A QUALI- 
FIED IMMUNITY ISSUE AT ALL............ 10 


B. PETITIONERS’ POSITION THAT A DEFENSE 
OF “I DIDN’T DO IT” IS A QUALIFIED 
IMMUNITY DEFENSE IS ERRONEOUS AND 
THEIR ADDITIONAL PROPOSITION THAT A 
DEFENSE OF “I DIDN’T DO IT” MAY BE 
RAISED ON AN INTERLOCUTORY APPEAL 
IS NOT CONSISTENT WITH THIS COURT’S 
DECISIONS ON THIS ISSUE AND WOULD BE 
CONTRARY TO THE MEANING OF QUALI- 
FIED IMMUNITY, THE COLLATERAL ORDER 
DOCTRINE ANNOUNCED IN COHEN, AND 
TREE PENALITY COC Pie oc cece ccnckcusees 16 


ill 
TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 


C. THE COURT OF APPEALS RULE CAN BE 
MEANINGFULLY APPLIED ..........cceces. 25 


re wake ew kS Oe ede 8 5 eR e E 32 


iV 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Pages 
Cases 
Alexander v. City and County of San Francisco, 29 
Fen Revere GUNN Oe NIN oi viv wiew enc cue cca ics 18, 31 
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635 (1987)........... 7 
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 272 (1986)...... 31 


Bever v. Gilbertson, 724 F.2d 1083 (4th Cir. 1984) .... 17 
Brisk v. City of Miami Beach, Fla., 726 F.Supp. 


. LSTA TAIT Se ATTA, eT aaa 


SOG TE Win, TION goons caw cencecuescnccx, 18 
Byrd v. Brishke, 466 F.2d 6 (7th Cir. 1972)......... 6, 27 
Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 
US. DOL CEDUD oo ovo ccc cc ccccncccns, 9, 16, 17, 21 
Elliott v. Thomas, 937 F.2d 338 (7th Cir. 1991), cert. : 
denied, 112 S.Ct. 1242 (1992) ........ 4, 3h, Oe; 2, OO 
Evans v. Dillahunty, 711 F.2d 838 (8th Cir. 1983) .... 17 
Flanagan v. United States, 465 U.S. 259 (1984)....... 16 
Giuffre v. Bissell, 31 F.3d 1241 (3rd Cir. 1994)....... 31 
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 475 U.S. 800 (1982)........ passim 


Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 105 S.Ct. 2806, 86 
iG@.20 411 (ISOS)... 0520s ces. cd wae ele eas passim 


Rascon v. Hardiman, 803 F.2d 269 (7th Cir. 1986) .... 27 
Richardson-Merrell, Inc. v. Koller, 472 U.S. 424 


Se saw kd arate bak ke Cees od eure 19 
Siegert v. Gilley, 500 U.S. 226 (1991)................. 25 
Unwin v. Campell, 863 F.2d 124 (1st Cir. 1988)...... 25 


——— 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 

Wilson v. City of Chicago, 707 F.Supp. 379 
CTP, SOOOD ccc nen a hendebsshasdeueer eeeecerade ses 6 
Yang v. Hardin, 37 F.3d 282 (7th Cir. 1994)........ 6, 27 


STATUTES 
Ge Res Oh oi 65 3 hea aes eae tee 2, 24 
Se ie Es os ob beh e sac eerie ee eee 2.25 


No. 94-455 
¢ 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
e 


TYSON JOHN: UN, ROBERT DEEVEY 
AND JOHN PAYNE, 


Petitioners, 


HOUSTON JONES, 
Respondent. 


* 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 


+ 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENT 
* 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet.App.1la-3a) is 
reported at 26 F.3d 727. The opinion of the district court 


(Pet.App.4a-10a) is unreported. 


¢ 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on 
June 14, 1994. The petition for a writ of certiorari was 


filed on September 12, 1994, and was granted on January 


1 


6, 1995. The jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1254(1). 


STATUTES INVOLVED 


28 U.S.C. § 1291 provides in relevant part: “The 
courts of appeals * * * shall have jurisdiction of appeals 
from all final decisions of the district courts of the United 
eee 


42 U.S.C. § 1983 provides in relevant part: Every 
person who, under the color of any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Terri- 
tory * * * subjects * * * any citizen of the United States 
*** to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immu- 
nities secured by the constitution and laws, shall be liable 
to the party injured in an action at law * * * .” 


¢ 


STATEMENT 


1. On November 6, 1990, HOUSTON JONES had 
just purchased a few items at a grocery store near his 
residence after work and walked through the store park- 
ing lot to his vehicle. When he arrived at his car, he began 
experiencing physical manifestations of hypoglycemia, or 
more commonly known as insulin reaction. HOUSTON 
JONES proceeded to a muffler shop which was behind 
the store’s parking lot and was found there by the muffler 
shop attendant hitting his forehead against an aluminum 
back door to the shor Pet.App.5a. John Heidelmeier, an 
officer of the Villa «ark, Illinois, Police Department, 


EE 


responded to the report of an apparently intoxicated man 
at a muffler shop. When Heidelmeier arrived at the scene, 
he found HOUSTON JONES hitting his forehead against 
the aluminum door of the muffler shop building. 
Heidelmeier then approached HOUSTON JONES in an 
attempt to ascertain whether there was a problem. 
Pet.App.5a. 


Unable to obtain a coherent response from HOUSTON 
JONES, Heidelmeier assumed he was intoxicated and 
decided to arrest him. Pet.App.5a. Upon reaching for 
HOUSTON JONES, who was faced away from Officer 
Heidelmeier, HOUSTON JONES swung a hand back- 
wards at Heidelmeier. Heidelmeier then placed 
HOUSTON JONES in an arm lock and slammed him to 
the ground. Four more Villa Park police officers soon 
arrived and participated in the arrest. Pet.App.5a. From 
this point, the parties’ version of the facts diverge. 


HOUSTON JONES remembers specifically Officers 
Esposito and Heidelmeier administering repetitive blows 
and verbal abuse to him at the police station.’ After a 
significant period of time at the station, Officer PAYNE, a 
petitioner in this appeal, suggested that an ambulance be 
called. HOUSTON JONES was then taken to the hospital 
and treated for multiple trauma and several broken ribs. 
Pet.App.5a. He remained in the hospital for several days 
recovering from his injuries. 


HOUSTON JONES was charged in State court with 
the criminal offenses of disorderly conduct, battery upon 


1 Officers Esposito and Heidelmeier were not part of the 
appeal taken to the Circuit Court of Appeals. 


a police officer, and resisting arrest. At the trial in State 


court, his physician testified that as a consequence of him 
experiencing an insulin reaction at the time of his arrest, 
his recollection of relevant events would be very poor 
and he would probably have been greatly weakened. 
Pet.App.6a. However, according to his doctor, during an 
insulin reaction, he could be coherent for brief periods of 
time and could engage in conversation and control motor 
functions. Pet.App.6a. His coherence at the police station 
is evident in that the police officers’ reports state that he 
was telling them, at that time he was a veteran of war and 
that he is a diabetic and needed medical assistance. The 
State trial court acquitted Houston Jones of the criminal 
charges brought against him finding that it was not 
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Houston Jones 
had the mental capacity to commit the crimes of which he 
was charged. Pet.App.6a. 


HOUSTON JONES then brought this civil rights 
action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 in the United States 
District Court for the Northern District of Illinois against 
petitioners, JOHNSON, DEEVEY and PAYNE, and also 
against Officers Heidelmeier and Esposito, who are not 
part of this appeal. In relevant part, HOUSTON JONES 
alleged that the officers who are the Petitioners in this 
appeal, condoned the use of excessive force against him 
and that they were responsible because the beatings and 
abuse occurred in their presence. 


The parties engaged in discovery during which time 
the depositions of the plaintiff and all of the defendants 
were taken. The officers denied that they beat, struck or 
abused the plaintiff during the arrest or at the police 


station. These denials are contrary to and directly in the 


face of their own admissions and police reports which 


show that they were the only officers engaged in the 
arrest and post-arrest processing at the station. The 
denials are also inconsistent with the medical evidence 
and other circumstantial evidence in the record which 
points to their involvement. Their roles at the station 
varied, but it became evident that they were all present at 
some point during the period of time which HOUSTON 
JONES testified the abuse occurred. Pet.App.5a, 7a. The 
officers have also stated in their reports and at their 
depositions that it was a tremendous struggle to subdue 
HOUSTON JONES because of his super-human strength; 
however, that testimony was directly contradicted by a 
medical doctor at the criminal trial who testified that a 
person suffering insulin reaction would be in a signifi- 
cantly weakened physical condition. 


Petitioners Johnson, Deevey and Payne moved for 
summary judgment, on the Plaintiff’s excessive force 
claim, arguing that there was not a scintilla of evidence 
that they had abused HOUSTON JONES at the scene of 
the arrest or in a police station. The district court denied 
the motion finding that there was sufficient circumstan- 
tial evidence supporting the plaintiff’s theory of the case 
against these defendants. Pet.App.8a. The district court 
followed the law in the Seventh Circuit which is that even 
if a police officer does not actually participate in a beat- 
ing, a jury may consider an excessive force claim against 
him if the officer stood by and allowed others to beat the 


2 The transcript of the state court criminal proceedings and 
trial was part of the record on summary judgment and these 
materials were provided to the district court judge. 


plaintiff. Byrd v. Brishke, 466 F.2d 6 (7th Cir. 1972); Wilson 
v. City of Chicago, 707 F.Supp. 379 (N.D.III. 1989). This law 
has recently been affirmed in the case Yang v. Hardin, 37 
F.3d 282 (7th Cir. 1994). 


2. Petitioners, Johnson, Deevey, and Payne, filed an 
interlocutory appeal challenging the denial of summary 
judgment. The appeal asserted the defense of qualified 
immunity and basically reiterated their position that not a 
scintilla of eviden. exists that petitioners, Johnson, 
Deevey or Payne, ever struck, punched or kicked the 
plaintiff, or observed anyone striking, punching or kick- 
ing the plaintiff. Pet.App.2a. The veracity of these allega- 
tions was directly challenged by the plaintiff in his 
response to the defendants’ motion for summary judg- 
ment and is belied by the ample circumstantial evidence. 
The court of appeals properly dismissed the appeal as to 
the excessive force claim for lack of jurisdiction. The 
court of appeals determined that whether these police 
officers beat the plaintiff or whether they were in the 
presence of said beatings must be resolved in the district 
court before it may be reviewed on appeal. Pet.App.2a. 
The court of appeals correctly found that a cry of “We 
didn’t do it” does not present any distinct legal issue or 
seek protection from legal uncertainty, the genesis of 
doctrines of official immunity. Pet.App.la, 2a. 


The court of appeals reasoned that it was being asked 
to do nothing other than address an exclusively factual 
question and was being asked to make a determination 
that the district court improperly found that there were 
questions of fact as to whether these petitioners are liable 
for the alleged abuses to the respondent. The court of 
appeal’s holding in this case followed from its prior 


decision in Elliott v. Thomas, 937 F.2d 338 (7th Cir.1991), 
cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 1242 (1992). 


The question presented in Elliott was whether a 
court's refusal to grant summary judgment to a defendant 
who denies committing any wrong may be appealed 
immediately as a collateral order on the authority of 
Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511 (1985). The court in this 
case, as it did in Elliott, reasoned that to state this ques- 
tion is to answer it. A defense of no wrong doing is not 
collateral to the merits; it is the nub of the case. The court 
of appeals held that it lacked jurisdiction to entertain the 
petitioners’ interlocutory appeal. Accordingly, the appeal 
was dismissed as to the excessive force claim brought in 
the guise of a qualified immunity defense and the case 
was remanded for trial. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


In Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 475 U.S. 800 (1982), this Court 
articulated the doctrine of qualified immunity. In that 
decision and in Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635 (1987), 
this Court ruled that a public official who does not vio- 
late the law, as it has been “clearly esatablished” at the 
time, is entitled to a dismissal of claims against him 
before trial. Qualified immunity, as authored by this 
Court, establishes a right to a disposition on the merits 
without trial. 


In Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511 (1985), it was 
determined that qualified immunity is an entitlement not 
be forced to trial regarding the claim of official miscon- 
duct on the basis that is conceptually distinct from the 


merits of a plaintiff’s complaint that he has been dam- 
aged by a violation of his rights. Mitchell v. Forsyth estab- 
lished that a denial of this entitlement was appropriate 
for appellate review through an interlocutory appeal. In 
that opinion, the Court focused on the issues which arose 
as a result of the Attorney General who had violated 
“clearly established law.” Under the facts supporting that 
decision, no real contest existed as to the facts regarding 
the actions alleged by plaintiff. Indeed, the Court noted 
that when reviewing a question of qualified immunity on 
interlocutory appeal, a court of review “need not con- 
sider the correctness of the plaintiff’s version of the facts 
... All it need determine is a question of law.” 472 U.S. at 
528. Further, the Mitchell opinion notes that the denial of 
a claim to qualified immunity is immediately appealable 
“to the extent that it turns on an issue of law.” 472 U.S. at 
530. 


Petitioners seek the right to take an interoluctory 
appeal of district court decisions concerning the existence 
of factual disputes that are not appealable in any other 
context. In the proceedings below, petitioners moved for 
summary judgment on the grounds that they denied com- 
mitting the actions alleged in the complaint. Their motion 
for summary judgment did not rest on the ground that 
the law was not clearly established, nor any other legal 
issue associated with qualified immunity. Rather, their 
motion for summary judgment rested on a claim that the 
alleged misconduct never occured - a claim that may be 
presented whenever the defendant denies the plaintiffs’ 
allegations, regardless of whether or not qualified immu- 


nity 1s an issue. 


It has long been recognized that where, as here, a 
district court denies such a summary judgment motion 
because it finds that material facts are in dispute, that 
decision is not subject to interlocutory appeal because it 
is so closely tied to the merits. Petitioners’ claim that this 
Court’s decision in Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511 (1985) 
created an exception to this rule is misplaced because the 
legal issues concerning whether the law is “clearly estab- 
lished” under the qualified immunity doctrine are not at 
issue here. Rather, petitioners’ challenge the district 
court’s decision rests solely on the whether the factual 
record was sufficient to support summary judgment, an 
issue that is unrelated to the qualified immunity issue 
that this Court held was subject to appeal in Mitchell. 


The collateral order doctrine announced in Cohen v. 
Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949) also 
does not provide appellate jurisdiction for petitioners’ 
appeal because petitioners’ claim is so closely tied to the 
merits. Indeed, petitioners’ claim that they are entitled to 
summary judgment requires that the court determine the 
merits of their claim that they did not commit the wrongs 
alleged. Allowing immediate appeals of such decisions 
would require appellate courts to conduct interlocutory 
review of factual determinations by the district court that 
go directly to the merits of the underlying claim. Expand- 
ing the collateral order doctrine to permit such appeals 
would undermine the civil rights laws by expanding the 
ability of defendants to pursue multiple appeals. It would 
also burden the appellate courts with interlocutory 
appeals involving factual issues that are very different 
from the qualified immunity issue for which this Court 


authorized an interlocutory appeal in Mitchell v. Forsyth. 


10 


Petitioners’ effort to create a special rule to allow 
their appeal must be rejected because it would transform 
the limited right to seek interlocutory review recognized 
in Mitchell v. Forsyth into a right to appeal every denial of 
a summary judgment motion by a public official who 
disagrees with the district court’s determination that the 
record is not sufficient to sustain a motion for summary 
judgment. The expense, delay and use of judicial 
resources, involved in weighing the sufficiency of the 
evidence in such appeals will far outstrip any benefit to 
be gained by allowing such a procedure. 


S 


ARGUMENT 


A. PETITIONERS’ ASSERTION THAT A DEFEN- 
DANT WHO DENIES VIOLATING THE LAW AT 
ALL MAY ASSERT QUALIFIED IMMUNITY AT 
BEST IS AN INCOMPLETE STATEMENT OF THE 
APPLICABILITY OF QUALIFIED IMMUNITY OR, 
IF TAKEN IN ITS BROADEST SENSE, A DEFEN- 
DANT WHO DENIES VIOLATING THE LAW IS 
SIMPLY ASSERTING A DEFENSE OF NO WRONG 
DOING AND IS NOT COLLATERAL TO THE 
MERITS AND THEREFORE IS NOT A QUALIFIED 
IMMUNITY ISSUE AT ALL. 


The petitioners have set forth a vague and incom- 
plete proposition in asserting that qualified immunity 
applies to a defendant who denies violating a law at all. 
This statement can be viewed in one of two ways. First, a 
defendant can certainly assert a qualified immunity 
defense by denying he violated the law if the law was not 
clearly established at the time the alleged violation took 
place or that the defendant was acting in the shadow of 


11 


legal uncertainty. Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511 (1985). 
Second, if the petitioners’ point is that their denial of 
violating the law at all is premised on the argument that 
they did not commit the acts alleged, this would not be a 
qualified immunity defense. This is simply stating a 
defense of no wrong doing which is not collateral to the 
merits. Elliott v. Thomas, 937 F.2d 338 (7th Cir. 1991). 


This Court would agree that a defendant who denies 
violating the law can assert a qualified immunity defense 
if the law which was allegedly violated was not clearly 
established or the defendant was acting in the shadow of 
legal uncertainty. However, it appears that the petitioners 
have taken this concept well beyond its rationale by 
mistakenly interpreting a statement in Harlow uv. 
Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982). The petitioners have 
extracted a statement from Harlow where this Court said: 


“We therefore hold that government officials 
performing discretionary functions generally 
are shielded from liability for civil damages 
insofar as their conduct does not violate estab- 
lished statutory or constitutional rights of which 
a reasonable person would have known.” Har- 
low, 457 U.S. at 818. 


Petitioners have interpreted this to mean that immunity 
protects a group of defendants who did not violate the 
law at all either because they did not commit the acts 
alleged or because those acts are lawful. Nowhere in the 
Harlow decision or holding was there a rule proposed, or 
even a discussion had, that delineated a grouping of 
defendants who deny any wrongdoing as falling into a 
potential qualified immunity category. This Court, in Har- 


low, addressed whether there was a workable procedure 


12 


to obtaining the goal of qualified immunity. This Court 
found that the standard of what needed to be shown was 
not workable and announced a standard that eased the 
burden placed on public officials asserting this defense 
by eliminating the necessity of exploring the subjective 
element of whether the official utilized good faith in 
carrying out the law as he understood it. Harlow, 457 U.S. 
at 818. Having dismissed this element, the Court held 
that government officials performing discretionary func- 
tions generally are shielded from liability for civil dam- 
ages insofar as their conduct does not violate clearly 
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a rea- 
sonable person would have known. Harlow, 457 U.S. at 
818. Harlow simplified the issue so that a district court 
did not have to inquire into disputed fact questions in 
order to determine if a valid qualified immunity defense 
exists. In this respect, it was added that: 


“Reliance on the objective reasonableness of an 
official’s conduct, as measured by reference to 
clearly establish law should avoid excessive dis- 
ruption of government and permit the resolu- 
tion of many insubstantial claims on summary 
judgment. On summary judgment, the judge 
appropriately may determine, not only the cur- 
rently applicable law, but whether that law was 
clearly established at the time an action 
occurred. If the law at that time was not clearly 
established, an official could not reasonably be 
expected to anticipate subsequent legal develop- 
ments, nor could he fairly be said to ‘know’ that 
the law forbade conduct not previously identi- 
fied as unlawful .. . If the law was clearly 
established, the immunity defense ordinarily 
should fail, since a reasonably competent public 


13 


official should know the law governing his con- 
duct.” 


Harlow, 457 U.S. at 818. 


This Court’s holding in Harlow clearly and unequivo- 
cally expresses that there has to be a determination as to 
whether the law was clearly established at the time of the 
alleged violation. Nowhere in this holding can it be found 
that Harlow stands for the proposition that a defendant 
who denies violating the law at all or that he didn’t do 
the acts complained of, may assert this “no wrongdoing” 
defense under the guise of a qualified immunity asser- 
tion. Also entangled in the petitioners’ theory that a 
defendant who denies violating the law at all is entitled 
to a qualified immunity defense, is their proposition that 
this would help to alleviate the burdens on defendant 
officials and society as a whole. They have also cited 
Harlow for this proposition. As discussed above, Harlow 
did not say this at all. Harlow did in fact ease the burden 
on defendants in these cases. The subjective element of 
the good faith defense frequently had proved to be 
incompatible with this Court’s admonition in that insub- 
stantial claims should not proceed to trial. This, in fact, 
allowed an easier vehicle for district court judges to have 
insubstantial and unmeritorious claims thrown out before 
or during the discovery stage. This Court in Harlow never 
extended the qualified immunity defense as far as the 
petitioners are suggesting and never did this Court in 
Harlow suggest that a qualified immunity defense should 
be considered the same as a defense of no wrongdoing as 
the petitioners suggest. 


The petitioners have also proposed that “defendants 


who deny violating the law at all” are entitled to a 


14 


qualified immunity defense collateral to the merits of the 
case. They have done so by blanketly asserting that 
courts of appeals have considered the factual back- 
grounds of other claims in deciding whether a clearly 
established law has been violated. The fact that a court 
may have to review the factual background of a particu- 
lar case in determining whether a qualified immunity 
defense applies is by no means dispositive as to whether 
a legitimate qualified immunity defense has been 
asserted. 


As the court in Elliott stated “facts do play a role in 
these types of appeals”. Elliott, 937 F.2d at 342. It is 
impossible to know which clearly established rules of law 
to consult unless you know what is going on. The reason 
a court of appeals examines the facts is to determine 
whether it was clearly established at the time that such 
deeds were forbidden. To say that the reviewing court 
must, at least in some circumstances, review the facts of a 
case is not to say that this should also allow a reviewing 
court in an interlocutory appeal to decide and rule upon 
issues of fact. Therefore, the petitioners are mistaken in 
their interpretation as to the reason reviewing courts 
have examined the facts in deciding whether a defendant 
should be qualifiedly immune for an alleged violation of 
the law. This Court in Mitchell v. Forsyth, with respect to 
this issue, stated: 


“An appellate court reviewing the denial of the 
defendant’s claim of immunity need not con- 
sider the correctness of the plaintiff’s version of 
the facts, nor even determine whether the plain- 
tiff’s allegations actually state a claim. All it 
need determine is a question of law: whether 


15 


the legal norms allegedly violated by the defen- 
dant were clearly established at the time of the 
challenged actions or, in cases where the district 
court has denied summary judgment for the 
defendant on the ground that even under the 
defendant’s version of the facts the defendant’s 
conduct violated clearly established law, 
whether the law clearly prescribed the actions 
the defendant claims he took.” 


Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 528. 


One would be extremely strained to find anywhere in 
this Court’s summation in Mitchell that qualified immu- 
nity concerns are identical to a situation where a defen- 
dant has denied violating the law at all. A denia! of 
violating the law without an accompanying assertion that 
there was uncertainty in the law is simply an “I didn’t do 
it” defense. This is not a qualified immunity assertion; it 
is simply a defense to the merits. 


Petitioners’ position that qualified immunity protects 
those who claim “we didn’t violate the law” absent an 
evaluation of whether the law was clearly established is 
not supported by this Court’s decisions or the majority of 
circuit court of appeals decisions concerning this issue. It 
is clear that the issue the petitioners are addressing when 
they attempt to bootstrap a qualified immunity defense 
with an assertion of “they didn’t violate the law at all”, is 
simply an issue of the innocence or guilt of the defen- 
dant. Any defendant can plead innocence or guilt. How- 
ever, the assertion of innocence or guilt has nothing to do 
with whether there exists a qualified immunity issue 
collateral to the merits of the case. 


16 


B. PETITIONERS POSITION THAT A DEFENSE OF 
“I DIDN’T DO IT” IS A QUALIFIED IMMUNITY 
DEFENSE IS ERRONEOUS AND THEIR ADDI- 
TIONAL PROPOSITION THAT A DEFENSE OF “I 
DIDN’T DO IT” MAY BE RAISED ON AN INTER- 
LOCUTORY APPEAL IS NOT CONSISTENT WITH 
THIS COURT’S DECISIONS ON THIS ISSUE AND 
WOULD BE CONTRARY TO THE MEANING OF 
QUALIFIED IMMUNITY, THE COLLATERAL 
ORDER DOCTRINE ANNOUNCED IN COHEN, 
AND THE FINALITY DOCTRINE. 


The petitioners attempt to expand the doctrine of 
qualified immunity to mean that a defendant who denies 
violating any law at all may assert qualified immunity 
and have argued the next step that this type of defense, 
i.e., “I didn’t do it” may be raised on an interlocutory 
appeal. This argument is unsupported in the law. 


Petitioners cite Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan 
Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949), for the proposition that they 
have a right to an interlocutory appeal under these cir- 
cumstances under the collateral order doctrine expressed 
in Cohen. In Cohen, this Court recognized a “small class” 
of decisions which finally determined claims of rights 
separable from, and collateral to, rights asserted in the 
action, too important to be denied review and too inde- 
pendent of the cause itself to require that appellate con- 
sideration be deferred until the whole case is adjudicated. 
Cohen, 337 U.S. at 546. Such orders warrant immediate 
review despite the final judgment rule which requires 
that a party must ordinarily raise all claims of error in a 


single appeal following final judgment on the merits. 
Flanagan v. United States, 465 U.S. 259 (1984). 


17 


To qualify under Cohen’s collateral order doctrine, an 
order must satisfy a three-part test. First, it must con- 
clusively determine the disputed question in the trial 
court. Bever v. Gilbertson, 724 F.2d 1083 (4th Cir. 1984). The 
order cannot be subject to any further proceedings at the 
trial level either before, during, or after the appeal. Sec- 
ond, it must resolve an important question separable 
from, and collateral to, the merits of the litigation. Evans 
v. Dillahunty, 711 F.2d 838 (8th Cir. 1983). Finally, the 
order must be effectively unreviewable on appeal from 
the final judgment: it must involve a right which would 
be lost or deprived of its practical value if immediate 
appeal were not available. Bever, 724 F.2d at 1087. 


Petitioners’ assertion that this doctrine has been sat- 
isfied where a defendant cries “I didn’t do it” is faulty at 
a glance at the second requirement of the collateral order 
doctrine in that the question must be separable from, and 
collateral to, the merits of the litigation. There is nothing 
to review collaterally when a cry of “I didn’t do it” is at 
issue because this is nothing more than a defense on the 
merits claiming innocence. Therefore, petitioners’ 
reliance upon the doctrine announced in Cohen is mis- 
placed. 


Petitioners also mistakenly assert that the Cohen doc- 
trine allows an appeal to a whole category of qualified 
immunity cases, 1.e., not just those that involve a legal 


question. This is inconsistent with Cohen's analysis that 
there is a very small class of decisions which finally 
determined claims of rights separable from, and collateral 
to, the rights asserted in the action. This is why the 
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals has held that such an 
assertion does not involve immunity at all because it is 


18 


not collateral to the merits. It is simply a defense of no 
wrongdoing. As a matter of semantics and misreading of 
this Court’s decisions on this issue, petitioners have 
attempted to broaden the scope of a qualified immunity 
defense to the point where a no wrongdoing defense on 
the merits should be viewed as the same thing as a 
defense of qualified immunity. Qualified immunity, how- 
ever, has been consistently held, if in fact it is properly 
asserted, to be completely collateral to the merits of the 
case. 


It seems that the crux of petitioner’s argument is that 
the circuit courts of appeal should be allowed to review a 
district court’s finding, after a review of the depositions, 
pleadings and other factual matter contained in the 
record, that there exists a question of fact as to whether 
the defendant did the acts alleged. There are several 
serious problems with this proposition. 


First, it is a jury question to decide the ultimate facts 
which are in dispute. Alexander v. City and County of San 
Francisco, 29 F.3d 1355 (9th Cir. 1994); Brisk v. City of 
Miami Beach, Fla., 726 F.Supp. 1305 (S.D.Fla. 1989). Also, 
contrary to the petitioners’ assertion, there would be 
additional appeals that would load the appellate docket 
in the circuits to an unmanageable and unrealistic level. 
Allowing interlocutory appeals to determine whether the 
district court properly determined whether the evidence 
is sufficient for summary judgment would disrupt the 
district court litigation and multiply the opportunity for 
repetitive appeals that burden the appellate courts. Fur- 
ther, if defendants are allowed to take such appeals, they 
may take more than one appeal. For example, if the 
district court denies a summary judgment motion and the 


at 


19 


court of appeals affirms on the basis that the record is 
inadequate to support summary judgment, and the defen- 
dant then submits additional affidavits, depositions, or 
other evidence and renews the summary judgment 
motion on the basis that he or she has caused the defi- 
ciencies in the original motion, petitioners’ theory sug- 
gests that the defendant would be entitled to a second 
appeal if the renewal motion is also denied. It would also 
require circuit courts of appeals to look over the shoulder 
of the district court every step of the litigation which 
would disrupt its function in quickly resolving these 
matters and moving them through the court system in an 
expeditious manner. This case is a perfect example. It is 
1995 and the plaintiff has not had his day in court con- 
cerning an incident which occurred in 1990 with a lawsuit 
on file since 1991. It would also lead to an exercise in 
futility and would perhaps lead to many frivolous 
appeals as the district court is upheld most of the time. 
Richardson-Merrell, Inc. v. Koller, 472 U.S. 424 (1985). 


The question of law contemplated by Harlow and 
Mitchell appropriate for an interlocutory appeal where a 
qualified immunity defense is asserted is whether or not 
the law that was allegedly violated was clearly estab- 
lished at the time the incident occurred. The issues that 
this Court held were subject to interlocutory review in 
Mitchell are not only distinct from, but very different 
from, the issues presented here because the issues pre- 
sented here are far more fact-intensive and difficult for an 
appellate court to review. The issue of whether the law is 
“clearly established” is a legal issue that requires the 
appellate court to review the district court’s reading of 
the case law, statutes, etc. The issue of whether the record 


20 


is sufficient to support summary judgment, on the other 
hand, requires intimate knowledge of the record to assess 
whether there are factual disputes concerning material 
elements of the case. Even if the issue of the sufficiency of 
the evidence for summary judgment, is, in some respect, 
a “legal issue,” it is an issue that requires a detailed 
assessment of the factual record that is not required to 
review whether the law was clearly established. Expand- 
ing Mitchell to cover appeals of defendants’ denials of the 
factual allegations would involve the appellate courts in 
intense review of the factual record that was never con- 
templated in Mitchell. Never has it been stated that a 
question of law which should be entertained is whether 
or not the district court correctly or incorrectly found the 
existence of a question of fact as to whether the defen- 
dants’ did or did not perform the acts alleged. A distinct 
danger of addressing the case on the merits would be 
readily apparent if an appellate court were allowed to 
second-guess a district court judge’s determination that a 
question of fact exists as to whether the defendants did 
the acts alleged. The appellate court would not be as 
familiar as the district judge with the often complex and 
voluminous record at summary judgment. 


Allowing interlocutory appeals under these circum- 
stances would impose costs on civil rights plaintiffs that 
undermine the enforcement of the civil right laws. Harlow 
and Mitchell emphasize the need to balance plaintiffs’ 
rights against the interest in protecting defendants from 
frivolous claims but, if defendants are permitted to 
appeal any adverse determination that may be disposi- 
tive, they would be able to thwart the ability of plaintiffs 
with legitimate claims to get to trial. It would place too 


21 


much of a burden on Civil Rights plaintiffs with legiti- 
mate claims. This case is a perfect example of a situation 
where the plaintiff has not had his day in court and it has 
been almost five years. The Civil Rights Act is intended 
as a vehicle for citizens to go up against large munici- 
palities and municipal departments when their civil and 
constitutional rights have been abused. It is a law which 
is designed to insure that the rights of victims of civil 
rights abuses are preserved. 


Concerns with respect to Cohen were addressed in 
Justice Brennan’s dissent in Mitchell. Justice Brennan 
expressed that denials of qualified immunity, at least 
where they rest on undisputed facts, are generally not 
appealable. Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 543, Brennan J., dissent- 
ing, Justice Brennan noted that this Court has always 
read the Cohen collateral order doctrine narrowly, in part 
because of the strong policy supporting the §1291 Final 
Judgment Rule. The rule respects the responsibilities of 
the trial court by enabling it to perform its function 
without a court of appeals peering over its shoulder 
every step of the way. It preserves scarce judicial 
resources that would otherwise be spent in costly and 
time consuming appeals. Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 544, Bren- 
nan J., dissenting. Equally important, the final judgment¢ 
rule removes a potent weapon of harassment and abuse 
from the hands of litigants. Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 544, 
Brennan J., dissenting. Similarly, where a pre-trial issue is 
closely related to the merits of a case and interlocutory 
review is permitted, post-judgment appellate review is 
likely to require the appellate court to re-examine the 
same or similar legal issues. This would lead to repe- 
titious appellate review. Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 549, Brennan 


22 


J., dissenting. Justice Brennan also concluded that even if 
there were some benefits to be gained by granting offi- 
cials a right to immediate appeal under these circum- 
stances, such is that in the case at bar, a rule allowing 
immediate appeal imposes enormous costs on plaintiffs 
and on the judicial system as a whole. It also imposes 
costs on the defendant officials and the public. Those who 
pursue interlocutory appeals can be expected ordinarily 
to lose. Finally, Justice Brennan observed that if factual 
determination type of appeals are to be allowed inter- 
locutorily, it would effectively result in the denial of full 
and speedy justice to those plaintiffs with strong claims 
on the merits and a relentless and unnecessary increase in 
the case load of appellate courts. Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 556, 
Brennan J., dissenting. 


There is a distinction between saying, “I’m innocent” 
and “I’m immune.” Qualified immunity protects those 
who acted in the shadow of uncertainty but it does not 
protect those who merely claim innocence and take issue 
with the factual claims asserted by the plaintiff which go 
directly to the merits of the claim. It is true that some 
courts have accepted that you must review facts to deter- 
mine if the defendant acted in the shadow of legal uncer- 
tainty but this is not the same as what is proposed by the 
defendant. 


The petitioners have also attempted to draw a dis- 
tinction between saying that a defendant who bases an 
immunity claim on the law not being established is some- 
thing different than saying he didn’t violate the law. 
There is no distinction; this is saying the same thing. The 
circuit courts of appeals, when they decide that a defen- 
dant is entitled to qualified immunity, do so because the 


23 


law was not clearly established and, therefore, are in 
effect deciding simultaneously that the defendant did not 
break the law. No court of appeal has broken this concept 
into a two-part analysis which the petitioners urge this 
Court to do. That is, decide if the defendant has broken 
the law and then decide if the law was clearly estab- 
lished. 


Additionally, the petitioners are saying that immu- 
nity is conceptually distinct from the merits. This can be 
true when the law is not clearly established but their 
argument fails when the immunity defense is based 
entirely on a denial of the facts. At this point, it really is 
not an immunity defense at all, it is a defense to the 
merits guised as an immunity defense. 


Along this line, courts have also addressed whether it 
is actually a question of law to determine if the district 
court properly found “sufficient evidence” that the defen- 
dants committed the alleged violative acts. It should be 
noted that if this is considered a question of law, it was 
never the type of question of law that is addressed in 
deciding if qualified immunity applies to a particular 
case, 1.e., whether the law at issue was clearly established 
at the time of the alleged acts. 


Allowing appellate jurisdiction to decide if there is 
sufficient evidence to support a plaintiff’s claim is asking 
appeals courts to review purely factual determinations in 
the course of a qualified immunity interlocutory appeal. 
This again would be improper because the only question 
would be whether a district court correctly decided to 
send a factual issue to the jury. To permit interlocutory 


1 
re. 


appeals of evidence sufficiency questions will create diffi- 
cult practical problems. Factual issues in §1983 cases are 
often complex. Deciding whether the evidence is suffi- 
cient to go to the jury in such cases can take many hours 
of reading depositions, interrogatory answers, and other 
record material, filled with indeterminate or dubious 
statements. District courts are often required to sort out 
complex records to make determinations on summary 
judgment, and the appellate court should not be required 
to repeat this review by giving the defendant an appeal 
as of right. Further, this should be addressed as an issue 
of sufficiency of the evidence at trial, not sufficiency of 
the often less comprehensible documentary evidence pre- 
sented at the summary judgment stage. This Court must 
recognize the power of the district court to decide, for 
administrative reasons, the most efficient course of action 
to take with their assigned matters. 


To permit a defendant to appeal an evidence suffi- 
ciency issue prior to trial would seriously undermine the 
district court’s case management powers. Also, allow an 
interlocutory appeal on these grounds would be anoma- 
lous to let a defendant force both a district court and an 
appeals court to pour over a complex record to decide 
whether the evidence is sufficient to go to a jury. This 
would not be practical. Additionally, it would be difficult 
to reconcile this Court’s cautions against hastily granting 
summary judgment if a district court knows that a defen- 
dant will immediately appeal, before trial, a decision to 
send a doubtful case to the jury. In light of these practical 
considerations this Court meant in Mitchell what it said, 
namely, that a qualified immunity issue is immediately 
appealable only when it presents a question of law other 


25 


than the question whether the evidence was sufficient to 
raise a jury question about a particular fact. See Unwin v. 
Campell, 863 F.2d 124 (1st Cir.1988), Breyer J., dissenting. 


Not only would there be the practical problems pre- 
viously addressed in this brief if an immediate appeal is 
allowed every time a qualified immunity defense is 
raised in the context of a purely factual issue, it would 
also ask the circuit courts of appeal to create new law in 
the area as to what constitutes “sufficient evidence” for a 
case to go to a jury. The appellate court would have to ask 
the question as to whether one fact, two facts, ten facts, or 
whether circumstantial evidence alone, is “sufficient evi- 
dence” to go to a jury. The appellate court in many or all 
instances would be required to evaluate which facts they 
think a jury might find the most compelling. The task 
would be one never seen in the law before, i.e., the 
question of what constitutes sufficient evidence to cross a 
certain threshold for a case to be allowed to go to a jury. 
This would not be an effective use of the time and 
resources of our appellate courts. 


C. THE COURT OF APPEALS RULE CAN BE MEAN- 
INGFULLY APPLIED 


The Seventh Circuit’s resolution of these issues in the 
instant opinion is drawn directly from language in Mit- 
chell v. Forsyth. The Court’s reliance on “legal uncer- 
tainty” as the indispensable component of an immunity 
claim is in harmony with this Court’s definition of such 
claims. In Siegert v. Gilley, 500 U.S. 226 (1991), this Court 
specifically notes: 


26 


“Decision of this purely legal question permits 
courts expeditiously to weed out suits which fail 
the test without requiring a defendant who 
rightly claims qualified immunity to engage in 
expensive and time consuming preparation to 
defend the suits on its merits. One of the pur- 
poses of immunity, absolute or qualified, is to 
spare a defendant not only unwarranted lia- 
bility, but unwarranted demands customarily 
imposed upon those defending a long drawn 
out lawsuit.” 


500 U.S. at 232. 


In Elliot v. Thomas, 937 F.2d 338 (1991), the Seventh 
Circuit discussed the need to confine interlocutory 
appeals to cases in which that issue is to be resolved. The 
Court noted that: 


“Yet the reason a Court of Appeals examines the 
facts is to determine whether it was clearly 
established at the time that such deeds were 
forbidden. Anderson, 483 U.S. at 641. It would 
extend Mitchell well beyond its rationale to 
accept an appeal containing nothing but a fac- 
tual issue.” 


937 F.2d at 342. 


On that basis, the Seventh Circuit has refused to 
extend an interlocutory appeal to a defense of “we didn’t 
do it.” Such an appeal requires resolution of the ultimate 


issues of fact, something not appropriately done without 
a trial and final judgment. The Seventh Circuit has not 
restricted itself to a review of the facts alleged in the 
Complaint. 


27 


In this case, the parties conducted discovery and 
participated in a completely briefed summary judgment 
before the Magistrate Judge in the District Court. That 
Court reviewed the submissions of the parties and 
described the facts of the occurrence as follows: 


At that point, Heidelmeier decided to place 
plaintiff under arrest and he forced plaintiff to 
the ground in order to handcuff him behind his 
back. Heidelmeier could not accomplish this 
task alone because of plaintiff’s struggling. In 
the interim, the other individual defendants had 
arrived on the scene and they assisted 
Heidelmeier in handcuffing plaintiff and placing 
him a squad car. Defendants state that due to 
plaintiff’s extreme resistance to their attempts to 
place him under arrest, it took the efforts of all 
five officers to control him. 


Defendants contend that no one struck, beat 
or abused plaintiff while in the parking lot 
where he was arrested. Defendants Johnson, 
Payne and Deevey add that at that point their 
involvement in the arrest ended and that they 
saw no one abuse plaintiff at the police station 
either. PX D-F. Shortly after Plaintiff arrived at 
the police station, paramedics were called. 
Plaintiff spend several days in the hospital for 
treatment of multiple trauma and broken ribs. 
DX A at 76; PXF. 


The Court’s opinion further recognizes the well- 
established law in the Seventh Circuit that a jury can find 
a defendant guilty of the excessive use of force if he stood 
by and watched other officers beat the plaintiff. Byrd v. 
Brishke, 466 F.2d 6 (7th Cir. 1972); (See also, Rascon uv. 
Hardiman, 803 F.2d 269 (7th Cir. 1986); Yang v. Hardin, 37 


28 


F.3d 282 (7th Cir. 1994). Additionally, the Court noted that 
the plaintiff was able to describe recollections of pain at 
the time of his arrest. 


Thus, the Court identified a specific issue of fact to 
be determined at trial. If a jury disbelieved the defen- 
dant’s denials (“we didn’t do it”), and determined that 
plaintiff’s injuries resulted from excessive force applied 
at the time of his arrest, plaintiff could prevail without 
evidence as to which defendant struck him at a specific 
point in time. Thus, the District Court determined that an 
issue of fact remained for trial as to whether the defen- 
dants “did it.” 


On appeal, defendants attempted to block a trial on 
the basis that qualified immunity should prevent a trial 
as their claims of “we didn’t do it” should be accepted as 
true. This is exactly what the Seventh Circuit had in mind 
when it noted that: 


“By slight of hand, you can turn any defense on 
the merits into a defense of qualified immunity.” 


937 F.2d at 341. 


The expansion of the rule in Mitchell v. Forsyth as 
proposed by these defendants will provide the oppor- 
tunity for a motion based on qualified immunity and an 
interlocutory appeal in every case. If “we didn’t do it” is 
acceptable as a basis for immunity to excessive force 
claims, then the next logical step is to allow defendants to 
allege they are immune as the force used in a case was 


reasonable. Under defendant’s proposal, literally every 
claim against an official can be adjudicated on the basis of 
qualified immunity. 


The Seventh Circuit’s resolution of this case is work- 
able as demonstrated by the Court's ruling on the issue of 
arrest without probable cause. The Court reviewed the 
record and found that as a matter of law, given the 
uncontradicted facts in the record, the officers had proba- 
ble cause to arrest the plaintiff, thus, they need not stand 
trial on the plaintiff’s Fourth Amendment claim. This 
resolution is demonstration enough that the Seventh Cir- 
cuit’s approach to such claims is clearly workable. 


It is defendant’s proposed expansion of interlocutory 
appeals that poses potential problems. If an interlocutory 
appeal is allowed on the basis that qualified immunity is 
appropriate due to lack of sufficient evidence in Section 
1983 cases, it will become even more difficult to litigate 
such matter as every such case will require extensive 
discovery on all issues in the case, not just those linked to 
a determination of immunity. 


In order to liquidate the issues involved in “we 
didn’t do it”, full discovery will be required. As in this 
case, when injuries are circumstantial proof of the use of 
excessive force, even medical discovery, will be required. 
This will defeat the stated purpose of immunity as a basis 
to halt discovery and pretrial proceedings and dispose of 
litigation at an early stage to protect defendants not only 
from judgment, but also from involvement in litigation. 


In defining qualified immunity in Harlow v. 
Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), this Court stated: 


Reliance on the objective reasonableness of 
an official’s conduct, as measured by reference 
to clearly established law, should avoid exces- 
sive disruption of government and permit the 


 aaeeneaitetiiaeeeeee 


30 


resolution of many insubstantial claims on sum- 
mary judgment. On summary judgment, the 
judge appropriately may determine, not only 
the current applicable law, but whether that law 
was clearly established at the time an action 
occurred. If the law at that time was not clearly 
established, an official could not reasonably be 
expected to anticipate subsequent legal develop- 
ments, nor could he fairly be said to ‘know’ that 
the law forbade conduct not previously identi- 
fied as unlawful. Until this threshold immunity 
question is resolved, discovery should not be 
allowed. If the law was clearly established, the 
immunity defense ordinarily should fail since a 
reasonably competent public official should 
know the law governing his conduct. 


457 J.S. at 819. 


Nothing in Harlow v. Fitzgerald supports the concept 
that litigation regarding the merits of the case or the 
ultimate issues involved should be treated similarly to 
the issue of standard conduct measured by clearly estab- 
lished law. 


It is petitioners proposal in this case which will cre- 
ate a rule that cannot be meaningfully applied. It will 
transform the limited appellate review provided by Mit- 
chell v. Forsyth into an appeal of every summary judgment 
by a public official, who is not satisfied that sufficient 
evidence exists to require a trial. The expense, delay and 
use of judicial resources involved in weighing sufficiency 
of the evidence appeals will far outstrip any benefit to be 
gained by allowing such a procedure. 


As a practical matter, a determination by a district 
court that an issue of fact as to sufficiency of the evidence 


= ea taal tte 


31 


exists is rarely, if ever, overturned on appeal. Summary 
judgments are appropriate in only a small number of 
cases; indeed, this Court has cautioned against hastily 
granting such motions. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 
272 (1986). It is unlikely that courts of review will be 
hasty to overturn decisions to deny summary judgment 
relief. Most importantly, the type of litigation proposed 
would be completely removed from the separate issue of 
immunity which are hopelessly entangled with the merits 
of each case. 


Circuit Courts have no problem whatsoever deter- 
mining if immunity is appropriate under the standard 
announced by the Seventh Circuit in Elliott v. Thomas. In 
this case, the Court was able to discern the lack of any 
factual issues regarding probable cause and determine 
that the petitioners were immune from claims regarding 
arrest without probable cause. 


Elliot v. Thomas was cited with approval by the Third 
Circuit in Giuffre v. Bissell, 31 F.3d 1241 (3rd Cir. 1994). In 
that case, the Court declined to review a denial of sum- 
mary judgment to a defendant whose “I didn’t do it” 
defense served only to refute Plaintiff’s case-in-chief. 


The Seventh Circuit’s interpretation of the scope of 
Mitchell v. Forsyth is perfectly appropriate. It is not 
unworkable and no reason has been put forth to justify 
expanding the use of interlocutory appeals by in effect 
redefining qualified immunity. 


+ 


32 


CONCLUSION 


The Seventh Circuit’s holding in Elliott and in this 
case, is consistent with the mandate of this Court. Mitchell 
v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 105 S.Ct. 2806, 86 L.Ed.2d 411 
(1985). The holding best serves the interests of judicial 
economy, the purpose of the Civil Rights Act, and pre- 
serves the fair treatment and rights of victims of civil 
rights abuses. The court of appeals holding in this case 
also best serves the balancing and fair application of the 
competing interests of the final judgment rule, the collat- 
eral order doctrine, and the purpose of the doctrine of 
qualified immunity, i.e., the right not to stand trial for 
actions taken in the shadow of legal uncertainty. Also, as 
amply demonstrated, the petitioner’s argument that the 
Seventh Circuit’s ruling in this matter cannot be mean- 
ingfully applied is mistaken. Therefore, the court of 
appeals’ decision in this matter should be affirmed in all 
respects. 


Respectfully submitted, 


ANTHONY PINELLI Epwarb G. Proctor, Jr.* 
Attorney at Law SANDMAN, Levy & PetTRICH 
221 North LaSalle Street 134 North LaSalle Street 
Suite 2100 Suite 1323 

Chicago, Illinois 60601 Chicago, Illinois 60602 
(312) 641-0590 (312) 726-1692 


* Counsel of Record 
March 1995 


ar nate ee 


