A aes : i 
BIEED 4 
No. 94-820 eS 
FEB £3 1395 
In The eee REE PEK 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


7 
METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE COMPANY, 
Petitioner, 
v. 


JOHN RAMBO and DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF WORKERS’ 
COMPENSATION PROGRAMS, UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, 


Respondents. 
> 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


JOINT APPENDIX 
. 

Rosert E. BAscock THomas J. Prerry 
Bascock & ASSOCIATES Prerry & MoorHEeAD 
Suite 1500 301 North Avalon 
121 S.W. Salmon Street Boulevard 
Portland, Oregon 97204-2925 Wilmington, California 
Telephone: (503) 224-8553 90744-5888 
Counsel of Record Telephone: (310) 834-2691 

for Petitioner Counsel of Record for 


Drew S. Days, III Respondent John Rambo 


Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
Telephone: (202) 514-2217 
Counsel of Record 
for Respondent Director, 
Office of Workers’ 
Compensation Programs 


Petition for Certiorari Filed November 7, 1994 
Certiorari Granted ime 13, 1995 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY "=——#ies 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
JOINT APPENDIX 


Page 
eg ge | ere ye Teree rer eee re 1 
Administrative Law Judge’s Decision and Order 

I CEI, foe no vas beVekevesauneees a beabaks 2 
Employer’s Application for Modification* ............ 7 
Claimant’s Response to Application for Modifica- 

I rere er rare eee eee ee ree ee ere 11 
Memorandum of Administrative Conference*........ 16 
Transcript of Hearing on Modification............... 20 
Administrative Law Judge’s Decision and Order 

ee | Ree rer rer eee re rT eee ee eee 63 
Decision and Order of the Benefits Review Board .... 70 


Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit, 28 F.3d 86 (9th Cir. 1994)....... 75 


Order of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit-denying Metropolitan’s Peti- 
tion for Rehearing and rejecting its Suggestion 
Pe WE WE OE i ay ese kbs ee deogvaweeers + « 79 


* The three items identified by the asterisk were not 
included in the record submitted by the Benefits Review Board 
to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. 
They comprise the pleadings submitted to and conclusions 
reached by the Department of Labor’s Office of Workers’ Com- 
pensation Programs. Petitioner and Respondent Rambo did not 
agree that each item should be included in the Joint Appendix. 
The Clerk suggested inclusion, accompanied by this explana- 
tion. 


CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS 


November 28, 1983 Decision and Order Awarding Bene- 


October 30, 1989 


December 8, 1989 


May 29, 1991 


November 9, 1992 


June 24, 1994 


August 10, 1994 


November 7, 1994 


January 13, 1995 


fits Issued 


Employer’s Application for Mod- 
ification Filed 


Administrative Response to Mod- 
ification Issued 


Decision and Order Granting Mod- 
ification Issued 


Decision and Order of Benefits 
Review Board Affirming Modifica- 
tion Issued 


Opinion of the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
Reversing Modification Issued 


Order of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit Deny- 
ing Rehearing Issued 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari Filed 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari 
Granted 


U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
Office of Administrative Law Judges 
211 Main Street — Suite 600 
San Francisco, California 94105 


Case No. 83-LHC-242 
OWCP No. 18-6945 


IN THE MATTER OF JOHN RAMBO, CLAIMANT 
v. 


METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE COMPANY 
SELF-INSURED EMPLOYER 


Before: JAMES J. BUTLER, Administrative Law 
Judge. 


DECISION AND ORDER - 
AWARDING BENEFITS 
I. Statement of the Case 


A. Pertinent statutes and regulations. 


The instant claim was made under the provisions of 
the Longshoremen’s and Harbor Workers’ Compensation 
Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 901-950, hereinafter referred to as “the 
Act,” and the regulations implementing the Act contained 
in Title 20, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Parts 701 
and 702. All code section references are to 33 U.S.C.A. 
(1970 ed. and Supp. V, 1975) unless otherwise indicated. 


B. Stipulations. 


The parties have stipulated as follows (29 C.FR. 
§ 18.51): 


1. The employer and employee on all occasions 
herein were covered by the provisions of the Act. The 
employee had both an appropriate situs and status on the 
occasion of these events and the employer is a maritime 
employer. 


2. The claimant, John Rambo, born April 11, 1945, 
bearing Social Security No. 547-64-2169, was employed as 
a longshoreman (frontman) by Metropolitan on Septem- 
ber 9, 1980, on which occasion he sustained an injury 
arising out of and occurring in the course of his employ- 
ment to his back and leg. 


3. On the occasion of said injury, the employee's 
average weekly wages were $534.38 per week which the 
parties stipulate for all purposes was sufficient to pro- 
duce a compensation rate of $356.26 per week for tempor- 
ary total disability. 


4. That the first lost time from work occurred Sep- 
tember 10, 1980, and the employee was paid temporary 
total disability at the weekly rate of $356.26 per week for 
the period September 10, 1980 through and including 
November 22, 1981, in the total sum of $22,342.58, which 
sum fully satisfied all claims of temporary total disability. 


5. That the employee’s condition became permanent 
and stationary November 16, 1981, as indicated by Jack 
Paschall, Jr., M.D., as a result of an examination of 
November 16, 1981, outlined in a report dated November 
30, 1981. That the date of November 16, 1981, is the 


appropriate date for the commencement of any perma- 
nent partial disability payments as are to be made herein. 


6. That the employee sustained an overall current 
permanent partial disability equivalent to 22'/2% of the 
whole person which the parties recognize as an “eco- 
nomic disability” producing a weekly wage loss of 
$120.24 per week with an equivalent compensation rate of 
$80.16 per week for permanent partial disability. 


7. The parties stipulate that all appropriate forms 
and notices were timely and properly filed including a 
timely controversion consistent with the positions of the 
parties and there is no basis for and no claim for penalties 
and/or interest in these proceedings. 


8. That the claimant’s attorney has rendered ser- 
vices both at the informal level and the formal level some 
of which directly relate to representation of the claimant 
wherein no controversion existed and some of which 
arise out of the dispute between the claimant and the 
employer. That in consideration of the documented time 
schedule and division of the services herein provided by 
claimant's attorney, claimant’s attorney is entitled to sep- 
arate fees from the claimant and the employer as follows: 


a. As a lien on the employee’s compensation, 
$1,000.00 


b. Payable by the employer over and above the 
compensation otherwise called for herein the sum of 
$2,000.00 which sum fully satisfies all claims of fees for 
all purposes against this employer. 


9. That all medical treatment has been provided by 
the employer herein and there are no claims for medical 


costs and/or related items outstanding. Any incidental 
billings as may remain will be adjusted by the parties 
between them for a full resolution of such items. 


10. That the claimant is entitled to permanent par- 
tial disability based on the compensation rate equivalent 
to his stipulated wage loss or $80.16 per week commenc- 
ing November 16, 1981, and continuing thereafter (subject 
to the employer’s seeking Special Fund relief and all 
other provisions of the Act) with said payments to con- 
tinue indefinitely less a lump sum payment of $1,000.00 
for the attorney fees referred hereinabove. 


11. That these Stipulations resolve all issues 
between the parties and the parties respectfully request 
Award issue in accordance therewith subject to the limita- 
tions of the Act. 


Il. Findings and Conclusions — §908(f) 


The evidentiary hearing in this matter was directed 
toward issues of fact pertaining to the requirements of 
§ 908(f) of the Act. An explanation of the intent and 
purposes of this section is no longer necessary. The claim- 
ant is not directly concerned and the employer is well 
acquainted with its provisions. It should suffice to say 
only that this employer is clearly qualified for the statu- 
tory relief it seeks by virtue of claimant's documented 
pre-existing disability attributable to previous low back 
injuries and the permanent residuals of those events (see, 
in particular, Joint Exhibits 1 & 2). The whole record 
presented fully supports employer ;/vsition that it is eligi- 
ble for a limitation of its liability under the circumstances 


brought forward. The claimant’s permanent partial dis- 
ability is materially and substantially greater than that 
which would have resulted from the subsequent subject 
injury alone. Accordingly, the employer shall provide 
compensation for one hundred and four weeks only. 
After payment of the one hundred and four week period, 
the claimant shall be paid the remainder of the compensa- 
tion due him out of the Special Fund established for this 
and other purposes in § 944 of the Act. The employer 
shall, however, continue to provide the medical benefits 
required by § 907 of the Act. 


ORDER 


The parties hereto, now including the Director, 
OWCP, on account of the liability of the Special Fund, 
shall proceed in a manner consistent herewith and the 
terms and provisions of the Act and applicable regula- 
tions. 


/s/ James J. Butler 
James J. BuTLER 
Administrative Law Judge 


Dated: Nov. 28, 1983 
San Francisco, California 


JJB:scm 


LAW OFFICES JAMES J. WOOD 
3441 East Broadway 

Long Beach, California 90803 
Telephone: 213-434-5703 
Attorney for Employer 


UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
OFFICE OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION PROGRAMS 
CASE NO: 


18-6945 
(83-LHC-242) 


EMPLOYER’S 


JOHN D. RAMBO, 
) 
) 
) 
METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE APPLICATION 
) 
) 
) 
) 


Claimant, 


VS. 


COMPANY, PERMISSIBLY FOR 
SELF-INSURED, MODIFICATION 


Employer. wae 


COMES NOW the employer by this Application to 
modify the previous Compensation Order of the Depart- 
ment of Labor filed December 6, 1983. 


STATISTICAL DATA 
Claimant: John D. Rambo 


Injury Date: September 9, 1980 
Birth Date: April 11, 1945 
Social Security No: 547-64-2169 
Employer No: C8000144 
Pre-Injury Wage: $534.38 
Benefit Rate: $356.26 

Wage Loss: $124.24 per week 


Benefit Rate: $80.16 
Special Fund Started: December 1, 1983 


STATEMENT OF FACT 


This matter came on before an Administrative Law 
Judge who issued a decision which was converted into a 
Compensation Order by the Department of Labor filed 
December 6, 1983. That Compensation Order provided 
that the claimant, as a result of the injury herein, sus- 
tained a weekly wage loss of $120.24 per week providing 
fora compensation rate of $80.16 per week. The employer 
paid the first 104 weeks and the claimant has been getting 
paid by the Special Fund in the interim. 


The employee’s current earnings are documented by 
Pacific Maritime Association records, enclosed herein as 
Exhibit B. Exhibit A represents the calculations for the 
period covering the week ending March 12, 1988 through 
the week ending March 4, 1989. This 52 week period 
demonstrates that the employee earned $78,271.05 for an 
average weekly wage of $1,505.21. This is almost 300% of 
the employee’s pre-injury average weekly wage demon- 
strating that he is not entitled to a wage loss of any kind 
at this time and that he has no economic disability as a 
result of this injury. 


APPLICATION FOR MODIFICATION 


The employer respectfully requests that all compen- 
sation payments being made through the Special Fund be 
terminated immediately. There is prima facie evidence 
presented here to demonstrate that this employee does 


not have a wage loss now and he has not had a wage loss 
for the last year or two. 


It is requested that an interim Stay Orde1 issue, ter- 
minating the benefits temporarily while the claimant 
responds to this Application for Modification. In the 
absence of good cause being demonstrated to the con- 
trary, it is requested that the Department of Labor issue a 
new Compensation Order completely terminating the 
previous Compensation Order and providing for the dis- 
continuance of all payments pursuant to §922 of the Act. 


CONCLUSION 


The Department of Labor has indicated in the past 
that they are not inclined to issue Stay Orders or to issue 
Compensation Orders terminating previous Compensa- 
tion Orders. In the absence of any affirmative action by 
the United States Department of Labor, the matter will 
normally sit dormant while payments are continuing to 
be made on an improper basis. Failure of the Department 
of Labor to act in accordance with the provisions of the 
Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act may 
cause the employer to seek adjustment in all Special Fund 
assessments for monies paid beyond the time when the 
employer submitted its Application for Modification. The 
employer would contend in that instance that a Stay 
Order and/or an Order terminating the benefits should 
have issued and assessments made against the employer 
for monies paid beyond that date are improper since the 
payments should not have been made. 


In this case we can clearly show simply by the earn- 
ings information alone that for the time frame between 
the issuance of the previous Compensation Order and the 


| 


10 


present earnings of the claimant there can be no reason- 
able argument made suggesting that pay increases in the 
interim would be an adequate explanation for the 
increase. There is no basis whatever for the pay increases 
to support a 300% increase in earnings as is demonstrated 
by the information provided. 


WHEREFORE, employer respectfully requests that a 
Stay Order issue immediately. Thereafter, if the claimant 
failed to show good cause why a Compensation Order 
terminating benefits should not issue, then an Order ter- 
minating benefits should issue relieving the Special Fund 
of further liability and relieving the employer of any 
potential assessments for monies paid by the Special 
Fund in this case. Lastly, if the Department of Labor 
either refuses to act upon this Application for Modifica- 
tion or alternatively if it considers itself to be powerless 
to act for any reason, it is then requested that the matter 
be referred promptly to the Office of Administrative Law 
Judges. An LS-18 is enclosed for that purpose. 


We want to emphasize that conferences before the 
Department of Labor will serve no purpose. If the 
Department takes the position that it has no power to act 
in any way to modify the previous Compensation Order, 
then it is apparent that the parties appearing before the 
Department of Labor at a conference will simply delay 
matters without any hope of productive result following 
that delay. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ James J. Wood 
JAMES J. WOOD, Attorney for 
the Employer 


11 


MAGANA, CATHCART, McCARTHY & PIERRY 
301 North Avalon Boulevard 

Wilmington, California 90744 

834-2691 or 775-8348 


UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
OFFICE OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION PROGRAMS 


JOHN RAMBO, CASE NO.: 18-6945 
Claimant, (83-LHC-242) 
vs CLAIMANT'S 
METROPOLITAN ee 
STEVEDORE; 


APPLICATION FOR 
SELF-INSURED, MODIFICATION OF 
Defendants. AWARD PURSUANT TO 
SECTION 922 
/ 


I. BACKGROUND 


On October 30, 1989, the employer filed an Applica- 
tion for Modification of a Compensation Order which had 
been entered on November 28, 1983. In that Application, 
the employer not only seeks Modification of the prior 
Compensation Order, but essentially asks for such Mod- 
ification on a summary basis. Without citing authority, 
the employer asks the Department of Labor to strike the 
Order without permitting the claimant an opportunity to 
be heard and/or submit evidence or argument. 


12 


II. ISSUES 


1) Should the Department either vitiate the prior 
compensation order or issue an Order terminating bene- 
fits on the basis of the Application filed on October 30, 
1989? 


Employer’s counsel concedes in its Application that 
it is not the Department’s policy to summarily adjudicate 
Petitions for Modification of Awards. Furthermore, the 
employer cites no authority which would authorize such 
an extraordinary remedy. It is respectfully submitted that 
the employers “modest proposal” is absurd and should 
be denied. 


2) Should this Application for Modification of 
Award proceed in an orderly fashion, first to Informal 
Conference? 


The employer argues that it will be prejudiced unless 
this matter is brought to a Hearing before an Administra- 
tive Law Judge yesterday. The reason that the employer 
apparently feels it will be prejudiced is that the law and 
the facts of the case are so patently clear that only one 
decision could possibly be rendered on the Application 
for Modification. Again, the employer cites no authority. 


Given the employer’s one sided and apparently pre- 
liminary evaluation of the factual and medical issues 
involved in this Modification of a prior Compensation 
Order, it is apparent why the employer wishes to rush to 
judgment. Modification pursuant to Section 922 of the 
Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act is not 
nearly as simple as is alleged by counsel for the 
employer. 


13 


In Fleetwood vs. Newport News Shipping, 18 BRBS 12 
(CTR) (4th Cir. 1985) both the majority and dissent review 
the issues involved in a Modification of an Award. 


In this case both the majority opinion and the dissent 
agreed that an award of compensation might only be 
modified by showing a substantial change in overall 
wage earning capacity. It should be noted that this is the 
only thing that the majority and the dissenting opinion 
agreed upon. 


The dissenting opinion concluded that as a predicate 
to modifying an award there must be a change in the 
physical condition of the claimant. The dissent relied 
upon fifty years of prior court decisions, including a 9th 
Circuit Court of Appeal Decision. That decision is McCor- 
mick Steamship Company vs. U.S. Employees Compensation 
Commission, 62 F. 2d 84 (9th Cir. 1933). 


While the majority never specifically ruled that a 
change in physical condition is not a condition precedent 
to modifying a prior award, it holds that one of the 
factors to be considered in determining whether there has 
been a change in wage earning capacity will be the actual 
post-award earnings of the claimant. Whether or not this 
court considered the impact of its ruling on the overall 
policy of the Act to encourage rehabilitation is nowhere 
reported. 


Regardless of whether the Ninth Circuit, McCormick 
approach which requires as a condition precedent to a 
modification, a substantial change in physical condition; 
or, whether one of the factors to be considered in a 
modification proceeding will be post award earnings, it is 


14 


clear that the mere assertion of increase earnings is not 
dispositive of a Section 922 proceeding. 


It is respectfully submitted that before this award is 
modified claimant is entitled to a hearing on the issues 
presented. 


I]. CLAIMANT’S CONTENTIONS 


1) Claimant contends that as a precedent to modify- 
ing a Compensation Order, medical evidence must be 
submitted to showing that there has been a change in the 
employee’s physical condition which has affected his 
earning capacity; 


2) Claimant contends that his physical condition 
has deteriorated since the Award; 


3) Claimant contends that the economic situation on 
the waterfront has changed since his award. It is this 
change which has caused an increase in his earnings not 
an increase in his earning capacity; 


4) Claimant contends that his actual post-award 
earnings would be substantially higher due to increased 
economic opportunity had it not been for the injury 
which forms the basis of his compensation award; 


5) Claimant contends that it will present both medi- 
cal and economic evidence to support his contention that 
there has been no change in claimant’s wage earning 
capacity since the date of the award. If anything claimant 
has been deprived of the opportunity to earn greater 
wages because of this injury. 


SEU ROE RS 8 Ponca AY 


2 AN AURA SEES OARS EET ER WEY 86D SIONS. LLIB ALE BS MN 


15 


THEREFORE, it is respectfully requested that the 
employer’s Application for Modification of Compensa- 
tion Award be denied. 


Respectfully submitted, 


MAGANA, CATHCART, McCARTHY 
& PIERRY 


By: /s/ Thomas Pierry 
THOMAS J. PIERRY 


U.S. Department of 
Labor 

Employment Standards 
Administration 

Office of Workers’ 
Compensation Programs 


1. Claimant 
John D. Rambo 


3. Employer 
Metropolitan 
Stevedore Co. 


5. Insurance Carrier 
Self Insured 


6. Date of Conference 
(month, day, year 
11-29-89 


8. Appearance: 
X Claimant present 


For Claimant: 
Thomas J. Pierry, Esq. 


16 


MEMORANDUM OF 
INFORMAL 
CONFERENCE 
(Under the 
Longshoremen’s and 
Harbor Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as 
extended) 


2. OWCP # 
18-06945 


4. Carrier/Employers No: 


7. Date of Injury 
(month, day, year) 
9/9/80 


_ Claimant not present 


For Employer/Carrier 
James Wood, Esq. 


otto arene aren 


17 


Issues: 
a. Section 922 Modification 


9. The claimant sustained/alleges an accidental injury 
on the date in item 7 while working for the above- 
named employer, under the circumstances bringing 
the injury within the purview of the LHWC Act (33 
U.S.C. 901 etc seq.) or an extension thereof, resulting 
in the following injury(ies): to the low back. 


10. Prior ALJ hearing was held and a Decision and. 
Order was issued on 11/28/83. The employer /car- 
rier have paid compensation for this injury in the 
amount of $30,517.61 for the following periods: 
9/10/80 to 11/30/83 and the special fund has paid 
permanent partial disability since 12/1/83. 


11. Present Claim: 


A. THERE HAS BEEN NO CHANGE IN THE CLAIM- 
ANT’S PHYSICAL CONDITION AS DEMONSTRATED 
BY MEDICAL EVIDENCE. 


B. THE MEDICAL STATUS HAS IN FACT DETERIO- © 
RATED. 


C. THE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS HAVE CHANGED. 
THE CLAIMANT IS WORKING UNDER CONTRACT 
AND IS GUARANTEED 45 HOURS PER WEEK. 


D. THE CLAIMANT WOULD BE EARNING SUBSTAN- 
TIALLY MORE IF IT WERE NOT FOR THE INJURY. 


12. Employer/Carrier’s Position: 


A. THE CLAIMANT IS EARNING 300% OVER THE 
1983 AVERAGE WEEKLY WAGE. WAGE INCREASES DO 
NOT ACCOUNT FOR THIS SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE. 
THE D&O OF 11/28/83 SHOULD BE VACATED. THE 
CLAIMANT IS NOT ENTITLED TO ADDITIONAL 
WAGE LOSS BENEFITS. 


18 


13. Average weekly wage (Sec.10) $534.48 
X As stipulated by parties 
__ As recommended by Examiner 


14. Compensation rate (7/3 x AWW) $356.28 


15. Claimant 
X Returned to work on 
_ Has not returned to work 
_ Did not lose time 


16. Medical costs related to the injury 
X have been paid by the employer 
_ Have not been paid 


Upon discussion of the issues involved among those pre- 
sent, together with due consideration to all information 
in the administrative file, the following recommendation 
is made. 


RECOMMENDATION 


IN FLEETWOOD V. NEWPORT NEWS SHIPBUILDING & 
DRY DOCK CO., 16 BRBS 282 (1984), AFF’D 776.F.2d 
1225, 18 BRBS 12 (CRT) (4TH CIR. 1985), THE BOARD 
HELD THAT EMPLOYER SHOULD NO LONGER HAVE 
TO COMPENSATE CLAIMANT WHEN THERE HAS 
BEEN A CHANGE IN CLAIMANT’S ECONOMIC CON- 
DITION SO THAT THERE IS NO LONGER A LOSS IN 
WAGE-EARNINGS CAPACITY. ASSUMING A 5% PER 
YEAR INCREASE IN WAGES SINCE 1983, BASED ON 
THE AVERAGE WEEKLY WAGE THE CLAIMANT 
WOULD NOW BE EARNING $43,000 PER YEAR. MR. 
RAMBO HAS REPORTED THE FOLLOWING EARN- 
INGS: 1984 $58,000; 1985 $71,000; 1986 $72,000; 1987 
$68,000; 1988 $76,000. CLAIMANT NO LONGER HAS 
ANY WAGE LOSS. I RECOMMEND THAT THE PRIOR 
D&O OF 11/28/89 BE VACATED. 


We ACERS 


19 


A DEMAND HAS BEEN MADE AND THE CARRIER IS 
CONSIDERING THIS DEMAND. 


SUBSEQUENT TO THE CONFERENCE MR. PIERRY 
REQUESTED THAT THE ISSUE OF STANDING TO PUR- 
SUE A MODIFICATION BE ADDED. UNDER SECTION 
22 AN EMPLOYER/CARRIER WHO HAS BEEN 
AWARDED SPECIAL FUND RELIEF IS SPECIFICALLY 
INCLUDED AS A PARTY IN INTEREST. 


PLEASE ADVISE OF THE ACCEPTANCE OR REJEC- 
TION OF THESE RECOMMENDATIONS WITHIN 14 
DAYS. THE CASE IS IN POSTURE FOR REFERRAL TO 
THE OALJ FOR A FORMAL HEARING. 


ACTION BY EMPLOYER/CARRIER 


The self-insured employer or insurance carrier is to sub- 
mit Forms LS-206 or LS-208, showing compliance with 
the above recommendation. Upon completion of pay- 
ments, a final Form LS-208 is to be submitted. 


In the event of controversion, Form LS-207 is to be sub- 
mitted. 


To avoid statutory penalties all required forms should be 
sent to this office promptly and within the time require- 
ments of the Act. 


/s/ Raquel Torres 
for 
Edward B. Bounds 
Claims Examiner 
12/8/89 
- (Date this memorandum 
issued) 


20 


UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 

OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES 
In the Matter of: 
JOHN RAMBO, 


Claimant, Case No. 83-LHC-242 


vs. OWCP No. 18-6945 


METROPOLITAN 
STEVEDORE COMPANY, 
Self-Administered, 


Employer. 


Dl 


[p. 3] PROCEEDINGS 


JUDGE STEWART: This is a hearing involving a 
claim for compensation under the Longshore and Harbor 
Workers’ Compensation Act. The hearing is being held in 
San Pedro, California, at 2:25 p.m., on October 15, 1990. 


The case number is 83-LHC-242 and the OWCP 
number is 18-6945. This hearing is being held pursuant to 
the notice of hearing dated July 12, 1990. 


The case has been assigned to myself, Daniel L. Stew- 
art, to hold the hearing and to decide the case. 


Will counsel for Claimant please identify himself for 
the record and state his name, address, and telephone 


number. 


~ ORE TER ome 


21 


MR. PIERRY: Thomas James Pierry, 301 North 
Avalon Boulevard, Wilmington, California, 90744, (213) 
834-2691. 


JUDGE STEWART: Will counsel for the 
Employer please identify himself for the record and state 
his name, address, and telephone number. 


MR. WOOD: James J. Wood, attorney, 3441 East 
Broadway, Long Beach, California, 90803, (213) 434-5703. 


JUDGE STEWART: Any decision made in this 
case will be based solely on the record made here this 
afternoon. Any papers, documents, or exhibits previously 
submitted to or filed are not a part of the record as of this 
time. 


[p. 4] Anyone wishing any such paper document or 
exhibit to become part of the evidence in this case will 
have to introduce it at the hearing here this afternoon. 


I would prefer that all exhibits that are introduced 
into evidence at the hearing here this afternoon be given 
to the court reporter. I understand that is the procedure 
that you do follow here in this area, and that is the 
procedure which I want to follow here this afternoon. 


Counsel will now be allowed an opportunity to make 
a brief opening statement if they so desire. 


Mr. Pierry. 


MR. PIERRY: Yes, Your Honor. 


22 


OPENING STATEMENT 


MR. PIERRY: The trial brief that I have submit- 
ted lays out what the Claimant’s position is. But for the 
record, so there is no misunderstanding and there is no 
opportunity at a later time for a court to interpret the 
Claimant having waived any objections to this hearing or 
the introduction of evidence, let me briefly summarize 
my trial brief. 


Your Honor, may I incorporate my trial brief into the 
record at this point? 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. That will be fine. 


MR. PIERRY: It will be Claimant’s, then, first in 
order. 


[p. 5] JUDGE STEWART: Okay. 


(The document referred to was marked as 
Claimant’s Exhibit No. 1 for identification and 
received into evidence.) 


MR. PIERRY: Essentially, the Claimant requests 
the Court to dismiss these proceedings - 


JUDGE STEWART: I take it you have no objec- 
tion, Mr. Wood, do you? 


MR. WOOD: To his trial brief? 
JUDGE STEWART: Yes. 


MR. WOOD: No, Your Honor. I have one of my 
own, plus exhibits. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. Go ahead. 


23 


MR. PIERRY: The Claimant requests the Court 
to terminate these proceedings and issue an order dis- 
cussing these proceedings on essentially two grounds. 


In 1983, the parties appeared before Judge William 
Butler and settled this case. As the order that came out in 
early 1983 demonstrates, the parties stipulated in open 
court to all issues between Metropolitan Stevedore and 
the Claimant. 


The exact language of the order that followed was in 
No. 6, where the parties have stipulated as follows, pur- 
suant to 29 C.F.R. Section 18.51, No. 6: 


[p. 6] “That the Employee sustained an overall - 
permanent partial disability equivalent to 22 1/2 percent 
of the whole person, which the parties recognize is an 
economic disability producing a weekly wage loss of 
$120.24 per week, with an equivalent compensation rate 
of $80.16 per week for permanent partial disability.” 


Then, Item No. 11: 


“These stipulations resolve all issues between the 
parties, and the parties respectfully request that an award 
issue in accordance therewith, subject to the limitations of 
the Act.” 


The only issue that was submitted to Judge Butler 
was the issue of 8(f) relief for the Employer. On Novem- 
ber 28, 1983, he issued an order granting the Employer’s 
petition for 8(f) relief and memorializing the settlement 
between the parties. 


The Employer, on October 30, 1989, filed a document 
entitled, “Employer’s Application for Modification, Sec- 
tion 922.” 


ee 


24 


I have cited the cases which basically hold that stipu- 
lations made by parties are binding upon parties who 
make them and that they cannot withdraw from the stip- 
ulation at this stage of the game. 


What is more, I have of course cited Clefstad case and 
all the other cases, including Sablowski, which holds [p. 7] 
that contingent awards are not contrary to the statute, 
and the Deputy Commissioner has power to approve a 
settlement agreed on which is properly conditioned. 


This was not a litigated cased [sic]. This was not a 
case that the judge issued a compensation order. For 
whatever reasons, the parties decided to settle this case, 
and they submitted it to a judge and it was settled. It was 
an 8(i) settlement. That plain and simple. 


If it looks like a duck, and walks like a duck, and it 
sounds like a duck, it must be a duck. So, it was an 8(i) 
settlement, and the quid pro quo was that the Claimant 
agreed that he would not shoot the dice at that time and 
seek a greater compensation award, nor would he 
attempt to modify it in the future, nor can he modify it 
now. 


And the same thing should hold true for the 
Employer. It is a strawman to say that the parties couldn’t 
settle this claim because they are not allowed to settle 8(f) 
cases. I totally agree with that. That isn’t what they were 
doing. 


What they did was they agreed to a settlement, that 
the Claimant was going to get $80.16 from somebody. If 
the Employer lost his 8(f) petition, Metropolitan would be 


25 


on the hook and it would be an 8(i) settlement, and they 
would have to pay him to this day. 


The fact that the Employer was fortunate enough to 
[p. 8] be able to get 8(f) relief can’t be used now as a 
weapon against the Claimant to withdraw from a settle- 
ment that they already made. 


The second argument that I have is — the second 
objection — let me clean that up. Just so the record is clear, 
Your Honor, I want it on the record that the Claimant 
formally objects to the introduction of any evidence at 
this hearing on the guise of a 922 petition by the 
Employer for the reasons stated. 


In addition to that, the Employer has not submitted 
any medical. I make an offer of proof now that they have 
no current medical. It is the Claimant’s condition that in 
this circuit, in the Ninth Circuit, since 1933 in the McCor- 
mick case, the Ninth Circuit has held that the change of 
condition to justify a 922 modification has to be predi- 
cated upon a change on medical condition. 


They don’t have that. There is a Fourth Circuit deci- 
sion, Fleetwood, which was recently decided, which I have 
cited, and I have a copy. I would be happy to give it to 
the court. There is a strong dissenting opinion, by the 
dissenting judge in the Fourth Circuit,that indicates that 
there are many reasons why you have to have the medical 
basis for a 922 petition. 


Otherwise, every time the economy hiccups, you are 
going to either have a line of longshoremen filing 922 [p. 9] 
motions or the employer is going to be filing 922 motions. It 
has nothing to do with the change in the economic condition 


26 


of the individual based upon his medical at the time of the 
finding, the time that they agreed or an order was entered 
establishing his disability, but rather it is due to economic 
conditions. 


Finally, Your Honor, if this Court or any reviewing 
court deems that the intention of the parties in 1983, 
when they entered into the stipulation — that the settle- 
ment of this claim is an issue, then the Claimant objects to 
any other Administrative Law Judge proceeding on this 
case, except Judge Butler, who was there and heard it, 
and presumably has some record or recollection of what 
exactly did occur. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Mr. Wood. 


MR. WOOD: Trying to take these items in turn, 
I would like to stress that counsel did not, in his pre-trial 
statement, make a request for a change of judge or | 
would have provided a case which is right on point, 
showing that for purposes of modification any judge can 
hear the proceeding. It does not have to be the judge that 
issued the original compensation order. 


But be that as it may, with regard to the argument 
that this case has been settled, we have our own trial 
brief which the Employer would like to submit on its 
behalf and [p. 10] incorporate herein, which points out, 
we think quite clearly, with the case of Laurence, which is 
cited therein, that this cannot be a settlement of the case. 


It did not conform to the provisions of Section 8(i), 
(a), or (b), and is therefore not a settlement. Furthermore, 
it is demonstrated that the process of a settlement —- and | 
use that term in the specific word of art — particular 


27 


emphasis must be made as to the manner in which it is 
submitted and approved. . 


Lastly, it is impossible to have a settlement that binds 
to Special Fund, and therefore, since the Judge enter- 
tained the Section 8(f) relief, it is pretty obvious the Judge 
did not consider this to be a settlement. 


Counsel’s other argument for the Claimant relates to 
the parties stipulating to the facts. Of course, there are 
two way [sic] to get evidence before the judge. One is to 
put on the evidence and otherwise to stipulate. But either 
way, the judge is not bound by any of the evidence. 


And the law requires the judge to make an indepen- 
dent judgment, not only with regard to Section 8(f) relief 
but with regard to the issue of disability, the extent 
thereof, and the amount of the compensation that is to be 
awarded. 


So, even though we did enter into certain stipulated 
facts, the judge still, by law, had to make an [p. 11] 
independent judgment. And our exhibits include a copy 
of his decision. Now, in this case it is true, he did incor- 
porate the parties’ stipulation on disability. But we all 
know that he didn’t have to do that. 


In any event with regard to counsel’s objection to the 
Employer seeking modification pursuant to Section 22, 
we have covered that with the authority right within the 
section, which provides that, even though the Special 
Fund is paying the claimant, the employer, as an inter- 
ested party, is entitled to seek modification if the facts 
warrant it. 


28 


Next, with regard to no medical, counsel is relying on 
a case — I think he said 1933. This Act has been amended 
in 1984, and there are other cases since then which clearly 
support a change of condition based on economic 
grounds as a valid basis to pursue modification. 


That is what the Employer is doing in this case. 


Separate from those items, we simply show that this 
individual has continued working in the same industry 
he has worked in before. He has not made a change into 
some other industry, which might be temporary in nature 
and potentially leave open for the future some further 
diminished earnings. 


As it is, this gentleman is earning approximately 
$1700 a week. At the time of the award, he was earning 
[p. 12] approximately $545 a week. Now, we are well 
aware — and we wouldn’t trouble the Court with this 
proceeding, by way of our application, if it was simply a 
matter of telling the Court that, well, $1700 is a lot more 
than $545, and therefore, it should be modified. 


What we have done and what we propose to do here, 
with our exhibits, is to demonstrate that no matter how 
you approach this earnings increase, throughout the time 
span involved, whether you use the national average 
weekly wage based on inflationary factors or whether 
you use the actual union increases which come into play 
by way of union contract agreements every year, that he 
would have no reasonable basis whatever, through nor- 
mal attrition of these benefits, to be making the kind of 
money he is making now. 


anaemia 


29 


So, he is still making at least $600 a week more than any 
of these compounded benefits for the time span in-between. 
So, in its simplest terms, we say, number one, the Employer 
does have the right to seek modification. Number two, this is 
a proper case for modification. Number three, we have 
earnings capacity demonstrated for this Claimant which sup- 
ports our position. Thank you. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Do you have any evi- 
dence you want to present, Mr. Pierry? I am not going to 
make a decision here today, counsel. I will have to study 
the issue, and then I will write a written decision. But I 
am [p. 13] not going to make a decision at the bench here 
today. 


MR. PIERRY: I know this has to end, Your 
Honor. It can’t go on forever. If I may just quickly sum- 
marize and respond. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. 


MR. PIERRY: Section 908 states, “Whenever the 
parties to any claim for compensation under this Act 
agree to a settlement, Administration Law Judge shall 
approve the settlement.” 


I direct your attention to the only document we have 
in front of us, not what Mr. Wood says that document 
says, but look at the document itself. The document says, 
“The parties have stipulated as follows...” And they lay 
out in No. 6 just exactly what they are doing. They lay 
out in No. 11 that, “These stipulations resolve all issues 
between the parties, and the parties respectfully request 
award issue in accordance therewith.” 


That is what they did. They settled this case. If Adminis- 
trative Judges want to have these cases bounced back at 


30 


them, then I suppose that is where we are going. But as far 
as the authority in this circuit for a 922 modification as to 
change of condition, the Ninth Circuit has religiously and 
without fail, since 1933, followed the McCormick, which held 
that in order to have a 922 modification, the condition prece- 
dent is that there was a [p. 14] physical change in the 
Claimant’s condition since the time of the award. 


The only decision that he can point to on that level is 
the Fourth Circuit Fleetwood decision, which is a vigor- 
ously dissented decision in the Fourth Circuit, with a 
vigorous dissent by one judge, who I greatly admire, 
Your Honor. 


I think you are bound by the Ninth Circuit. We are 
sitting in San Pedro, California, and until the Ninth Cir- 
cuit of the United States Supreme Court changes that 
decision, then I think you are bound by that decision. 


JUDGE STEWART: I would agree we are bound 
by the law in the Ninth Circuit. Now, as to what the law 
in the Ninth Circuit is, that is another question. But we 
are bound by the law in the Ninth Circuit. There is no 
question about that. We are not bound by the law in the 
Fourth Circuit. 


Do you have any evidence that you want to present 
at this time? 


MR. PIERRY: May I submit the Fleetwood deci- 
sion, Your Honor? 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. Now, how do 
you want to — you already have Claimant’s Exhibit No. 1, 
which has been admitted into evidence. Do you want to 
make this Claimant’s Exhibit 2? 


31 


[p. 15] MR. PIERRY: Two. 
JUDGE STEWART: Do you have any objection? 


MR. WOOD: Well, it is just that I think you 
threw me a little bit when you accepted a trial brief as an 
exhibit. 


JUDGE STEWART: I agree, it is not evidence. 

MR. WOOD: All right. That is what I - 

JUDGE STEWART: There is no question about 
it. 

MR. PIERRY: The only reason I - 

MR. WOOD: Well, I - 


(The document referred to was marked for iden- 
tification as Claimant’s Exhibit No. 2 and 
received into evidence.) 


JUDGE STEWART: We have nothing else, I 
gather, here today? 


MR. WOOD: I have exhibits I wish to offer. 
JUDGE STEWART: Oh, okay. 


MR. WOOD: And if need be, I will call the 
Claimant. 


JUDGE STEWART: I am bending the rules; 
there is no question, Mr. Wood. Because it is not evidence. 


MR. WOOD: Well, I don’t care what number it 
is given, just so it is not evidence, that is all. 


MR. PIERRY: Just as long as it is on the record. I 
don’t want it to be like the - 


32 


[p. 16] JUDGE STEWART: Right. Right - 


MR. PIERRY: -—- Pigrenet decision, where later 
the BRB ducts [sic] the issue by saying it wasn’t raised by 
the Claimant at the hearing, therefore it was waived. 


JUDGE STEWART: I understand your position, 
Mr. Pierry. You are trying to make exactly clear what your 
legal position is. 


MR. PIERRY: Thank you. 


JUDGE STEWART: And you want me to have 
access to all of the cases that are pertinent to this particu- 
lar decision. And I appreciate your effort. 


MR. PIERRY: Thank you. 


JUDGE STEWART: As far as evidence, it is not 
evidence. 


Does that complete your case, Mr. Pierry? 


MR. PIERRY: I don’t put the case on. He has got 
the - 


JUDGE STEWART: Yes, I know. 


MR. PIERRY: Oh. This completes my statement, 
yes. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. 


MR. WOOD: Your Honor, we would like to 
offer Employer’s trial brief and the exhibits, if we may. 


MR. PIERRY: I have objections to each and 
every one of them. 


[p. 17] JUDGE STEWART: Okay. | 


ee 


33 


MR. WOOD: That is the brief and the exhibits 
that he is going to argue about, I believe. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. And you have identi- 
fied the exhibits as Exhibits A through H.’ 


(The documents referred to were marked for 
identification as Employer’s Exhibits A through 
H.) 


JUDGE STEWART: Mr. Pierry, you have objec- 
tions to every one of them? 


MR. PIERRY: Every single one of them, Your 
Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: What is your objection to 
Exhibit A? 


MR. PIERRY: Exhibit A, I don’t know what it is. 
It is on Mr. Jim Wood’s stationery. I have no idea where 
these figures came from. He has no affidavit, no jurat by 
anybody, certifying what these numbers are. I haven’t got 
the faintest idea what they are and I don’t believe the 
Court does either. 


JUDGE STEWART: Do you want to respond, 
Mr. Wood? 


MR. WOOD: Yes. These exhibits are numbered 
in sequence, as the Court said, starting with Exhibit A, 
and all the pages are numbered. 


The Court will note on Page 2 is a breakdown tabu- 
lated by the Department of Labor. 


34 


[p. 18] MR. PIERRY: I have no objection to that 
document. 


MR. WOOD: That in turn provides the basis for 
Page 1. 


MR. PIERRY: I object to that, Your Honor. If the 
Court wishes to do some calculation, that is fine. But Mr. 
Wood should not be able to. 


MR. WOOD: Let’s let me finish, please. 


JUDGE STEWART: One at a time, please. Okay, 
Mr. Wood. 


MR. WOOD: That simply takes the mathemati- 
cal significance of the numbers and translates it, using the 
Claimant’s average weekly wage at the time of the injury, 
compounding it up to what it would be October 1, 1989. 


So, if counsel doesn’t object to Page 2, which is the 
foundation for Page 1, then I am not sure I appreciate the 
objection. 


MR. PIERRY: Is Mr. Wood taking the stand and 
testifying as an expert in this? That is what I am objecting 
to. It is irrelevant and immaterial, and we have no foun- 
dation for it. 


JUDGE STEWART: Your objection is overruled. 
It will be admitted into evidence. Employer’s Exhibit A 
will be admitted into evidence. I appreciate your position, 
Mr. Pierry, but let’s face it, Page 1 of Exhibit No. A goes 
to the weight that I am going to give this particular 
evidence. 


[p. 19] I might not give it any weight at all, but it is 
admitted into evidence. 


a 


35 


(The document referred to, having been previously 
marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibit A, was 
received into evidence.) 


JUDGE STEWART: What about B? 


MR. PIERRY: B, Your Honor, this again — Mr. 
Wood asked the Court to take judicial notice of some 
fellow by the name of Mike Carmelich and what he said 
in some other case. 


And if he wants to have Mr. Carmelich come in and 
testify and make an offer of proof — he is available; I 
spoke to him last week. He is in town. I object to this 
evidence coming in. Again, it is without foundation. I 
don’t know what it proves. 


JUDGE STEWART: Mr. Wood, I think you have 
a serious problem as to Exhibit No. B. 


MR. WOOD: Well, Your Honor, on Page 4 I cite 
the authority which clearly states, on 29 C.F.R. 18.48, that 
records and other proceedings may be offered in similar 
proceedings. 


Now, we have already been through this modifica- 
tion procedure in the Henry Corbos (ph.) case. And - 


[p. 20] MR. PIERRY: I - 


MR. WOOD: Just a second. And Mr. Carmelich 
did testify and he did offer — the claimant offered into 
evidence this very same documentation. 


It is nothing more than a guideline of the yearly basic 
longshore pay increase on hourly rates. And if he has an 
argument against it, it is not with me. He has been served 


36 


before this trial — I didn’t just serve it on him today. He 
was served, whatever it is, 10 or 12 days ago with this 
document. 


And I don’t understand why he would have an objec- 
tion to it. 


MR. PIERRY: Your Honor, let me cite to you the 
case of Jordon versus Davis Construction Corporation. It is a 
BRB decision, on judicial notice. And the Court makes it 
very clear that even where the administrative tribunal 
may take judicial notice of extra record facts, because of 
the vulnerable position in which the opponent is placed 
by judicial notice, the administrative law judge must be 
concerned with certain protective measures. 


I don’t have any chance to cross examine this man. | 
have no idea where these records came from or the truth 
or veracity of them. I believe it is an improper exhibit. 
May I give the case — Claimant’s 3. 


JUDGE STEWART: Yes. 


[p. 21] (The document referred to was marked for 
identification as Claimant’s Exhibit No. 3 and received 
into evidence.) 


MR. PIERRY: 9 Benefits Review Board’s — 


JUDGE STEWART: I agree Mr. Pierry. I am 
going to sustain your objection. 


MR. WOOD: With regard to that item, Your 
Honor, we would like to then extract it from our exhibits 
and append it to our pre-trial brief. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. 


37 


MR. WOOD: Since that is not an exhibit for 
evidence. 


JUDGE STEWART: Right. 
MR. WOOD: So, may I jerk it out of there. 
JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. 


(The document referred to, having been previously 
marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibit B, was 
withdrawn from evidence.) 


MR. WOOD: What was the citation on Davis - 
Jordan versus Davis, BRB? 


MR. PIERRY: 9 Benefits Review Board Service — 
(NOISE) - 


MR. WOOD: Volume 9 did you say? 
[p. 22] MR. PIERRY: 9. 
MR. WOOD: Thank you very much. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Now, what is your 
objection to Exhibit No. C? 


MR. PIERRY: None, Your Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Exhibit No. C will be 
admitted into evidence. 


(The document referred to, having been previously 
marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibit C, was 
received into evidence.) 


JUDGE STEWART: What about D? 


MR. PIERRY: Yes, I object to that, Your Honor. 


38 


JUDGE STEWART: What is your objection? 


MR. PIERRY: I have no objection to the PMA 
records, which it is cut off on my exhibit, but it is the last 
seven pages of that exhibit. I only object to the cover 
sheet where Mr. Wood gives us the benefit of his evalua- 
tion of what these records mean. 


MR. WOOD: Could you identify that by a page 
number? 


JUDGE STEWART: The problem is I have the 
same problem here. The bottom is cut off, and I can’t tell 
what - oh, I see, someone has written here, at least part of 
them, in ink. 


[p. 23] MR. WOOD: The only part that is cut off 
— some of that earnings came to us on fax paper, which is 
a little longer, so when it was photocopied, just the page 
number was cut off. That has nothing to do with the 
records. 


JUDGE STEWART: No. What is it - ‘four pages, 
is that what it is supposed to be? 


MR. WOOD: Well, I don’t know where we are, 
Your Honor. 


MR. PIERRY: Exhibit D. 
MR. WOOD: Exhibit D, as in dog - 


JUDGE STEWART: In and of itself, isn’t it four 
pages? 


MR. WOOD: That is correct. 


MR. PIERRY: The first page is what I psi to, 
not the records from PMA. 


39 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Do you want to 
respond, Mr. Wood? 


MR. WOOD: Yes, Your Honor. PMA records are 
tedious to review, and it has been our practice in many 
cases in my office to retype the actual information from 
the PMA. This takes no interpretation whatsoever, but it 
simply lists it in a straight line instead of horizontal and 
otherwise, as shown on their record. 


So, we consider that to be entirely consistent with 
normal legal procedures. If counsel can point to a [p. 24] 
flaw, that would be entirely different. 


MR. PIERRY: Your Honor, I don’t think I have 
.9 make his case. He has to come in with admissible 
evidence. What he is doing now is he is testifying in this 
to all these exhibits. And I object. I don’t have the oppor- 
tunity to cross examine Mr. Wood. 


I shouldn’t have to point out any flaws. I think the 
court is capable of reading records. I think if he wants to 
put in records, that is fine, but I don’t think he should 
editorialize on them, except as closing argument. 


JUDGE STEWART: Your objection is overruled. 
Exhibit D is admitted into evidence and I will give it the 
appropriate weight that I think it deserves when I write 
my decision. 


(The document referred to, having been previously 
marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibit D, was 
received into evidence.) 


JUDGE STEWART: What is your objection to 
Exhibit No. E? 


40 


MR. PIERRY: None, Your Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Exhibit No. E, then, is 
admitted into evidence. 


‘ {p. 25] (The document referred to, having been previ- 
ously marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibit E, 
was received into evidence.) 


JUDGE STEWART: What about F? 


MR. PIERRY: Of course, I object to this whole 
procedure. 


JUDGE STEWART: I understand. I understand 
your position, Mr. Pierry. 


MR. PIERRY: Again, the exhibits attached to it 
seem to be all the exhibits that we have just done - I don’t 
want him sneaking them in the back door, after the Court 
has ruled on them. 


Again, I would not object to any of the PMA records 
that are attached, nor to the 208, but I object to Mr. 
Wood’s cover sheet. 


JUDGE STEWART: On F? 
MR. PIERRY: F. That is the application. 
MR. WOOD: My F is all PMA stuff. 


MR. PIERRY: My F is Employer’s Application 
for Modification, Section 922. 


JUDGE STEWART: He is correct. That is what I 
_have, too. 


MR. WOOD: Oh, I beg your pardon. That is 
included within. That is correct. Well, that is a [p. 26] 


=> 


41 


pleadings, Your Honor. It is just informative. That is how 
we got here in the first place. 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection overruled. 
MR. PIERRY: I have no objection to G and H. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Then, Exhibits F, G, 
and H are admitted into evidence. 


(The document referred to, having been previously 
marked for identification as Employer’s Exhibits F, G, 
and H, were received into evidence.) 


MR. WOOD: With regard to Exhibit B, Your 
Honor, if we may jerk that out of the collection and add it 
to the Employer’s pre-trial brief, it would be appreciated. 
You have the brief. 


JUDGE STEWART: Yes. You want to add it in 
here. Okay. (Pause.) Thank you. 


Does that complete your case or are you going to 
have some testimony? 


MR. WOOD: I would like to call the Claimant, 
Your Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. Mr. Rambo. 
Let’s go off the record a moment. 
(Brief discussion off the record.) 
JUDGE STEWART: Back on the record. 
[p. 27] Whereupon, 


JOHN RAMBO 
was called as a witness herein and, having been first duly 
sworn, was examined and testified as follows: 


42 


JUDGE STEWART: Go ahead, Mr. Wood. 


MR. PIERRY: Your Honor, again for the record, 
the Claimant objects to introduction of any evidence, 
including this testimony, for reasons already stated on the 
record. 


JUDGE STEWART: Right. Right. Because you 
don’t think the record should be reopened for any reason. 


MR. PIERRY: That is right. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Go ahead, Mr. Wood. 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


Q BY MR. WOOD: Would you please state your 
full name. 


A John D. Rambo. 
Q Mr. Rambo, what is your occupation? 
A Longshoreman. 


Q Were you so occupied in 1980, when you sus- 
tained an injury while working for Metropolitan? 


A Yes. 


Q Your employee number with Pacific Maritime 
Association, what is that? 


A 333130. 


Q Would you do that number again for us? 33130? 


[p. 28] A 33130. 


43 


Q_ Yes. Thank you. I thought you had an extra 3 in 
there before. Are you currently employed full time for as 
a longshoreman? 


A Yes. 

Q_ In what capacity? 

A Crane operator. 

Q About how long have you been a crane operator? 

A Four years - five years. Five years. 

Q_ As a crane operator, are you working steady for 
anyone? 

A Yes. 


Q Separate from when you are working as a crane 
operator, do you also sign for what they call volunteer for 
other jobs? 


A No. 


Q As a crane operator - according to the Occupa- 
tional Codings of Pacific Maritime Association, in the 
year 1988 they showed, for instance, that you put in eight 
hours as a dockman, for which you were paid. 


A I would have to look at my time book. 


Q_ They also show you put in 16 hours as a lift truck 
operator. 


A Okay. I might have. I don’t know. 


Q_ They also show you put in time as a heavy lift [p. 
29] truck operator. That is a little different pay, isn’t it? 


44 


A That is just driving a bigger forklifts. 


Q Now, if you are working steady for someone as a 
crane operator, how would it come about that you would 
sign out with classifications such as a dockman or a lift 
truck operator, et cetera? 


A What do you mean? 


Q Let’s do it another way. As a steady crane opera- 
tor for a particular employer, are you expected to be 
available to them on call? 


A Yes. 


Q And in exchange for that, are you guaranteed so 
many hours pay per week? 


A Yes. 


Q And as such, if they tell you that they are not 
going to need you on a particular day, are you then 
eligible to volunteer for work through the dispatch hall? 


A If I go to the hall. 
Q If you wish to, correct? 
A Yes. 


Q Now, is that the means by which you can get 
work as a dockman or a lift truck operator by volunteer- 
ing? 


A Yes. 


Q And in order to do that, you would have to go 
through the old procedure of getting dispatched? 


[p. 30] A Yes. 


45 


Q And if you do that, you get paid extra for it? 
A Yes. 


Q And you are still available for the guaranteed 
hours that your steady employer would otherwise be 
paying you? 


A Yes. 


Q Now, we have shown documents here that we 
have been debating - you heard us debating - from 
Pacific Maritime Association. Is that where your check 
comes from? 


A Yes. 


Q And on your check, the stub that comes with it, 
will it usually show the identity of each employer you 
may have worked for, assuming you worked for more 
than one and that employer’s code or number as listed 
with PMA. 


A Yes. 


Q So, if you sit home, you can keep your own time 
book and make sure that you got paid for whatever day 
you actually work and for whom you work? 


A Yes. 
Q_ Now, is that still the way it is as of right now? 
A Yes. 


Q Is that the way it was before you were injured 
and at the time of your injury in September of 1980? 


A I could volunteer then, yes. 


46 


[p. 31] Q At that time, you were not a steady crane 
operator, then? 


A No. 


Q Now, currently, they show that most of your 
hours, the bulk of your hours, are as a gantry crane 
operator? 


A Yes. 
Q What is a gantry crane? 


A_ I sit in a chair, like this, with arms, and I have 
two handles. I just operate it. 


Q Is that one of those large items over there on the 
waterfront that moves containers on and off of vessels? 


A Yes. 

Q How high off the ground is that? 
A Our crane I think is 121 feet. 

Q How do you get up there? 

A Elevator. 


Q Do you only work one crane and that one crane 
has an elevator? 


A APL has five cranes and they all have elevators. 


Q So, you are telling me, then, to get on those 
particular cranes it is not necessary to go up or down the 
ladder? 


A There is a ladder there, 12 feet, 15 feet. I don’t 
know. Then we get on an elevator. 


enema 


47 


Q_ So, you can use the elevator for part of the way 
[p. 32] and a ladder for part of the way? 


A Elevator almost all the way, all the way to the 
top. Just 12 feet - I climb, say, a 12-foot ladder, go into the 
elevator, and I go up the rest of the way. 


Q_ Okay. So, the elevator doesn’t pick up until about 
12 feet off the ground? 


A Yes. I am guessing on the 12 feet. 
Q Approximately. 
A Yes. 


Q And when you are doing this, this is normally 
your everyday job? 


A Yes. 


Q Before you became a steady with one particular 
employer — which employer is that? 


A Before? 


Q_ Excuse me. I will retract that. You are steady with 
whom? 


A Right now? 
QO Yes. 
A American President Lines. 


Q And before you became a steady with them, had 
you also worked as a crane operator through the hall? 


A They picked me up when I made the list on 
seniority. I went with SSA. They asked me to go steady. 


48 


Q So, as soon as they knew that you were available 
[p. 33] as a crane operator, you were picked up by SSA? 


A Yes. Seniority list. 


Q And then, in the meantime, you have went over 
with American President Lines? 


A Yes. 


Q Now, they have a crane board at the union dis- 
patch hall, as well, do they not? 


A Yes. 
Q I missed that. 
A Yes. 


Q And they also have a rule now that steady crane 
operators are not supposed to work more than 45 hours a 
week, is that true? 


A Under the new contract, 42!/2. 


Q 42'/2. And the reason for that is to assure that 
other crane operators out of the hiring hall will get work? 


A Yes. 


Q We don’t know how much they are going to get, 
but they are going to get more than they would other- 
wise, isn’t that true? 


A Yes. 


Q Because before some of the crane operators were 
working more than 45 hours a week. 


A The hall was good — (Not audible.) 


a 


49 


Q Now, is your job that you presently have of [p. 
34] indefinite duration? 


A No. 


Q What is not definite about it? What is not indefi- 
nite about it? 


A Matson laid off 50 guys. They can cut back on us 
and I would have to go back to the hall. 


Q You are not working for Matson, right? 


A No. 


Q But what you are telling me is that one of the 
lines did lay off some people. 


A Yes. 
Q Has anyone told you you are being laid off? 
A 


No. 


Q_ Has there been anything specific said that causes 
you to feel, with any reasonable certainty, that your job is 
not going to go on indefinitely? 


A I don’t under - 


Q If you don’t understand, I would be pleased to 
rephrase it, if I may. 


A I don’t know if it is indefinitely or not. 
Q But at the moment it is? What I am getting at is — 


A Icould be there next year. They might close down 
in two years, five years; I don’t know. 


Q All right. How long have you been there so far? 


50 


[p. 35] A Two-and-a-half years. 


JUDGE STEWART: Do you know of anyone that 
has been laid off for any reason? 


THE WITNESS: Well, Matson Company, lack of 
work — I heard they laid off 50 people. 


JUDGE STEWART: What about your company? 


THE WITNESS: Well, so far, there are only 15 or 
16 of us on nights, and - 


JUDGE STEWART: And no one has been laid 
off? 


THE WITNESS: Not right now, no. 
JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Go ahead. 


Q BY MR. WOOD: Of that number of people, how 
many are crane operators? 


A On nights? 


Q That you just mentioned. You gave the Judge a 
number of 16 people. 


A_ I think 16 on the nights. 
Q. All crane operators? 
A Yes. 


Q And as always, let’s suppose that you were told 
that they weren’t going to need you today over at Ameri- 
can President Lines.-Could you also volunteer as a crane 
operator out of the hall? 


A If there is work? 


51 


Q That is what I mean. 


[p. 36] A Yes. If there is work, which I don’t go to 
the hall. I haven’t went — I forgot about the times you told 
me there, but that was the last time | went. 


Q I want you to assume that we have in evidence 
the PMA earnings records relating to your payroll. What 
do you estimate your average weekly wage was in 1988, 
approximately? 

A This is ’90 - 

Q ‘88. 

A_ That is what is am thinking — this is 90 — 75 to 80. 


I don’t know. 


Q_ Well, let’s say the calculations show it is in excess 
of —- around $1600 a week. Does that seem approximately 
right to you? 


A_ Right now, with our new payroll, I make $1550 a 
week. 


JUDGE STEWART: Now. But what about 1988? 


THE WITNESS: I don’t know what I made a 
week then. 


Q BY MR. WOOD: In 19839, it showed, according to 
the payroll, that you averaged approximately $1700 a 
week. Does that seem correct? 


A_ I don’t know. 


MR. PIERRY: Your Honor, | object. He doesn’t 
have those records in front of him, and I think he is 
asking [p. 37] him to speculate. The records speak for 
themselves. 


52 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection overruled. Go 
ahead. 


Q BY MR. WOOD: If you don’t know the answer, 
just tell us you don’t know the answer. I am just asking 
you does $1700 seem about correct per week? 


A I can’t tell you that. 


Q Do you recall what you earned for the whole year 
in 1989? 


A No, I don’t. 


© But you are satisfied that every check you get 
comes through Pacific Maritime Association? 


A Yes. 


JUDGE STEWART: Do I understand correctly, 
Mr. Rambo, that if you were laid off at American Presi- 
dent and you had to try to get work some place else, 
would your chances of getting a new job depend upon 
seniority? 


THE WITNESS: Only in crane — it took me 20 
years to become a crane operator. Then I made the list. 
Now, if I go back to the hall, it is whatever company 
wants to pick up a crane operator. There is no seniority. 


JUDGE STEWART: They can pick up anyone 
they want? 


THE WITNESS: They can pick up anyone they 
want. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Go ahead. 


Q BY MR. WOOD: But nevertheless, you could still 
work through the hall, not only as a crane operator but in 


53 


[p. 38] any other capacity that you feel you want to work 
through the hall? 


A I- 


Q You could work like you have. You could work as 
a dockman if you wanted to. 


A Yes. 


Cn BO a AT Pat 


Q Or as a heavy truck Operator or - 


A Yes. Something that I don’t have to bend over 
and pick up. 


Q_ The crane operator’s work is preferred, I take it, 
because it pays more? 


A Yes. 
Q And if you are a Steady, you get guaranteed 
hours? 
A Yes. 
MR. WOOD: I have nothing further, Your 
Honor. 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


Q_ BY MR. PIERRY: Crane operator’s work is prefer- 


red, not only because it pays more but because it is an 
easier job, isn’t it? 


A Yes. 
Q Physically less demanding? 
A Oh, yes. 


54 


Q Has your physical condition since 1983 gotten 
better, or worse, or stayed the same? 


A_ I would say at least the same, because | still [p. 
39] can’t do certain things. 


Q And how many days a week on average do you 
work? 


A Three, maybe four. 


Q On the average, if you have 52 weeks in front of 
you, how many would you say you work three days per 
week? 


A What do you mean - 
© The last 52 weeks — 


MR. WOOD: I object. The question has been 
asked and answered, three to four days a week. 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection overruled. Go 
ahead. 


Q BY MR. PIERRY: How many weeks out of the last 
52 did you work three? If you can give us a percentage, a 
majority, a minority, 50 percent - 


A I would say the majority three, maybe four, if | 
am answering right. 


Q When you went to crane school in 1986, there 
were four instructors, were there not? 


A Yes, there were a few of them, yes. 


Q They came and went, but there were four posi- 
tions where PMA and the union had four different guys 


55 


instructing the various people that went through that 
class on how to operate these hammerhead cranes, cor- 
rect? 


A Yes. 
Q They are down to one, isn’t that correct? 


A I don’t know. Since I graduated, | couldn’t tell [p. 
40] you. 


MR. PIERRY: I would make an offer of proof, 
Your Honor, that they are down to one. 


MR. WOOD: Well, I object, Your Honor. We 
were talking about attorneys testifying. 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection sustained. 


Q BY MR. PIERRY: Do you know, from whatever 
knowledge, any source, as to what the plans of the union 
and the PMA to bring in more crane drivers are? Are they 
going to bring in more, less, the same or - 


A Right now - 
MR. WOOD: I object, without foundation. 


Q BY MR. PIERRY: Your own knowledge, what- 
ever you can tell us. 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection is overruled. 


THE WITNESS: Right now there is not enough 
work at the crane hall - at the hall — because that is why 
they are lowering our hours. 


Q BY MR. PIERRY: If you lose your job at Eagle 
Marine, you go back to the - you work out of the hall, 
correct? 


56 


Yes. 


A 
Q As low man out at the hall, isn’t that right? 
A Yes. You go on an heuely system. 

Q 


Could you explain to the Court what low man 
out [p. 41] means? 


A If we work tonight, we get eight hours - nine 
hours on the print. And if I go out - say Iam 10 guys out 
and I don’t get out tonight, tomorrow night I will be on, 
say, zero hours. This guy is on nine. Then I take a job. 


Then I come back. I check in on nine, but he is on the 
board before me and he would get the job first. 


Q Let me take you back to 1983. Your case was set 
for hearing before the United States Department of Labor, 
on Wilshire Boulevard. Do you remember that? 


A Yes. 


Q And you drove down with your attorney at the 
time, whose name was - 


A Goldwater. 


Q Goldwater. And after you checked in, you went 
down to the cafeteria, and you sat at one table and Mr. 
Goldwater and Mr. Wood sat at another table. Is that 
right? 


A Yes. 
Q Tell the Court what happened after that? 


A They called me over there after Goldwater and 
Wood were talking, and Goldwater said that we were 


iia aetna llll 


57 


going to get $80 — say, $80 and some change a week. And 
I looked at him and Wood said — Goldwater said, “This is 
your settlement.” And then, Wood said, “You will get this 
as a settlement.” 


And I said — because the sum was little, the [p. 42] 
amount I was getting, I said, “Well, this isn’t very much.” 
I talked to Goldwater, and they said, “You [sic] settlement 
will be this for life.” 


Q Who said that? 


MR. WOOD: Your Honor, I am going to object 
at this moment, to hearsay statements made by his attor- 
ney, which the attorney is alive and he is available. He 
could have been called as a witness. We are being quoted 
— I don’t know what Mr. Goldwater told him, and it is 
irrelevant what he told him. 


JUDGE STEWART: Objection sustained. 


MR. PIERRY: For the record, Your Honor, may | 
be heard. This is percipient testimony. He is testifying to 
what he heard Mr. Goldwater say in front of Mr. Wood, 
and Mr. Wood was there. This isn’t hearsay. 


THE WITNESS: He told me for life. 
MR. PIERRY: This is percipient testimony. 
JUDGE STEWART: Mr. Wood. 


MR. WOOD: It is being offered for the truth of 
the matter. That is what makes it hearsay. Mr. Goldwater 
could have told him anything. If he wants to disagree 
with Mr. Goldwater - 


JUDGE STEWART: He said Mr. Wood. 


58 


MR. WOOD: Well, I hear what he is saying, 
Your Honor. I will have to call myself as a witness then, I 
[p. 43] guess. 


JUDGE STEWART: Well, he said he heard you 
say it. He has a right to testify as to what he heard you 
say. 


Go ahead. 
MR. PIERRY: That is all I have, Your Honor. 
JUDGE STEWART: Any redirect? 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


Q BY MR. WOOD: Were you aware at all times that 
I was the attorney for Metropolitan, while your case was 
in litigation? 


A Only when we went to court, as far as I remem- 
ber. 


Q Did you ever discuss with Mr. Goldwater the 
difference between a settlement and a compensation 
aware [sic]? 


A He discussed - I don’t remember everything, but 
I do remember sitting there in the cafeteria with both of 
you. 


Q The word “settlement” might be — did anybody 
use the word - 


A He said for life. 


© - resolution of the claim or submission of the 


facts or anything like that? 


59 


A I don’t recall that. All I know is you said for life 
and Goldwater wrote it down on a piece of paper, and 
you two were taking about it. 


Q_ He never told you about the provisions in the Act 
that provided for modification, in fact that you could [p. 
44] modify it and get more money if you later got worse? 
He never discussed that with you? 


A_ I don’t know if he did or not. All I know is that it 
was said that I had it for life. 


JUDGE STEWART: By Mr. Wood? 
(Brief pause off the record.) 


JUDGE STEWART: The answer was by Mr. 
Wood and by Mr. Goldwater. 


MR. WOOD: Well, let’s go back and hear it. I 
want to hear it myself, if I may, because the machine 
stopped running. 


Q BY MR. WOOD: Who told you that you would 
have this payment for life? 


A Both of you. 

Q Who is both of us? 

A You and Goldwater. 

Q I told you that you would have this payment for 
life? 


A We were sitting there in the cafeteria. You were 
on the left. You called me over later, and you were talking 
about what I am going to get a week. You said, “You will 
get this for life.” Goldwater was saying — I looked at him 
and he said, “Well, this is the rest of your life.” 


60 


And he wrote it down in the figures. “This is what 
you get two weeks, and you will get this for the rest [p. 
45] of your life.” 


Q And who said that? 


A Goldwater said that, and you said, “For your 
life.” 


Q I said, “For your life”? I told you that? 


A You were saying — between — now you are getting 
me confused — between both of you that I was supposed 
to get this for life. 


Q So, don’t worry about what I said. Your attorney 
never told you that this case could be modified either at 
your request or the Employer’s request? 


A I don’t know if he told me that or not, because I 
just was listening. I don’t remember that. 


Q Well, don’t you think that would be germane to 
the discussion as to whether you are going to get some- 
thing for life or not, if it could be modified? 


A I understood I had it for life. 


Q You have received your payments continuously 
up until today, haven’t you? 


A Yes. 

Q And that was following the Judge’s order? 

A Yes. 

Q So, I take it from what you say that your impres- 


sion was that Mr. Goldwater was settling your case, is 
that what you are telling us? 


i asceneenienensiiniieinemeiall 


61 


[p. 46] A Yes, with you, yes. 
Q With me? 


A Well, I mean, we were there together. You were 
there with - 


MR. WOOD: Your Honor, it may be that we 
have a mistake of fact here, and what really should hap- 
pen is the award should be vacated going back to the date 
of its inception, if that is the case. In which event, we 
would request reimbursement and go to trial on the 
issues. 


JUDGE STEWART: That is not going to happen, 
Mr. Wood. Go ahead. 


MR. WOOD: I have nothing further. 
MR. PIERRY: Nothing further, Your Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: Fine. Does that complete 
your case, Mr. Wood? 


MR. WOOD: It does. 
JUDGE STEWART: Okay. You may step down. 
(Whereupon, the Witness was excused.) 


JUDGE STEWART: And you had indicated you 


have nothing at all, Mr. Pierry, except your legal argu- 
ment. 


MR. PIERRY: Yes, Your Honor. 
JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. 


Since we have the trial brief - Mr. Wood do you want 
to write a brief after the hearing here today, in addition, 
or not? 


62 


[p. 47] MR. WOOD: Well, I could for the pur- 
pose of citing the case that he brought up, the issue of 
whether Judge Butler had to hear this case or not. 


JUDGE STEWART: Yes. Do you or don’t you? 
That is all I want to know. 


MR. WOOD: No. That is clear. I don’t think it is 


necessary. 
JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Mr. Pierry? 
MR. PIERRY: No, Your Honor. 


JUDGE STEWART: Okay. Fine. This hearing 
will be concluded at 3:13 p.m. Thank you, counsel. 


(Whereupon, at 3:13 p.m., the hearing in the above- 
entitled matter was adjourned.) 


63 


U.S. Department of Labor Office of Administrative 
Law Judges 
211 Main Street — Suite 600 
San Francisco, California 


Self-Administered Employer 


94105 
(seal) 
) 
In the Matter of ) 
JOHN RAMBO ) Case No. 
Claimant 83-LHC-242 
against ) OWCP No. 
METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE ) 18-6945 
COMPANY, 
) 
) 


DECISION AND ORDER GRANTING MODIFICATION 


This proceeding involves a request for modification 
of the November 28, 1983, Decision and Order Awarding 
Benefits of Administrative Law Judge Butler. The request 
for modification was filed on October 30, 1989, pursuant 
to the provisions of 30 U.S.C. § 922. 


ISSUES 


1. Whether the employer’s request for modification of 
the 1983 Decision and Order under the provisions of 
| 30 U.S.C. § 922 should be granted. 


2. Whether the administrative law judge who approved 
the settlement is the one required to rule on the issue 
of modification. 


64 


Background 


The parties stipulated that the Claimant, John 
Rambo, became permanently, partially disabled as the 
result of an injury to his back and leg sustained on 
September 9, 1980; that the Claimant’s condition became 
permanent and stationary on November 16, 1981; and 
that the Claimant sustained an overall current permanent 
partial disability equivalent to 22'/2% of the whole person 
amounting to a compensation rate of $80.16 per week for 
permanent partial disability. This stipulated “settlement” 
was incorporated into a Decision and Order of the admin- 
istrative law judge. The only issue which the administra- 
tive law judge decided in his Decision and Order was 
whether § 908(f) was applicable. 


Then, on October 30, 1989, Employer filed an applica- 
tion for modification under Section 922 alleging that the 
Claimant’s current earning capacity had increased sub- 
stantially. 


JURISDICTION 


A. Administrative Law Judge 


Claimant alleges- that the motion for modification 
must be heard by the same administrative law judge 
assigned to the original claim. This allegation is without 
merit. In Finch v. Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock 
Company, 22 BRBS 196 (1989), the Benefits Review Board 
held that there is no requirement under the Act that a 
motion for modification must be heard by the same 
administrative law judge assigned to the original claim. 


65 


B. Section 922 Modification 


Claimant contends that the stipulations contained in 
the November 28, 1983, Decision and Order of the admin- 
istrative law judge constitute a settlement between the 
parties. However, Judge Butler’s Decision and Order 
awarding benefits does not constitute the approval of a 
settlement because it fails to provide in specific terminol- 
ogy for the complete discharge of employer’s liability 
and does not contain findings as to whether the compen- 
sation awarded was in the Claimant's best interest as is 
required under Section 8(i) of the Act. Finch v. Newport 
News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, supra. There- 
fore, Judge Butler’s Decision and Order must be consid- 
ered as an award of benefits based on the agreements and 
stipulations of the parties which is subject to modification 
pursuant to Section 22. 


DISCUSSION 


In the original Decision and Order dated November 
28, 1983, it was stipulated that the Claimant's average 
weekly wages were $534.38 per week at the time of the 
pertinent injury, that Claimant sustained an overall cur- 
rent permanent partial disability equivalent to 22.5% of 
the whole person which produced a weekly wage loss of 
$120.24 per week with an equivalent compensation rate of 
$80.16 per week for permanent partial disability. 


Section 22 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. §922, authorizes the 
modification of a Decision and Order based on a change 
in condition or mistake of fact at any time prior to one 
year after the last payment of compensation. Modification 
based on a change in condition may be granted in cases in 


a 


66 


which the claimant’s economic condition has changed 
following the entry of an award of compensation. Fleet- 
wood v. Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, 
16 BRBS 282 (1984). 


Employer in the instant case contends that since 
Claimant is presently earning more money than at the 
time of his injury, Claimant did not have a loss of wage- 
earning capacity. However, higher post-injury gains/ 
losses are not necessarily determinative of an employee’s 
wage-earning capacity. See Devillier v. National Steel and 
Shipbuilding Co., 10 BRBS 649 (1979). One has to consider 
wage-earning capacity in an open labor market under 
normal employment conditions. 


Claimant testified that he was working as a long- 
shoreman in 1980 when he was injured, and that he is 
currently working fulltime as a longshoreman (Tr. 27-8).! 
He is presently working steadily as a crane operator for 
American President Lines (Tr. 28, 32). He has been work- 
ing as a crane operator for four or five years (Tr. 28). In 
addition to working as a crane operator, Claimant volun- 
teers for work as a lift truck operator and a heavy lift 
truck operator for which he receives additional pay (Tr. 
28-30). When Claimant works as a crane operator, he 
works most of the time as a gantry crane operator (Tr. 31). 
The crane which he operates is 131 feet high (Tr. 31). In 
order to reach the place where he works, Claimant has to 
climb a 12 to 15 foot ladder and then take an elevator (Tr. 


' In this decision, “CX” refers to Claimant’s Exhibits, 
EX” refers to Employer's Exhibits and “Tr.” refers to the tran- 
script of the hearing. 


67 


31). As a crane operator, he is not allowed under the 
contract to work more than 42.5 hours per week (Tr. 33). 


According to the Claimant, he is now making 
$1,550.00 per week (Tr. 36). He prefers doing crane work 
because it pays more money and it is easier work than 
some of the other jobs (Tr. 38). 


Claimant testified that his Physical condition since 
1983, when he was awarded permanent partial disability, 
has remained about the same (Tr. 38-9). 


According to the Claimant, Matson Lines has laid off 
50 men; however, there has been no indication by the 
company for which he works that anyone is going to be 
laid off (Tr. 34). 


The evidence in the instant case shows that Claimant 
earned a total of $70,662.67 for 1985 for an average 
weekly wage of $1,358.90; a total of $68,006.22 for 1986 
for an average weekly wage of $1,307.81; a total of 
$67,953.72 for 1987 for an average weekly wage of 
$1,306.80; a total of $76,332.19 for 1988, for an average 
weekly wage of $1,467.93; a total of $87,873.53 for the 
work beginning December 31, 1988, and ending Decem- 
ber 23, 1989, for an average weekly wage of $1,689.88: 
and a total of $67,619.96 for the week beginning Decem- 
ber 30, 1989, and ending September 22, 1990, for an 
average weekly wage of $1,690.50. 


Claimant's average weekly wages have increased 
from $534.38 per week in 1980 when Claimant was 
injured to $1,690.50 as of September 22, 1990. This dem- 
onstrates that the Claimant’s average weekly wages more 


68 


.than tripled from 1980 to 1990. After taking into consider- 
ation the increase in wages due to the rate of inflation 
and any increase in salary for the particular job, it is 
evident that Claimant no longer has a wage-earning 
capacity loss. Although Claimant testified that he might 
lose his job at some future time, the evidence shows that 
Claimant would not be at any greater risk of losing his 
job than anyone else. Moreover, no evidence has been 
offered to show that Claimant's age, education, and voca- 
tional training are such that he would be at greater risk of 
losing his present job or in seeking new employment in 
the event that he should be required to do so. Likewise, 
the evidence does not show that Claimant’s employer is a 
beneficent one. On the contrary, the evidence shows that 
Claimant is not only able to work full time as a crane 
operator, but that he is able to work as a heavy lift truck 
operator when the time is available within which to do 
so. 


Accordingly, I find that the Claimant no longer has a 
wage-earning capacity loss and that his disability pay- 
ments should be discontinued effective on the date of this 
Decision and Order. 


ATTORNEY’S FEES 


Inasmuch as the Claimant did not prevail in this 
proceeding, the attorney is not entitled to any fee. 


69 


ORDER 


It is hereby ORDERED that Claimant's disability be 
terminated effective as of the date of this Decision and 
Order. 


/s/ Daniel Lee Stewart 
DANIEL LEE STEWART 
Administrative Law Judge 


Dated: MAY 29, 1991 
San Francisco, California 


DLS:bll 


70 


U.S. Department of Labor Benefits Review Board 
800 K Street N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001-8001 


(seal) 
BRB No. 91-1538 
JOHN RAMBO ) NOT 
Claimant-Petitioner ) PUBLISHED 
v. 
METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE  ) DATE 
Conny ) ISSUED: 
Self-Insured ) 
Employer-Respondent ) 
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ) DECISION 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION ) AND ORDER 
PROGRAMS, UNITED ) | 
STATES DEPARTMENT ) (Filed 
OF LABOR Nov. 9, 1992) 
Respondent ) 


Appeal of the Decision and Order Granting 
Modification of Daniel Lee Stewart, Administra- 
tive Law Judge, United States Department of 
Labor. 


Thomas J. Pierry (Magana, Cathcart, McCarthy 
& Pierry), Wilmington, California, for claimant. 


James J. Wood, Long Beach, California, for self- 
insured employer. 


LuAnn Kressley (Marshall J. Breger, Solicitor of 
Labor; Carol DeDeo, Associate Solicitor; Janet 
Dunlop, Counsel for Longshore), Washington, 


ee ee ee S ee a ee — 


71 


D.C., for the Director, Office of Workers’ Com- 
pensation Programs, United States Department 
of Labor. 


Before: BROWN, DOLDER and McGRANERY, 
Administrative Appeals Judges. ‘ 


PER CURIAM: 


Claimant appeals the Decision and Order Granting 
Modification (83-LHC-242) of Administrative Law Judge 
Daniel Lee Stewart on a claim filed pursuant to the provi- 
sions of the Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensa- 
tion Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §901 et seq. (the Act). We 
must affirm the findings of fact and conclusions of law of 
the administrative law judge if they are rational, sup- 
ported by substantial evidence, and in accordance with 
law. O'Keeffe v. Smith, Hinchman & Grylls Associates, Inc., 
380 U.S. 359 (1965); 33 U.S.C. §921(b)(3). 


On September 9, 1980, claimant injured his back and 
leg while working for employer. In a Decision and Order 
dated November 28, 1983, Administrative Law Judge 
James J. Butler awarded claimant temporary total disabil- 
ity compensation from September 10, 1980 through 
November 22, 1981, and permanent partial disability 
compensation thereafter. Pursuant to the stipulations of 
the parties, the administrative law judge found that 
claimant's average weekly wage at the time of injury was 
$534.38, that claimant had sustained a 22 1/2 percent 
impairment of the whole person which the parties equa- 
ted to a $120.24 per week loss in wage-earning capacity, 
and that accordingly claimant was entitled to permanent 
partial disability compensation based on an $80.16 per 
week compensation rate. In addition, the administrative 


72 


law judge awarded claimant’s counsel an attorney’s fee 
payable by employer, see 33 U.S.C. §928, and awarded 
employer relief pursuant to Section 8(f), 33 U.S.C. §908(f). | 


Thereafter on October 30, 1989, employer sought 
modification of the permanent partial disability award 
pursuant to Section 22, 33 U.S.C. §922, arguing that there 
had been a change in claimant’s wage-earning capacity 
such that he is no longer disabled. In a Decision and 
Order dated May 29, 1991, Administrative Law Judge 
Daniel Lee Stewart granted modification, noting that 
claimant had completed training and was currently work- 
ing as a crane operator, a higher paying yet less strenuous 
job, which he had been performing for four or five years 
and was not in danger of losing. In addition, Judge Stew- 
art noted that claimant also was able to obtain additional 
pay by volunteering to work as a lift truck operator and 
heavy lift truck operator. Finally, Judge Stewart found 
that claimant’s average weekly wage had more than tri- 
pled between the time of his injury in 1980 and the 
hearing in 1990. After taking into consideration the 
increase in wages due to the rate of inflation and any 
increase in salary for the particular job, he concluded that 
claimant no longer had a loss in his wage-earning capac- 
ity. The administrative law judge therefore ordered that 
the award of permanent partial disability compensation 
be terminated as of the date of the decision and order. 
Claimant appeals, arguing that the granting of modifica- 
tion was improper. Employer and the Director, Office of 
Worker’s Compensation Programs, respond, urging affir- 
mance. 


Under Section 22 an aggrieved party may seek mod- 
ification of a compensation award within one year of the 


73 


date of last payment of compensation or within one year 
of the denial of a claim based on a change in condition or 
mistake of fact. 33 U.S.C. §922. With the enactment of the 
1984 Amendments to the Act, Section 22 was amended to 
prohibit the modification of settlements which were 
entered into pursuant to Section 8(i), 33 U.S.C. 
§908(i)(1988). The Board had previously reached the same 
conclusion under the pre-1984 Act. See Lambert v. Atlantic 
& Gulf Stevedores, 17 BRBS 68 (1985). 


Initially, we reject claimant’s assertion that Judge 
Butler’s original Decision and Order constitutes the 
approval of a Section 8(i) settlement which could not be 
modified pursuant to Section 22. This decision fails to 
provide for the complete discharge of employer’s liability 
and lacks any findings as to whether the compensation 
awarded was in claimant's best interest as was required 
under Section 8(i) at the time of Judge Butler’s decision. 
33 U.S.C. §908(i) (1982) (amended 1984). Accordingly, 
Judge Butler’s Decision and Order was, as Judge Stewart 
properly determined, simply an award of benefits based 
on the agreements and stipulations of the parties which is 
subject to modification pursuant to Section 22. Norton v,. 
National Steel & Shipbuilding Co., 25 BRBS 79, 84 (1991); 
Lawrence v. Toledo Lake Front Docks, 21 BRBS 282 (1988). 


Claimant’s contention that the administrative law 
judge erred in granting modification absent a showing of 
a change in his physical condition is similarly without 
merit. Contrary to claimant’s assertions Judge Stewart 
correctly recognized that modification Pursuant to Sec- 
tion 22 may be granted based solely upon a change in 
claimant’s economic condition. See Fleetwood v. Newport 
News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co., 776 F.2d 1225, 18 


BRBS 12 (CRT) (4th Cir. 1985); Ramirez v. Southern Steve- 
dores, 25 BRBS 260 (1991); Moore v. Washington Metro- 
politan Area Transit Authority, 23 BRBS 49 (1989). Claimant 
has raised no error committed by the administrative law 
judge in weighing the evidence and granting modifica- 
tion based on claimant’s increase in wage-earning capac- 
ity- after the original award of benefits. We therefore 
affirm his determination that claimant was no longer 


74 


disabled as of the date of his decision. 


Accordingly, the administrative law judge’s Decision 


and Order Granting Modification is affirmed. 


SO ORDERED. 


/s/ James F. Brown 
JAMES F. BROWN 
Administrative Appeals 
Judge 


/s/ Nance S. Dolder 
NANCY S. DOLDER 
Administrative Appeals 
Judge 


/s/ Regina C. McGranery 
REGINA C. McGRANERY 
Administrative Appeals 
Judge 


75 


Cite as 94 C.D.O.S. 4781 


JOHN RAMBO, Petitioner, 
V. 


DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
PROGRAMS; METROPOLITAN STEVEDORE COM- 
PANY, Respondents, 


No. 92-70783 


United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
OWCP No. 18-6945 BRB No. 91-1538 


Petition for Review of an Order of the Benefits Review 
Board Argued and Submitted March 14, 1994 — San Fran- 
cisco, California 


Before: Stephen Reinhardt and Edward Leavy, Circuit 
Judges, and William D. Browning,” District Judge. 


COUNSEL 


Thomas J. Pierry, Magana, Cathcart, McCarthy & 
Pierry, Wilmington, California, for the petitioner. 


LuAnn Kressley, United States Department of Labor, 
Office of the Solicitor, Washington, D.C., for the respon- 
dents. 


Filed June 24, 1994 


*The Honorable William D. Browning, Chief United States Dis- 
trict Judge for the District of Arizona, sitting by designation. 


76 


LEAVY, Circuit Judge: 


In 1983, the appellant John Rambo (“Rambo”) was 
awarded $80.16 per week in worker’s compensation for a 
permanent partial disability to his back and leg. Rambo 
subsequently attended crane school and obtained a posi- 
tion as a crane operator. In 1990, Rambo’s employer, 
Metropolitan Stevedore Company (“Metropolitan”) 
moved to have his benefits terminated. Despite the fact 
that Rambo’s physical condition had not changed, Metro- 
politan argued that Rambo was no longer eligible for the 
benefits because he was presently working at a job that 
paid him $1,505.21 per week - almost 300% of Rambo’s 
pre-injury average weekly wage. 


The Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”) found in 
favor of Metropolitan and terminated Rambo’s benefits. 
The ALJ determined that Rambo’s new job was a “change 
in conditions” within the meaning of 33 U.S.C. § 922.2 The 
Benefits Review Board affirmed. Both the ALJ’s and the 
Board’s decisions relied upon Fleetwood v. Newport News 
Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 776 F.2d 1225 (4th Cir. 1985), 
which held that a mere change in a claimant’s wages 
could satisfy the “change in conditions” requirement for 
modification. Neither decision cited any Ninth Circuit 
cases. However, our cases make clear that only a change 
in a claimant’s physical condition can justify an award 
modification. A change in a claimant’s wages, training, 


2 Section 922 provides for a modification of awards for, 
among other things, a “change in conditions.” 


77 


skills, or educational background is insufficient. Accord- 
ingly, we reverse the decision of the Benefits Review 
Board (“BRB”). 


Analysis 


Under our cases, a mere change in a claimant's 
wages, training, skills, or educational background is not 
sufficient to meet the “change in conditions” requirement 
for an award modification. Rather, a party seeking to 
modify an award must prove that the claimant has under- 
gone a change in his physical condition. See, e.g., Pillsbury 
v. Alaska Packers Ass'n, 85 F.2d 758, 760 (9th Cir. 1936), 
rev'd on other grounds, 301 U.S. 174 (1937) (“The expres- 
sion ‘change in conditions’ refers to a change in the physi- 
cal condition of the employee.” (emphasis added)). 


For example, in McCormick S.S. Co. v. United States 
Employees’ Compensation Comm'n, 64 F.2d 84 (9th Cir. 
1933), we held that a mere change in a claimant’s wages - 
without proof of a change in his physical condition — was 
not sufficient to satisfy the “change in conditions” 
requirement of 33 U.S.C. § 922. See id. at 86 (rejecting the 
petition for modification because it was not based upon 
“a change in physical condition,” but rather upon the claim- 
ant’s changed earnings (emphasis added)). 


Here, the respondent relies exclusively upon the 
Fourth Circuit’s decision in Fleetwood, which held that a 
mere change in a claimant's wages could satisfy the 
“change in conditions” requirement of 33 U.S.C. § 922. As 
the Fleetwood dissent noted, the Fourth Circuit’s rule is in 
direct conflict with the Ninth Circuit's rule. See id. at 
1235 (Warriner, J., dissenting) (noting that “[bleginning 


78 


with the first opinion dealing with the question, [McCor- 
mick,] handed down in 1933, and continuing thereafter, 
the courts have uniformly interpreted the term “change 
in conditions” in [33 U.S.C. § 922] to refer exclusively to a 
change in physical condition of the employee receiving 
compensation.” (emphasis added)). A three-judge panel 
may not overturn Ninth Circuit precedent, United States v. 
Lewis, 991 F.2d 524, 525 n.1 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S.Ct. 
216 (1993). 


As the Fleetwood dissent points out, id., the Fourth 
Circuit’s rule conflicts with the position taken by the First 
and Fifth Circuits. See, e.g., General Dynamics Corp. v. 
Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs, United 
States Dep’t of Labor, 673 F.2d 23, 25 n.6 (1st Cir. 1982) 
(“Courts uniformly have held that a ‘change in condi- 
tions’ . . . means a change in the employee’s physical 
condition, not other conditions.” (emphasis in original)); 
Burley Welding Works, Inc. v. Lawson, 141 F.2d 964, 966 (5th 
Cir. 1944) (citing McCormick and Pillsbury, and holding 
that “[i]t has been uniformly held that the term ‘change in 
conditions’ . .. means a change in the employee’s physical 
condition, and not other conditions” (emphasis added)). 
Thus, this circuit’s precedent is supported by the clear 
weight of authority. 


REVERSED 


79 


NOT FOR PUBLICATION 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


JOHN RAMBO, 


Claimant-Petitioner, No. 92-70783 
| 


OWCP No. 18-6945 
BRB No. 91-1538 


ORDER 


(Filed 
Aug. 10, 1994) 


V. 


DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
PROGRAMS; METROPOLITAN 
STEVEDORE COMPANY, 


Respondents. 


eet? eet Nee? ee See” eee?” Sue See Se Sue Ne 


Before: REINHARDT and LEAVY, Circuit Judges, and 
BROWNING," District Judge. 


The panel has voted to deny the petition for rehear- 
ing. Judges Reinhardt and Leavy have voted to reject the © 
suggestion for rehearing en banc, and Judge Browning 
has so recommended. 


The full court has been advised of the en banc sug- 
gestion and no judge of the court has requested a vote on 
it. 


The petition for rehearing is DENIED and the sugges- 
tion for rehearing en banc is REJECTED. 


*The Honorable William D. Browning, Chief United States Dis- 
trict Judge for the District of Arizona, sitting by designation. 


