No. 93-1841 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC.,, 
Petitioner, 
VS. 


FEDERICO PENA, SECRETARY OF 
TRANSPORTATION, ET AL., 


Respondents. 


° 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The United States 
Court Of Appeals For The Tenth Circuit 


+ 
JOINT APPENDIX 
+ 
WILLIAM Perry PENDLEY* Drew S. Days, III 
Topp S. WELCH Solicitor General 
Mountain States Legal Department of Justice 
Foundation Washington, D.C. 20530 
1660 Lincoln Street, (202) 514-2217 
Suite 2300 Counsel for Respondents 


Denver, Colorado 80264 
(303) 861-0244 

*Counsel of Record 
for Petitioner 


—- a 
= — 


Petition For Certiorari Filed May 17, 1994 
Certiorari Granted September 26, 1994 


COCKLE LAW PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
Docket Journal Entries (Colo.) ...................000. 1 
Docket Journal Entries (10th Cir.).................... 5 
Complaint and Jury Demand......................... 7 
Section 108 (Subcontract Compensation Clause). ..... 24 
Declaration of Starling J.T. Proffit................... 28 
Declaration of Randy Mark Pech.................... 32 
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Skinner, 790 F. Supp. 
ss kh ys ne dened een eeeen App. 26-38 
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 16 F3d 1537 
sidbes ss ceeesvcceesseecnse App. 1-26 
Se EE OD weeds ccc ssseccccscocnces App. 39-40 
Appellant’s Reply Brief..................... App. 41-44 
Deposition of Jerry Budwig................. App. 45-48 


Deposition of James L. Robinson............ App. 49-50 


8/10/90 


10/9/90 


4/24/91 


4/24/91 


4/24/91 


4/24/91 


4/24/91 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 
U.S. District Court for the District of Colorado (Denver) 


Proceedings include all events. 
1:90cv1413 Adarand Constructors v. Skinner, et al 


1 


18 


19 


21 


22 


23 


COMPLAINT and Jury Demand (Sum- 
monses issued) (tp) ; 


ANSWER by defendant Samuel K. 
Skinner, defendant Robert E. Farris, 
defendant Louis N. MacDonald, 
defendant Jerry Budwig (Im) [Entry 
date 10/11/90] 


Motion by defendant for summary 
judgment before Judge Jim R. Car- 
rigan (lm) 


BRIEF by dfts Samuel K. Skinner, 
Robert E. Farris, Louis N. MacDonald, 
Jerry Budwig in support of motion for 
summary judgment before Judge Jim 
R. Carrigan [18-1] (Im) 


STATEMENT of Facts by plaintiff 
Adarand Constructors (Im) [Entry 
date 04/25/91] 


Motion by plaintiff Adarand Con- 
structors for summary judgment 
before Judge Jim R. Carrigan (lm) 
[Entry date 04/25/91] 


MEMORANDUM of points and 
authorities ba plaintiff Adarand Con- 
structors in support of motion for 
summary t before Judge Jim 
R. Carrigan [22-1] (lm) [Entry date 
04/25/91] 


4/24/91 


5/6/91 


5/13/91 


5/15/91 


5/24/91 


5/24/91 


5/24/91 


24 


29 


32 


33 


35 


2 


EXHIBITS to pla’s mtn for s/j (Im) 
[Entry date 04/25/91] 


SUPPLEMENTAL by plaintiff 
Adarand Constructors exhibits in sup- 
port of mtn for s/j [24-1] (Im) [Entry 
date 05/07/91] 


BRIEF Amicus Curiae by movant 
Rocky Mt Enterprise, movant Com- 
mercial Energies in support of dfts’ 
motion for summary judgment and in 
opp to pla’s mtn for summary judg- 
ment before Judge Jim R. Carrigan 
[18-1] (Im) [Entry date 05/14/91] 


MOTION by Rocky Mt Enterprise, 
Commercial Energies for leave to sub- 
stitute attached Amicus Curiae Brief 
for draft brief filed on 5/13/91 (lm) 
[Entry date 05/16/91] [Edit date 
05/16/91] 


MEMORANDUM by plaintiff 
Adarand Constructors in opposition 
to motion for summary judgment 
before Judge Jim R. Carrigan [18-1] 
(Im) [Entry date 05/28/91] 


Supplement EXHIBITS in support of 
pla’s memorandum in opp to dfts’ mtn 
for summary judgment (Im) [Entry 
date 05/28/91) 


MEMORANDUM by defendants in 
opposition to pla’s motion for sum- 
mary judgment before Judge Jim R. 
Carrigan and in further support of 
dfts’ mtn for summary judgment 
[22-1] (Im) [Entry date 05/28/91] 


5/29/91 


9/16/91 


11/26/91 


4/21/92 


7/17/92 


7/17/92 


7/20/92 


37 


38 


41 


42 


45 


3 


Supplemental EXHIBITS in support of 
their mtn for summary judgment in 
opp to pla’s mtn for summary judg- 
ment (Im) [Entry date 05/30/91] 


NOTICE of Significant Authority by 
Federal defendants (lm) 


Amicus Curiae BRIEF FILED by 
movant Rocky Mt Enterprise in sup- 
port of dfts’ mtn for s/j and in opp to 
pla’s mtn for s/j regarding [33-1], 
regarding [32-1], regarding [18-1] (Im) 
[Entry date 12/02/91] 


MEMORANDUM, OPINION, AND 


ORDER: by Judge Jim R. Carrigan 


granting dfts’ motion for summary 
judgment [18-1]; denying pla’s motion 
for summary judgment [22-1]; dis- 
missing pla’s claims and action with 
prejudice (cc: all counsel); entry date: 
4/22/92 (Im) [Entry date 04/22/92] 


MOTION by plaintiff Adarand Con- 
structors to extend time (14 days from 
order entered upon this mtn) file 


notice of appeal (Im) [Entry date 
07/20/92) 


DECLARATION by Todd S. Welch in 
support of pla’s motion to extend time 
to file notice of appeal [44-1] (Im) 
[Entry date 07/20/92] 


Amended MOTION by plaintiff 
Adarand Constructors for ext of time 
(30 day ext or 10 days from the date of 
entry of the order granting the mtn, 
which ever comes later) to file notice 


of appeal (Im) 


7/20/92 


7/23/92 


8/3/92 


8/5/92 


47 


49 


50 


51 


DECLARATION by Todd S. Welch in 
support of plaintiff's Adarand Con- 
structors motion for ext of time to file 
notice of appeal [46-1] (Im) 


RESPONSE by defendant to motion 
for ext of time (30 day ext or 10 days 
from the date of entry of the order 
granting the mtn, which ever comes 
later) to file notice of appeal [46-1] (If) 
[Entry date 07/24/92] 


MINUTE ORDER: by Judge Jim R. 
Carrigan granting motion for ext of 
time (30 day ext or 10 days from the 
date of entry of the order granting the 
mtn, which ever comes later) to file 
notice of appeal [46-1]. Hearing is 
vacated. (cc: all counsel); entry date: 
8/5/92 (gc) [Entry date 08/05/92] 


NOTICE OF APPEAL by plaintiff 
Adarand Constructors in re memoran- 
dum opinion and order [42-2] of 
4/21/92; Notice of transcript order 
form due 8/15/92; Notice mailed to 
all counsel on 8/5/92 (gc) 


8/7/92 


8/17/92 


8/17/92 


11/30/92 


5 


GENERAL DOCKET FOR 


Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 


1 


2 


3 


11 


[612241] Civil case docketed. Prelimi- 
nary record filed. Transcript order 
form due 8/17/92 for Deborah A. 
Stafford pursuant to R.42.1. Docketing 
statement due 8/17/92 for Adarand 
Constructors. Notice of appearance 
due 8/17/92 for Louis N. MacDonald, 
for Jerry Budwig, for Robert E. Farris, 
for Samuel K. Skinner, for Adarand 
Constructors. (mbm) 


[614115] Docketing statement filed by 
Adarand Constructors. Original and 4 
copies. c/s: y. (mbm) 


[614166] Notice received from Appel- 
lant Adarand Constructors that a tran- 
script is not necessary for this appeal. 
Notice due that record is complete 


8/24/92 for Jim R. Carrigan. (mbm) 


[637558] Appellant’s brief filed by 
Adarand Constructors. Original and 7 
copies. c/s: y. Served on 11/30/92 
Oral argument? y., Appendix filed. 
Original and 1 appendix copy. Appel- 
lee /Respondent’s brief due 1/4/93 for 
Louis N. MacDonald, for Jerry Bud- 
wig, for Robert E. Farris, for Samuel 
K. Skinner (jtp) 


2/4/93 


2/17/93 


9/29/93 


2/16/94 


5/23/94 


10/3/94 


17 


25 


26 


29 


31 


6 


[653355] Appellee’s brief filed by Sam- 
uel K. Skinner, Robert E. Farris, Jerry 
Budwig, Louis N. MacDonald. Origi- 
nal and 7 copies. c/s: y. Served on 
2/3/93. Oral Argument? y. Appendix 
filed. Original and 1 appendix copy. 
Appellant’s optional reply brief due 
2/22/93 for Adarand Constructors. 
(pdw) 


[655716] Appellant’s reply brief filed 
by Adarand Constructors. Original 
and 7 copies. c/s: y. (pdw) 


[712317] Case argued and submitted 


to Judges McKay, Holloway, Garth. 
(sls) 


[743222] Terminated on the Merits 
after Oral Hearing; Affirmed; Written, 
Signed, Published, McKay; Holloway; 
Garth, authoring judge. [92-1242] 
(mbm) 


[768362] Petition for writ of certiorari 
filed on 5/17/94 by Appellant 
Adarand Constructors. Supreme Court 
Number 93-1841. (afw) 


[799259] Supreme Court order dated 
9/26/94 granting certiorari filed. 
(afw) 


7 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


CIVIL ACTION NO. 90-1413 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. 
a Colorado Corporation, 


Plaintiff, 
v. 


SAMUEL K. SKINNER, Secretary of the 
Department of Transportation, ROBERT E. 
FARRIS, Administrator of the Federal 
Highway Administration, LOUIS N. 
MACDONALD, Administrator of Region VIII 
of the Federal Highway Administration, 
and JERRY BUDWIG, Division Engineer of 
the Central Federal Lands Highway 
Division, 

Defendants. 


COMPLAINT AND JURY DEMAND 


COMES NOW Plaintiff, ADARAND CONSTRUC- 
TORS, INC., by and through its attorneys, Mountain 


States Legal Foundation, and for its complaint against 
Defendants, alleges as follows: 


PARTIES 


1. Plaintiff is a Colorado Corporation, incorporated 
under the laws of the State of Colorado, with its principle 


place of business in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and is a 
citizen of the State of Colorado. 


2. Defendant Samuel K. Skinner is the Secretary of 
the United States Department of Transportation (“the Sec- 
retary”). Under the Surface Transportation Assistance Act 
of 1982 (“STAA”) and the Surface Transportation and 
Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 1987 (“STURAA”), 
the Secretary is charged with the administration of those 
statutes and other Federal statutes though [sic] the pro- 
muigation and enforcement of regulations. 


3. Defendant Robert E. Farris is the Administrator 
of the Federal Highway Administration (“FHA”). Defen- 
dant Farris is responsible for the administration and 
enforcement of STAA and STURAA, subject to the super- 
vision of Defendant Skinner. 


4. Defendant Louis N. MacDonald is the Regional 
Administrator of the FHA for Region VIII, whose terri- 
tory and jurisdiction include the State of Colorado. 
Defendant MacDonald is responsible for the administra- 
tion and enforcement of STAA and STURAA by the FHA 
in the State of Colorado, subject to the supervision of 
Defendants Skinner and Farris. 


5. Defendant Jerry Budwig is the Division Engineer 
of the Central Federal Lands Highway Division of the 
FHA, Department of Transportation and is charged with 
the administration and supervision of all contracts let by 
any federal agency on federal lands within the states 
which comprise the Central Federal Lands Highway Divi- 
sion including the State of Colorado, subject to the super- 
vision of Defendants Skinner, Farris and MacDonald. 


JURISDICTION AND VENUE 


6. This action arises out of the requirements of 
§ 105(f) of STAA, P.L. 97-424, and § 106(c) of STURAA, 
P.L. 100-17, and is brought to secure the rights of 
ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., as guaranteed by 
the due process and equal protection components of the 
Fifth Amendment, the equal protection clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment, the Civil Rights Act of 1871, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000(d). Plaintiff seeks 
relief from STAA and STURAA pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 2201 and 2202. Jurisdiction in this Court is properly 
invoked pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and § 1343. 


7. Venue is properly in this Court pursuant to 28 
U.S.C § 1391, in that the contracts and work which give 
rise to this cause of action occurred in the State of Colo- 
rado. 


STATEMENT OF FACTS 


8. In 1982, Congress enacted STAA and, in 1987, 
Congress enacted STURAA. Prior to the enactment of 
STAA and STURAA, Plaintiff could bid for subcontracts 
on federally funded-highway construction projects, 
whether the contracts were state highway contracts 
funded, in whole or in part, by federal monies or federal 


projects. 


9. Section 105(f) of STAA provides that not less than 
10 per cent [sic] of all appropriated federal monies under 
STAA will be spent on contracts with Minority Business 


10 


Enterprises (MBE) and Disadvantaged Business Enter- 
prises (DBE) unless the Secretary determines otherwise. 
Section 106(c) of STURAA provides that not less than 10 
percent of all appropriated federal monies under 
STURAA will be spent on contracts with Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprises (DBE) unless the Secretary deter- 
mines otherwise. The legislative history of these Acts 
contains no description of any findings made by Con- 
gress of discrimination in the award of federally funded 
highway construction contracts. 


10. Regulations implementing the provisions of 
STAA and STURAA were promulgated, revised and 
adopted by the Department of Transportation (“DOT”). 
These regulations are codified at 49 C.F.R., part 23. The 
regulations provide that the ten percent (10%) require- 
ment for MBE-DBE participation will be achieved if the 
recipients of the federal funds establish and award at 
least ten percent (10%) of all federal contract monies to 
certified MBE-DBE participants. 49 C.F.R. § 23.61(b). 


11. The Central Federal Land Highway Division has 
established specific procedures and contract provisions to 
meet the MBE/DBE requirements of STAA and STURRA. 
“The Notice to Bidders and Offerors” sent to each bidder 
on projects offered by the Central Federal Lands High- 
way Division states on page 1 of 3: 


UTILIZATION OF SMALL BUSINESS AND 
SMALL DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS CON- 
CERNS, WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS CON- 


CER AN ALL A ALL 
DISA A ES UB- 
CO 


ee ee ee ae [ayes TE eh, SERN Cotten) ee It Se cae i be iis 


11 


Bidders should note their responsibilities in the 
awarding of subcontracts in accordance with the 
Utilization of Small Business Concerns and 
Small Business Concerns Owned and Controlled 
by Socially and Economically Disadvantaged 
individuals clause and with the Women-owned 
Business Concerns clause which are included in 
the Contract Clauses section of this contract. 


The Bidder, if a big business concern, should 
note their responsibility to establish and con- 
duct a Small Business and Small Disadvantaged 
Business Subcontracting Program in accordance 
with The Small Business and Small Disadvan- 
taged Business Subcontracting Plan clause 
included in Contract Clause 52.219.9, Alternate 
I. The successful Low Bidder will be required to 
submit a Subcontracting Plan within 2 weeks of 
the opening of bids. If the apparent successful 
bidder fails to submit a subcontracting plan accept- 
able to the contracting officer within the allowable 
time, that bidder may be ineligible for award of the 
contract. 


(emphasis added). 


12. In the “Proposal and Contract” under FEDERAL 
ACQUISITION REGULATION CONTRACT CLAUSES 
pages F-13 through F-16, § 52.219-9, entitled SMALL 
BUSINESS AND SMALL DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS 
SUBCONTRACTING PLAN. (APRIL 1984) ALTERNATE 
1 (APRIL 1984), the contract provides, in part, as follows: 


(c) The apparent low bidder, upon request by 
the Contracting Officer, shall submit a sub- 
contracting plan, where applicable, which 
addresses separately subcontracting with small 
business concerns and small disadvantaged 


12 


business concerns, and which shall be included 
in and made part of the resultant contract. The 
subcontracting plan shall be submitted within 
the time specified by the Contracting Officer. 
Failure to submit the subcontracting plan shall make 
the bidder ineligible for the award of a contract. 


(d) The offeror’s subcontracting plan shall 
include the following: 


(1) Goals, expressed in terms of percent- 
ages of total planned subcontracting dollars, for 
the use of small business concerns and small 
disadvantaged business concerns as subcontrac- 
tors. The offeror shall include all subcontracts 
that contribute to contract performance, and 
may include a proportionate share of products 
and services that are normally allocated as indi- 
rect costs. 


(2) A statement of - 


(i) Total dollars planned to be sub- 
contracted; 


(ii) | Total dollars planned to be sub- 
contracted to small business con- 
cerns; and 


(iii) Total dollars planned to be sub- 
contracted to small disadvan- 
taged business concerns. 


(3) A description of the principal types of 
supplies and services to be subcontracted, and 
an identification of the types planned for sub- 
contracting to (i) small business concerns and 
(ii) small disadvantaged business concerns. 


(4) A description of the method used to 
develop the subcontracting goals in (1) above. 


13 


* * * 


(9) Assurances that the offeror will include 
the clause in this contract entitled “Utilization of 
Small Business Concerns and Small Disadvan- 
taged Business Concerns” in all subcontracts 
that offer further subcontracting opportunities, 
and that the offeror will require all subcontrac- 
tors (except small business concerns) who 
receive subcontracts in excess of $500,000 
($1,000,000 for construction of any public facil- 
ity), to adopt a plan similar to the plan agreed to 
by the offeror. 


* * * 


(i) The failure of the Contractor or subcontractor to 
comply in good faith with (1) the clause of this 
contract entitled “Utilization of Small Business 
Concerns and Small Disadvantaged Business Con- 
cerns,” or (2) an approved plan required by this 
clause, shall be a material breach of the contract. 


(emphasis added) 


13. “The Proposal and Contract” in the SPECIAL 
CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS section, page I-1, provides: 


The following special Contract Requirements 
amend and supplement the Standard Specifica- 
tions for Construction of Roads and Bridges on 
Federal Highway Projects, FP-85. U.S. Depart- 
ment of Transportation, Federal Highway 
Administration. 


Section 108, located on pages I-24 through I-26, provides, 
in part: 


ere ow WY A eee 


14 


Section 108. - PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS 


108.01 Subcontracting. This subsection is 
supplemented to include a Disadvantaged Busi- 
ness Enterprise (DBE) Development and Sub- 
contracting Compensation Provision as follows: 


Monetary compensation is offered for awarding 
subcontracts to small business concerns owned and 
controlled by socially and economically disadvan- 
taged individuals. A DBE shall mean a small busi- 
ness concern owned and controlled by socially 
and economically disadvantaged individuals as 
defined under the FAR Contract Clause 52.219-8 
entitled “Utilization of Small Business Concerns 
Owned and Controlled by Socially and Econom- 
ically Disadvantaged Individuals” or a woman 
owned business as defined under FAR Contract 
Clause 52.219-13. 


A small business concern will be considered 
a DBE after it has been certified as such by the 
U.S. Small Business Administration or any State 
Highway Agency. Certification by other Govern- 
ment agencies, counties, or cities may be accept- 
able on an individual basis provided the 
Contracting Officer has determined the certify- 
ing agency has an acceptable and viable DBE 
certification program. If the Contractor requests 
payment under this provision, the Contractor 
shall furnish the Engineer with acceptable evi- 
dence of the Subcontractor(s) DBE certification 
and shall furnish one certified copy of the exe- 
cuted subcontract(s). 


Compensation is provided to the Contractor 
to locate, train, utilize, assist, and develop 
DBE’s to become fully qualified contractors in 
the transportation facilities construction field. 


15 


The Contractor shall also provide direct assis- 
tance to disadvantage subcontractors in acquir- 
ing necessary bonding, obtaining price 
quotations, analyzing plans and specifications, 
and planning and management of the work. The 
Contractor shall maintain records documenting 
these activities and shall make them available 
for Government review upon request. 


If the DBE subcontractor subcontracts (2nd 
tier) all or part of its work to a non-DBE sub- 
contractor, payment under this provision may 
be adjusted accordingly by the Engineer. The 
prime contractor may only receive compensa- 
tion for that portion of subcontract work which 
is actually performed by DBEs. However, if the 
DBE subcontractor subcontracts only insignifi- 
cant portions «f the subcontract while still doing 
the major portion of the work, the prime con- 
tractor may receive full compensation under this 
provision. 


For each subcontract, the subcontracted 
work, except for purchased materials, must be 
performed at the project site, and, except for 
engineering s¢:vices, the labor associated with 
that work must be subject to the Labor Stan- 
dards Provisions of the contract. 


The Contractor will become eligible to 
receive payment under this subcontracting com- 
pensation provision when the dollar amount 
(based on final subcontract amount) of the dis- 
advantaged business enterprise subcontract(s) 
awarded exceeds 1 percent of the original con- 
tract amount. 


The Contractor will be paid an amount com- 
puted as follows: 


16 


1. If a subcontract is awarded to one DBE, 10 
percent of the final amount of the approved 
DBE subcontract, not to exceed 1.5 percent 
of the original contract amount. 


2. If subcontracts are awarded to two or more 
DBEs, 10 percent of the final amount of the 
approved DBE subcontracts, not to exceed 2 
percent of the original contract amount. 


Payment will be made as follows: 


1. Fifty percent of the computed amount 
(based on original subcontract amount) will be 
paid when the DBE subcontractor(s) commences 
work on the project. 


2. The remainder of the computed amount 
(based on the final subcontract amount) will be 
paid when the DBE subcontractor(s) has satis- 
factorily completed all subcontract work. 


This payment will be full compensation for 
locating, selecting, training, and assisting DBE 
subcontractors; for maintaining supporting 
records; and for supplying all facilities and ser- 
vices to complete this DBE subcontracting pro- 
vision. 


Upon completion of the subcontract work, 
the Contractor shall furnish a certified copy of 
acceptable records supporting the final 
amount(s) paid to or on behalf of the DBE sub- 
contractor(s). 


Item 108(2) of the bid schedule provides an 
estimated contingent sum amount to cover the 
cost of this provision. 


(emphasis added) 


17 


14. The use of the above described contract provi- 
sions compel the Prime Contractor bidding on federal 
highway projects to discriminate against certain classes of 
subcontractors because of their gender, race, sex or 
national origin. The use of the “bonus” provisions above 
described rewards prime contractors for their discrimina- 
tion practices against certain classes of subcontractors 
based on their gender, race, sex or national origin. 


15. Plaintiff ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. is 
a corporation operated primarily by Randy Pech, a cauca- 
sian male under the age of 60 years and is not qualified as 
a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise. 


16. On or about August 10, 1989, the FHA, Central 
Federal Lands Highway Division, sent out a “PRE- 
SOLICITATION NOTICE (CONSTRUCTION CON- 
TRACT) for Project No. CO FH 60-2(2),” with the project 
Title and Location as “Colorado FH 60-2(2), West Delores, 
Delores County.” The notice provided that the offers 
(bids) from prime contractors were to be received by 2:00 
P.M. on September 12, 1989. In the notice, number 11, 
“offers covering the project restricted to small business,” 
is answered “no.” Number 12 “subcontracting program 
required?,” is marked neither “yes” nor “no.” 


17. The West Delores Project proposal and contract 
contained the standard contract provisions set forth in 
paragraphs numbered 11 to 13 above which compel and 
reward prime contractors in discriminatory practices. 


18. Mountain Gravel & Construction Company of 
Delores, Colorado was one of the prime contractors sub- 
mitting a bid to the Central Federal Highway Lands 
Division on the West Delores project. In response to a 


18 


request from Mountain Gravel & Construction Company 
for subcontracting bids Plaintiff submitted a bid for the 
guardrail work on the West Delores Project on September 
11, 1989. 


19. Shortly thereafter, Mountain Gravel & Construc- 
tion Company was awarded the prime contract for the 
West Delores Project, including the construction of the 
guardrail, by the Central Federal Lands Highway Divi- 
sion of the FHA. 


20. Since Mountain Gravel & Construction Com- 
pany, as the prime contractor, is compelled and rewarded 
for discriminatory practices by the minority requirements 
of the contract and even though Plaintiff, as a guardrail 
subcontractor, was the low bidder for the guardrail work 
submitted on the West Delores Project to Mountain 
Gravel & Construction Company and although Plaintiff is 
qualified, competent, proficient and capable, the sub- 
contract was awarded to Gonzales Construction, a Disad- 
vantaged Business Enterprise (DBE). 


21. Plaintiff believes and alleges that Mountain 
Gravel & Construction Company was compelled and 
required by the contract provisions promulgated by the 
Central Federal Lands Highway Division to submit a 
subcontracting plan that would award the subcontract to 
Gonzales Construction and that Mountain Gravel & Con- 
struction Company would be rewarded by a “bonus” as 
described above for awarding the subcontract on the 
guardrail to Gonzales Construction rather than to Plain- 
tiff. 


— 


a) 


19 


22. Plaintiff believes and alleges that such conduct 
by the Central Federal Lands Highway Division discrimi- 
nates against Plaintiff because of gender, race, sex, and 
national origin contrary to the equal protection and due 
process clauses of the Fifth Amendment and the equal 
protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution. 


23. Asa direct result of STAA, STURAA, the regula- 
tions promulgated thereunder, and the contract provi- 
sions established as a result of STAA, STURAA, and the 
regulations, as enforced by the defendants, Plaintiff has 
been denied the award of specialty subcontract work on 
account of the gender, race, sex or national origin of its 
operator. If STAA, STURAA, the regulations and contract 
provisions were declared unconstitutional, Plaintiff could 
bid for and receive contracts free from discrimination on 
account of gender, race, sex or national origin. 


24. Plaintiff is injured by being denied an oppor- 
tunity to meaningfully participate in the bidding for and 
performance of contacts for the construction of public 
highways funded with federal monies on account of gen- 
der, race, sex or national origin, and will continue to 
suffer this harm and injury as a direct result of Defen- 
dants’ actions. 


25. Plaintiff believes and alleges that Defendants 
have made no findings of discrimination in the award of 
federal construction contracts to justify the use of racial 
or gender preferences in the award of federal highway 
construction contracts. 


26. The result of Defendants’ actions is a system of 
rigid, inflexible quotas, which creates naked racial and 


—_—. } *+ oe 


20 


gender preferences that discriminate against Plaintiff and 
other innocent third parties. 


COUNT ONE 


27. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference 
the allegations set forth in paragraphs 1 through 26 of 
this Complaint. 


28. Section 105 (f) of STAA and section 106 (c) of 
STURAA require the use of racial and gender preferences 
in the award of federally financed highway construction 
contracts, without any findings of past discrimination in 
the award of such contracts. 


29. Such racial and gender preferences on their face 
violate the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the 
United States Constitution and are therefore unconstitu- 
tional and must be struck down. 


COUNT TWO 


30. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference 
the allegations set forth in paragraphs 1 through 29 of 
this Complaint. 


31. The actions of Defendants in the use of their 
regulations and contract provisions which require the use 
of race and gender as a factor in the award of federally 
financed highway construction contracts, discriminate 
against Plaintiff in violation of the due process and equal 
protection components of the Fifth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution and are unconstitutional and 
must be struck down. 


21 


COUNT THREE 


32. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference 
the allegations set forth in Paragraphs 1 through 31 of the 
Complaint. 


33. The actions of Defendants, in their development 
and administration of the DBE pr>gram, constitute gov- 
ernment action. By requiring subcontract awards based 
on gender or race or granting successful prime contract 
bidders a bonus based on said prime contractor granting 
the subcontract based on gender or race, the defendants 
have discriminated against Plaintiff in violation of the 
Equal Protection Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments and are unconstitutional and must be 
struck down. 


COUNT FOUR 


34. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference 
the allegations set forth in paragraphs 1 through 33 of the 
Complaint. 


35. The concerted actions of Defendants deprive 
Plaintiff of rights, privileges and immunities secured by 
the United States under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 


COUNT FIVE 


36. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference 
the allegations set forth in paragraphs 1 through 35 of the 
Complaint. 


37. The use of race as a factor in the award of 
federally financed contracts, by excluding Plaintiff from 


22 


participation in federal funded highway construction 
projects on the basis of gender or race, violates the provi- 
sions of Title VI, § 601 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 
U.S.C. § 2000(d). 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests that this 
Honorable Court grant the following relief: 


1. Entry of a judgment declaring that § 105(f) of 
STAA, § 106(c) of STURAA, the regulations promulgated 
thereunder and the contract provisions promulgated pur- 
suant to STAA, STURAA and the regulations are facially 
unconstitutional; 


2. Entry of judgment declaring that § 105(f) of 
STAA, § 106(c) of STURAA, the regulations promulgated 
thereunder and the contract provisions promulgated pur- 
suant to STAA, STURAA and the regulations, are uncon- 
stitutional as they are applied and thus deprive Plaintiff 
of rights secured by the Constitution and Laws of the 
United States; 


3. Entry of judgment declaring that the Federal 
highway program administered by the Central Federal 
Lands Highway Division violates the rights of Plaintiff 
under the Constitution of the United States; 


4. Entry of Judgment permanently enjoining Defen- 
dants from discriminating in the future on the basis of 
gender, race, sex or national origin in the administration 
of federal highway contracts; 


5. Entry of Judgment awarding costs and attorneys 
fees to Plaintiff pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983; and 


ea . tS 


2 ee ee ee ee ee ae ee er ree ee SO eer ee Ye 


6. For such other and further relief as to the Court 
seems just and equitable in the premises. 


JURY DEMAND 


PLAINTIFF HEREBY DEMANDS THAT THE ISSUES 
IN THIS CASE BE TRIED BY A CIVIL JURY. 


MOUNTAIN STATES LEGAL 
FOUNDATION 


/s/ Gary N. Herbert 
William Perry Pendley 
Gary N. Herbert No. 004922 
Todd S. Welch 
1660 Lincoln Street 
Suite 2300 
Denver, Colorado 80264 
(303) 861-0244 


PLAINTIFF’S ADDRESS: 
ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. 
2720 East Las Vegas Street 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80906 
(719) 390-4000 


a 
; 
; 


24 


* x + 


Section 108. - PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS 


108.01 Subcontracting. This subsection is supple- 
mented to include a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise 
(DBE) Development and Subcontracting Compensation 
Provision as follows: 


Monetary compensation is offered for awarding sub- 
contracts to small business concerns owned and con- 
trolled by socially and economically disadvantaged 
individuals. A DBE shall mean a small business concern 
owned and controlled by socially and economically dis- 
advantaged individuals as defined under the FAR Con- 
tract Clause 52.219-8 entitled “Utilization of Small 
Business Concerns Owned and Controlled by Socially 
and Economically Disadvantaged Individuals” or a 
woman owned business as defined under FAR Contract 
Clause 52.219-13. 


A small business concern will be considered a DBE 
after it has been certified as such by the U.S. Small 
Business Administration or any State Highway Agency. 
Certification by other Government agencies, counties, or 
cities may be acceptable on an individual basis provided 
the Contracting Officer has determined the certifying 
agency has an acceptable and viable DBE certification 
program. If the Contractor requests payment under this 
provision, the Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with 
acceptable evidence of the subcontractor(s) DBE certifica- 
tion and shall furnish one certified copy of the executed 
subcontract(s). 


25 


Compensation is provided to the Contractor to 
locate, train, utilize, assist, and develop DBE’s to become 
fully qualified contractors in the transportation facilities 
construction field. The Contractor shall also provide 
direct assistance to disadvantaged subcontractors in 
acquiring necessary bonding, obtaining price quotations, 
analyzing plans and specifications, and planning and 
management of the work. The Contractor shall maintain 
records documenting these activities and shall make them 
available for Government review upon request. 


If the DBE subcontractor subcontracts (2nd tier) all or 
part of its work to a non-DBE subcontractor, payment 
under this provision may be adjusted accordingly by the 
Engineer. The prime contractor may only receive compen- 
sation for that portion of subcontract work which is actu- 
ally performed by DBEs. However, if the DBE 
subcontractor subcontracts only insignificant portions of 
the subcontract while still doing the major portion of the 
work, the prime contractor may receive full compensa- 
tion under this provision. 


For each subcontract, the subcontracted work, except 
for purchased materials, must be performed at the project 
site, and, except for engineering services, the labor asso- 
ciated with that work must be subject to the Labor Stan- 
dards Provisions of the contract. 


The Contractor will become eligible to receive pay- 
ment under this subcontracting compensation provision 
when the dollar amount (based on final subcontracted 
amount) of the disadvantaged business enterprise sub- 
contract(s) awarded exceeds 10 percent of the original 
contract amount. 


26 


The Contractor will be paid an amount computed as 
follows: 


1. If a subcontract is awarded to one DBE, 10 per- 
cent of the final amount of the approved DBE 
subcontract, not to exceed 1.5 percent of the orig- 
inal contract amount. 


2. If subcontracts are awarded to two or more DBEs, 
10 percent of the final amount of the approved 
DBE subcontracts, not to exceed 2 percent of the 
original contract amount. 


Payment will be made as follows: 


1. Fifty percent of the computed amount (based on 
original subcontract amount) will be paid when the DBE 
subcontractor(s) commences work on the project. 


2. The remainder of the computed amount (based 
on the final subcontract amount) will be paid when the 
DBE subcontractor(s) has satisfactorily completed all sub- 
contract work. 


This payment will be full compensation for locating, 
selecting, training, and assisting DBE subcontractors; for 
maintaining supporting records; and for supplying all 
facilities and services to complete this DBE subcontract- 
ing provision. 


Upon completion of the subcontract work, the Con- 
tractor shall furnish a certified copy of acceptable records 
supporting the final amount(s) paid to or on behalf of the 
DBE subcontractor(s). 


Item 108(2) of the bid schedule provides an estimated 
contingent sum amount to cover the cost of this provi- 
sion. 


27 


108.04 Limitation of Operations. Add the following: 


The Contractor is restricted from working in the fol- 


lowing areas until right-of-way clearance is received by 
the Government: 


1. Station 257+00 to Station 299+00 
2. Station 555+00 to Station 570+00 


Right-of-way clearance is expected by March 1, 1990. 


The Contractor shall limit the hours of construction 
activities within 1,000 feet of occupied residences to 
between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. daily. 


* * * 


28 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 90-1413 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 
a Colorado Corporation, 


Plaintiff, 
v. 


SAMUEL K. SKINNER, Secretary of the 
Department of Transportation, ROBERT E. 
FARRIS, Administrator of the Federal 
Highway Administration, LOUIS N. 
MACDONALD, Administrator of Region VIII 
and JERRY BUDWIG, Division Engineer of 
The Central Federal Land Highway 
Division, 


Defendants. 


DECLARATION OF 
STARLING J.T. PROFFIT 


STARLING J.T. PROFFIT makes the following state- 
ment pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §1746: 


1. That he makes this statement in support of the 
Motion For Summary Judgment filed by the Plaintiff 
herein. 


2. That he is the Chief Estimator for MOUNTAIN 
GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY and has held 
_that position for five (5) years. 


ss ideal FRA IEE Bd gb QO, POOR POLE LE OT a iii 
‘ 


29 


3. That he is familiar with plaintiff ADARAND 
CONSTRUCTORS, INC., and has known plaintiff for 
approximately four (4) years. 


4. That ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., has a 
good reputation in the highway construction industry for 
quality performance at reasonable prices. 


5. That MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY was the prime contractor on Project No. CO 
FH 60-2(2), West Delores, Delores County, Colorado, 
which was let by the Central Federal Lands Highway 
Division of the Federal Highway Administration. 


6. That MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY is familiar with the contract provisions and 
bid specifications on Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), West 
Delores, Delores County, Colorado, which was let by the 
Central Federal Lands Highway Division of the Federal 
Highway Administration, including the Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprises (DBE) provisions, which pay a 
prime contractor a “bonus” if the prime contractor uses 
DBE’s for at least 10% of the total contract let by Central 
Federal Lands Highway Division of the Federal Highway 
Administration. 


7. That MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY knew that it would receive a “bonus” on 
Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), West Delores, Delores County, 
Colorado, which was let by the Central Federal Lands 
Highway Division of the Federal Highway Administra- 
tion if it subcontracted at least 10% of the contract with 
one or more DBEs. 


Ni 
a a ee ee ee & AL 


30 


8. That ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., sub- 
mitted a bid to MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUC- 
TION COMPANY to perform the guardrail construction 
work on Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), West Delores, Delores 
County, Colorado, which was let by the Central Federal 
Lands Highway Division of the Federal Highway Admin- 
istration. 


9. That bid submitted by ADARAND CONSTRUC- 
TORS, INC., was the lowest bid of all bids received by 
MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY 
for the guardrail work on Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), 
West Delores, Delores County, Coloradg, which was let 
by the Central Federal Lands Highway Division of the 
Federal Highway Administration. 


10. That because of the contract provisions which 
give a bonus to prime contractors in order to encourage 
the use of DBEs on Federal Highway Projects, MOUN- 
TAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY felt com- 
pelled to give the subcontract for the guardrail work to 
Gonzales Construction, as well as subcontract to other 
qualified DBE construction firms. 


11. That the primary reason that MOUNTAIN 
GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY gave the sub- 
contract for the guardrail to Gonzales Construction, a 
qualified DBE, is because Gonzales Construction is a DBE 
and MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COM- 
PANY felt economically compelled to award its sub- 
contract to a DBE and because MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & 
CONSTRUCTION COMPANY was entitled to a bonus of 
approximately $10,000.00 for awarding the subcontract to 
_Gonzales Construction, a qualified DBE. 


31 


12. That but for the requirements of the Federal 
Highway contracts which encourage prime constractors 
[sic] to use DBEs, MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUC- 
TION COMPANY would have accepted the low bid sub- 
mitted by ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., and 


awarded the subcontract to ADARAND CONSTRUC- 
TORS, INC. 


I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing 
is true and correct. Executed on this 12th day April, 1991. 


/s/ Starling J. T. Proffit 
STARLING J. T. PROFFIT 


32 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 90-1413 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., 
a Colorado Corporation, 


Plaintiff, 
v. 


SAMUEL K. SKINNER, Secretary of the 
Department of Transportation, ROBERT E. 
FARRIS, Administrator of the Federal 
Highway Administration, LOUIS N. 
MACDONALD, Administrator of Region VIII 
and JERRY BUDWIG, Divisior. Engineer of 
The Central Federal Land Highway 
Division, 


Defendants. 


DECLARATION OF RANDY MARK PECH 


RANDY MARK PECH makes the following declara- 
tion pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §1746: 


1. That he makes this declaration in support of the 
Motion For Summary Judgment filed by the Plaintiff 
herein. 


2. That he is a white male and is currently General 
Manager of Plaintiff ADARAND CONSTRUCTOR, INC. 
and has held that position for 3 years. Previous to becom- 
jing General Manager he served as President since 1976. 


a ee Pee ee 


33 


ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. specializes in guard- 
rail installation and is precertified by the State of Colo- 
rado to perform guardrail installation. The installation of 
guardrail requires specialized training, experience and 
equipment. ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. has the 
training, equipment and expertise to perform the spe- 
cialty subcontract work of installing guardrail. 


3. That ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. is not a 
DBE firm certified by the State of Colorado or any other 
governmental entity and is not entitled to receive the 
benefits conferred on DBEs by the Central Federal Lands 
Highway Division. 


4. As General Manager he is responsible for the 
general, day to day operations of Plaintiff. That his duties 
include, overseeing all of the financial decisions of the 
company, developing company procedures and policies, 
check all of the bookkeeping work, some estimating, 
developing the estimating programs and tracking histori- 
cal data for the estimators, and handles the bank and 
insurance negotiations. 


5. That ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., has a 
good reputation in the highway construction industry for 
quality performance at reasonable prices. 


6. That MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY was the prime contractor on Project No. CO 
FH 60-2(2), West Delores, Delores County, Colorado, 
which was let by the Central Federal Lands Highway 
Division on the Federal Highway Administration. 


34 


7. That ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., sub- 
mitted a bid to MOUNTAIN GRAVEL & CONSTRUC- 
TION COMPANY to perform the guardrail construction 
work on Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), West Delores, Delores 
County, Colorado, which was let by the Central Federal 
Lands Highway Division of the Federal Highway Admin- 
istration. 


8. That he understands that the bid submitted by 
ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC., was the lowest 
responsible bid of all bids received by MOUNTAIN 
GRAVEL & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY for the guard- 
rail work on Project No. CO FH 60-2(2), West Delores, 
Delores County, Colorado, which was let by the Central 
Federal Lands Highway Division of the Federal Highway 
Administration. 


9. That the bid submitted by ADARAND CON- 
STRUCTORS, INC. on the West Delores project for guard- 
rail and related items was $104,800. 


10. That as a result of not receiving the bid on the 


West Delores project ADARAND CONSTRUCTORS, INC. 


was unable to realize a profit of approximately $20,000. 


11. That he contacted the state highway depart- 
ments for the States of Colorado, Nevada, Utah, Wyo- 
ming, New Mexico, Arizona and Idaho and obtained the 
publications of those States that set forth the number of 
Certified DBE contractors in each of those States and the 
number of prequalified Non-DBE contractors. That he 
personally counted the number of DBEs and prequalified 
Non-DBEs in each state. That the number of DBEs and 
| prequalified Non-DBEs in each States is as follows: 


he ele tar ete he hg 2 
a | " 
? 


35 
Prequalified 
DBE Non-DBE 
Contractors Contractors 
Colorado 211 145 
Nevada 140 231 
Utah 65 166 
Wyoming 54 308 
New Mexico 193 
Arizona 160 270 
Idaho 91 


The States designated with an * did not provide informa- 
tion on Non-DBE contractors. 


12. That at various times ADARAND CONSTRUC- 
TORS, INC. has been a prime contractor on jobs in Colo- 
rado. 


13. That he views the DBE provisions of the contract 
- which pay a “bonus” for use of DBEs on highway 
construction and require large business concerns to pre- 
pare a subcontracting plan showing the proposed use of 
DBEs — as a requirement that they must meet or they may 
lose the contract. Rather than take the chance that they 
will lose the bid once they have obtained it, they will use 
the DBEs even if a lower bid is received from a Non-DBE. 


14. That because a prime contractor is required to 
perform 50% or more of the contracted work, a large 
percentage of the subcontracted work is in the specialty 
area, including guardrail, which puts an undue burden 
on non-DBE companies that work only in the specialty 
areas. 


15. That he has read the Contract which is the sub- 
ject matter of this action and is attached to the Motion for 


36 


Summary Judgment as Exhibit A and he has not found a 
specific provision of the Contract which provides that a 
prime contractor does not have to participate in the Sub- 
contracting Compensation Clause program. 


I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing 
is true and correct. Executed on this 18th day of April, 
1991. 


/s/ Randy M Pech 
RANDY MARK PECH 


