
[PDF PAGE 1]
652 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Syllabus 
494 u. s. 
AUSTIN, MICHIGAN SECRETARY OF STATE, ET AL. 
v. MICHIGAN STATE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR 
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
No. 88-1569. Argued October 31, 1989-Decided March 27, 1990 
Appellee Michigan State Chamber of Commerce (Chamber) is a nonprofit 
corporation, whose bylaws set forth both political and nonpolitical pur-
poses. 
Its general treasury is funded through annual dues required of 
all members, three-quarters of whom are for-profit corporations. Sec-
tion 54(1) of the Michigan Campaign Finance Act prohibits corporations, 
excluding media corporations, from using general treasury funds for, 
inter alia, independent expenditures in connection with state candidate 
elections. 
However, they may make such expenditures from segre-
gated funds used solely for political purposes. 
Because the Chamber 
wished to use general treasury funds to place a local newspaper ad-
vertisement in support of a specific candidate for state office, it brought 
suit in the Federal District Court for injunctive relief against § 54(l)'s 
enforcement, arguing that the expenditure restriction is unconstitutional 
under the First and Fourteenth Amendments. 
The court upheld the 
section, but the Court of Appeals reversed, reasoning that, as applied to 
the Chamber, § 54(1) violated the First Amendment. 
Held: 
1. Section 54(1) does not violate the First Amendment. Pp. 657-666. 
(a) Although § 54(1)'s requirements burden the Chamber's exercise 
of political expression, see FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 
479 U. S. 238, 252 (MCFLJ, they are justified by a compelling state in-
terest: preventing corruption or the appearance of corruption in the po-
litical arena by reducing the threat that huge corporate treasuries, which 
are amassed with the aid of favorable state laws and have little or no 
correlation to the public's support for the corporation's political ideas, 
will be used to influence unfairly election outcomes. 
Pp. 657-660. 
(b) Section 54(1) is sufficiently narrowly tailored to achieve its goal, 
because it is precisely targeted to eliminate the distortion caused by cor-
porate spending while also allowing corporations to express their politi-
cal views by making expenditures through separate segregated funds. 
Because persons who contribute to segregated funds understand that 
their money will be used solely for political purposes, the speech gener-
ated accurately reflects contributors' support for the corporation's politi-
cal views. 
The fact that § 54(1) covers closely held corporations that 


[PDF PAGE 2]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
653 
652 
Syllabus 
do not possess vast reservoirs of capital does not make it substantially 
overinclusive, because all corporations receive the special benefits con-
ferred by the corporate form and thus present the potential for distort-
ing the political process. Cf. FEC v. National Right to Work Commit-
tee, 459 U. S. 197, 209-210. 
Pp. 660-661. 
(c) There is no merit to the Chamber's argument that even if§ 54(1) 
is constitutional with respect to for-profit corporations, it cannot be 
applied to a nonprofit ideological corporation such as itself. The Cham-
ber does not exhibit the crucial features identified in MCFL, supra, that 
would require the State to exempt it from independent spending burdens 
as a nonprofit corporation more akin to a voluntary political association 
than a business firm. 
MCFL's narrow focus on the promotion of politi-
cal ideas ensured that its resources reflected political support, while 
the Chamber's more varied bylaws do not. Additionally, unlike MCFL 
members, the Chamber's members are similar to shareholders-who 
have an economic disincentive for disassociating with a corporation even 
if they disagree with its political activity-in that they may be reluctant 
to withdraw from the Chamber because they wish to benefit from its 
nonpolitical programs and to establish contacts with other members of 
the business community. Also in contrast to MCFL, which took no con-
tributions from business corporations, more than three-quarters of the 
Chamber's members are business corporations, whose political contribu-
tions and expenditures can constitutionally be regulated by the State, 
and who thus could circumvent § 54(1)'s restriction by funneling money 
through the Chamber's general treasury. Pp. 661-665. 
(d) Section 54(1) is not rendered underinclusive by its failure to reg-
ulate the independent expenditures of unincorporated labor unions that 
also have the capacity to accumulate wealth, because the exclusion does 
not undermine the State's compelling interest in regulating corporations 
whose unique form enhances such capacity. 
Moreover, because mem-
bers who disagree with a union's political activities can decline to con-
tribute to them without giving up other membership benefits, a union's 
political funds more accurately reflect members' support for the orga-
nization's political views than does a corporation's general treasury. 
Pp. 665-666. 
2. Section 54(1) does not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment. Even under strict scrutiny, its classifications 
, pass muster. The State's decision to regulate corporations and not un-
incorporated associations is precisely tailored to serve its compelling in-
terest. Similarly, the exemption of media corporations does not render 
the section unconstitutional. 
Restrictions on the expenditures of cor-
porations whose resources are devoted to the collection and dissemina-
tion of information to the public might discourage news broadcasters or 


[PDF PAGE 3]
654 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
publishers from serving their crucial societal role of reporting on and 
publishing editorials about newsworthy events; thus, their exemption 
from the section's restriction is justified. 
Pp. 666-668. 
856 F. 2d 783, reversed. 
MARSHALL, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST, 
C. J., and BRENNAN, WHITE, BLACKMUN, and STEVENS, JJ., joined. 
BRENNAN, J., post, p. 669, and STEVENS, J., post, p. 678, filed concurring 
opinions. 
SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, post, p. 679. 
KENNEDY, 
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which O'CONNOR and SCALIA, JJ., joined, 
post, p. 695. 
Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General of Michigan, argued the 
cause for appellants. With him on the briefs were Frank J. 
Kelley, Attorney General, prose, Thomas L. Casey, Assist-
ant Solicitor General, and Gary P. Gordon and Richard P. 
Gartner, Assistant Attorneys General. 
Richard D. McLellan argued the cause for appellee. With 
him on the brief were Joel M. Boyden, William J. Perrone, 
and Cindy M. Wilder.* 
JUSTICE MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the Court. 
In this appeal, we must determine whether § 54(1) of the 
Michigan Campaign Finance Act, 1976 Mich. Pub. Acts 388, 
violates either the First or the Fourteenth Amendment to 
the Constitution. 
Section 54(1) prohibits corporations from 
using corporate treasury funds for independent expenditures 
in support of, or in opposition to, any candidate in elections 
for state office. Mich. Comp. Laws§ 169.254(1) (1979). Cor-
*Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for the Federal Elec-
tion Commission by Lawrence M. Noble and Richard B. Bader; and for 
Common Cause by Roger M. Witten, Carol F. Lee, and Archibald Cox. 
Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed for the American 
Civil Liberties Union by Arthur B. Spitzer, John A. Powell, and Joel M. 
Gora; for the American Medical Association et al. by Michael A. Nemeroff, 
Carter G. Phillips, and Mark D. Hopson; for the Center for Public Inter-
est Law by Robert C. Fellmeth; and for the Washington Legal Foundation 
et al. by Daniel J. Popeo and Paul D. Kamenar. 
Thomas J. Hart filed a brief of amici curiae for the National Organiza-
tion for Women et al. 


[PDF PAGE 4]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
655 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
porations are allowed, however, to make such expenditures 
from segregated funds used solely for political purposes. 
§ 169.255(1). 
In response to a challenge brought by the 
Michigan State Chamber of Commerce (Chamber), the Sixth 
Circuit held that§ 54(1) could not be applied to the Chamber, 
a Michigan nonprofit corporation, without violating the First 
Amendment. 856 F. 2d 783 (1988). Although we agree that 
expressive rights are implicated in this case, we hold that 
application of § 54(1) to the Chamber is constitutional be-
cause the provision is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling 
state interest. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the 
Court of Appeals. 
I 
Section 54(1) of the Michigan Campaign Finance Act pro-
hibits corporations from making contributions and independ-
ent expenditures in connection with state candidate elec-
tions. 1 
The issue before us is only the constitutionality of 
the State's ban on independent expenditures. 
The Act de-
fines "expenditure" as "a payment, donation, loan, pledge, or 
promise of payment of money or anything of ascertainable 
monetary value for goods, materials, services, or facilities in 
assistance of, or in opposition to, the nomination or election of 
a candidate." 
§ 169.206(1). 
An expenditure is considered 
independent if it is "not made at the direction of, or under the 
control of, another person and if the expenditure is not a con-
tribution to a committee." § 169.209(1); see § 169.203(4) (de-
fining "committee" as a group that "receives contributions or 
makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing or at-
tempting to influence the action of the voters for or against 
the nomination or election of a candidate"). 
The Act ex-
empts from this general prohibition against corporate politi-
cal spending any expenditure made from a segregated fund. 
1 Section 54(1) is modeled on a provision of the Federal Election Cam-
paign Act of 1971, 86 Stat. 11, as amended, 2 U. S. C. §§ 431-455, that re-
quires corporations and labor unions to use segregated funds to finance in-
dependent expenditures made in federal elections. 
§ 441b. 


[PDF PAGE 5]
656 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
§ 169.255(1). 
A corporation may solicit contributions to its 
political fund only from an enumerated list of persons associ-
ated with the corporation. See §§ 169.255(2), (3). 
The Chamber, a nonprofit Michigan corporation, challenges 
the constitutionality of this statutory scheme. The Chamber 
comprises more than 8,000 members, three-quarters of whom 
are for-profit corporations. The Chamber's general treasury 
is funded through annual dues required of all members. Its 
purposes, as set out in the bylaws, are to promote economic 
conditions favorable to private enterprise; to analyze, com-
pile, and disseminate information about laws of interest to 
the business community and to publicize to the government 
the views of the business community on such matters; to 
train and educate its members; to foster ethical business 
practices; to collect data on, and investigate matters of, so-
cial, civic, and economic importance to the State; to receive 
contributions and to make expenditures for political purposes 
and to perform any other lawful political activity; and to co-
ordinate activities with other similar organizations. 
In June 1985 Michigan scheduled a special election to fill a 
vacancy in the Michigan House of Representatives. 
Al-
though the Chamber had established and funded a separate 
political fund, it sought to use its general treasury funds to 
place in a local newspaper an advertisement supporting a 
specific candidate. 
As the Act made such an expenditure 
punishable as a felony, see§ 169.254(5), the Chamber brought 
suit in District Court for injunctive relief against enforce-
ment of the Act, arguing that the restriction on expenditures 
is unconstitutional under both the First and the Fourteenth 
Amendments. 
The District Court upheld the statute. 643 F. Supp. 397 
(WD Mich. 1986). 
The Sixth Circuit reversed, reasoning 
that the expenditure restriction, as applied to the Chamber, 
violated the First Amendment. We noted probable jurisdic-
tion, 490 U. S. 1045 (1989), and now reverse. 


[PDF PAGE 6]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
657 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
II 
To determine whether Michigan's restriction on corporate 
political expenditures may constitutionally be applied to the 
Chamber, we must ascertain whether it burdens the exercise 
of political speech and, if it does, whether it is narrowly tai-
lored to serve a compelling state interest. Buckley v. Valeo, 
424 U. S. 1, 44-45 (1976) (per curiam). Certainly, the use of 
funds to support a political candidate is "speech"; independ-
ent campaign expenditures constitute "political expression 'at 
the core of our electoral process and of the First Amendment 
freedoms."' 
Id., at 39 (quoting Williams v. Rhodes, 393 
U. S. 23, 32 (1968)). 
The mere fact that the Chamber is a 
corporation does not remove its speech from the ambit of the 
First Amendment. See, e. g., First National Bank of Bos-
ton v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 777 (1978). 
A 
This Court concluded in FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens 
for Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238 (1986) (MCFL), that a federal 
statute requiring corporations to make independent political 
expenditures only through special segregated funds, 2 
U. S. C. § 441b, burdens corporate freedom of expression. 
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 252 (plurality opinion); id., at 266 
(O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg-
ment). 
The Court reasoned that the small nonprofit cor-
poration in that case would face certain organizational and 
financial hurdles in establishing and administering a segre-
gated political fund. 
For example, the statute required the 
corporation to appoint a treasurer for its segregated fund, 
keep records of all contributions, file a statement of organiza-
tion containing information about the fund, and update that 
statement periodically. 
Id., at 253 (plurality opinion). 
In 
addition, the corporation was permitted to solicit contribu-
tions to its segregated fund only from "members," which did 
not include persons who merely contributed to or indicated 
support for the organization. Id., at 254 (plurality opinion). 


[PDF PAGE 7]
658 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
These hurdles "impose[d] administrative costs that many 
small entities [might] be unable to bear" and "create[d] a 
disincentive for such organizations to engage in political 
speech." Ibid; see also id., at 265-266 (O'CONNOR, J.). 
Despite the Chamber's success in administering its sepa-
rate political fund, see, e. g., Tr. 443 (Chamber expected to 
have over $140,000 in its segregated fund available for use in 
the 1986 elections), Michigan's segregated fund requirement 
still burdens the Chamber's exercise of expression because 
"the corporation is not free to use its general funds for cam-
paign advocacy purposes." MCFL, supra, at 252 (plurality 
opinion). 
The Act imposes requirements similar to those in 
the federal statute involved in MCFL: a segregated fund 
must have a treasurer, § 169.221; and its administrators must 
keep detailed accounts of contributions, § 169.224, and file 
with state officials a statement of organization, ibid. 
In ad-
dition, a nonprofit corporation like the Chamber may solicit 
contributions to its political fund only from members, stock-
holders of members, officers or directors of members, and 
the spouses of any of these persons. 
§ 169.255. 
Although 
these requirements do not stifle corporate speech entirely, 
they do burden expressive activity. 
See MCFL, 479 U. S., 
at 252 (plurality opinion); id., at 266 (O'CONNOR, J.). Thus, 
they must be justified by a compelling state interest. 
B 
The State contends that the unique legal and economic 
characteristics of corporations necessitate some regulation of 
their political expenditures to avoid corruption or the appear-
ance of corruption. 
See FEC v. National Conservative Po-
litical Action Committee, 470 U. S. 480, 496-497 (1985) 
(NCPAC) ("[P]reventing corruption or the appearance of 
corruption are the only legitimate and compelling govern-
ment interests thus far identified for restricting campaign 
finances"). 
State law grants corporations special advan-
tages -such as limited liability, perpetual life, and favorable 


[PDF PAGE 8]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
659 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
treatment of the accumulation and distribution of assets -
that enhance their ability to attract capital and to deploy 
their resources in ways that maximize the return on their 
shareholders' investments. These state-created advantages 
not only allow corporations to play a dominant role in the 
Nation's economy, but also permit them to use "resources 
amassed in the economic marketplace" to obtain "an unfair 
advantage in the political marketplace." MCFL, 479 U. S., 
at 257. 
As the Court explained in MCFL, the political ad-
vantage of corporations is unfair because 
"[t]he resources in the treasury of a business corporation 
... are not an indication of popular support for the cor-
poration's political ideas. 
They reflect instead the eco-
nomically motivated decisions of investors and custom-
ers. 
The availability of these resources may make a 
corporation a formidable political presence, even though 
the power of the corporation may be no reflection of the 
power of its ideas." Id., at 258. 
We therefore have recognized that "the compelling govern-
mental interest in preventing corruption support[s] the re-
striction of the influence of political war chests funneled 
through the corporate form." 
NCPAC, supra, at 500-501; 
see also MCFL, supra, at 257. 
The Chamber argues that this concern about corporate 
domination of the political process is insufficient to justify 
a restriction on independent expenditures. 
Although this 
Court has distinguished these expenditures from direct con-
tributions in the context of federal laws regulating individual 
donors, Buckley, 424 U. S., at 47, it has also recognized that 
a legislature might demonstrate a danger of real or apparent 
corruption posed by such expenditures when made by cor-
porations to influence candidate elections, Bellotti, supra, at 
788, n. 26. 
Regardless of whether this danger of "financial 
quid pro quo" corruption, see NC PAC, supra, at 497; post, at 
702-705 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting), may be sufficient to justify 
a restriction on independent expenditures, Michigan's regula-


[PDF PAGE 9]
660 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
tion aims at a different type of corruption in the political 
arena: the corrosive and distorting effects of immense ag-
gregations of wealth that are accumulated with the help of 
the corporate form and that have little or no correlation to 
the public's support for the corporation's political ideas. See 
supra, at 658-659. The Act does not attempt "to equalize the 
relative influence of speakers on elections," post, at 705 (KEN-
NEDY, J., dissenting); see also post, at 684 (SCALIA, J., dis-
senting); rather, it ensures that expenditures reflect actual 
public support for the political ideas espoused by corpora-
tions. 
We emphasize that the mere fact that corporations 
may accumulate large amounts of wealth is not the justifica-
tion for § 54; rather, the unique state-conferred corporate 
structure that facilitates the amassing of large treasuries 
warrants the limit on independent expenditures. Corporate 
wealth can unfairly influence elections when it is deployed in 
the form of independent expenditures, just as it can when it 
assumes the guise of political contributions. 
We therefore 
hold that the State has articulated a sufficiently compelling 
rationale to support its restriction on independent expendi-
tures by corporations. 
C 
We next turn to the question whether the Act is suffi-
ciently narrowly tailored to achieve its goal. 
We find that 
the Act is precisely targeted to eliminate the distortion 
caused by corporate spending while also allowing corpora-
tions to express their political views. 
Contrary to the dis-
sents' critical assumptions, see post, at 698, 699, 706 (KEN-
NEDY, J.); post, at 680, 682-683 (SCALIA, J.), the Act does 
not impose an absolute ban on all forms of corporate polit-
ical spending but permits corporations to make independent 
political expenditures through separate segregated funds. 
Because persons contributing to such funds understand that 
their money will be used solely for political purposes, the 
speech generated accurately reflects contributors' support 
l


[PDF PAGE 10]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
661 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
for the corporation's political views. 
See MCFL, supra, at 
258. 
The Chamber argues that § 54(1) is substantially overin-
clusive, because it includes within its scope closely held cor-
porations that do not possess vast reservoirs of capital. We 
rejected a similar argument in FEC v. National Right to 
Work Committee, 459 U. S. 197 (1982) (NRWC), in the con-
text of federal restrictions on the persons from whom cor-
porations could solicit contributions to their segregated 
funds. The Court found that the federal campaign statute, 2 
U. S. C. § 441b, "reflect[ed] a legislative judgment that the 
special characteristics of the corporate structure require par-
ticularly careful regulation. While§ 441b restricts the solici-
tation of corporations and labor unions without great financial 
resources, as well as those more fortunately situated, we ac-
cept Congress' judgment that it is the potential for such influ-
ence that demands regulation." 459 U. S., at 209-210 ( cita-
tion omitted; emphasis added). 
Although some closely held 
corporations, just as some publicly held ones, may not have 
accumulated significant amounts of wealth, they receive from 
the State the special benefits conferred by the corporate 
structure and present the potential for distorting the political 
process. 
This potential for distortion justifies § 54(1)'s gen-
eral applicability to all corporations. 
The section therefore 
is not substantially overbroad. 
III 
The Chamber contends that even if the Campaign Finance 
Act is constitutional with respect to for-profit corporations, it 
nonetheless cannot be applied to a nonprofit ideological cor-
poration like a chamber of commerce. 
In MCFL, we held 
that the nonprofit organization there had "features more akin 
to voluntary political associations than business firms, and 
therefore should not have to bear burdens on independent 
spending solely because of [its] incorporated status." 4 79 
U. S., at 263. 
In reaching that conclusion, we enumerated 


[PDF PAGE 11]
662 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
three characteristics of the corporation that were "essential" 
to our holding. 
Ibid. 
Because the Chamber does not share 
these crucial features, the Constitution does not require that 
it be exempted from the generally applicable provisions of 
§ 54(1). 
The first characteristic of Massachusetts Citizens for Life, 
Inc., that distinguished it from ordinary business corpora-
tions was that the organization "was formed for the express 
purpose of promoting political ideas, and cannot engage in 
business activities." Id., at 264. 
Its articles of incorpora-
tion indicated that its purpose was "[t]o foster respect for 
human life and to defend the right to life of all human beings, 
born and unborn, through educational, political and other 
forms of activities," id., at 241-242, and all of the organiza-
tion's activities were "designed to further its agenda," id., at 
242. 
MCFL's narrow political focus thus "ensure[d] that 
[its] political resources reflect[ed] political support." Id., at 
264. 
In contrast, the Chamber's bylaws set forth more varied 
purposes, see supra, at 656, several of which are not inher-
ently political. For instance, the Chamber compiles and dis-
seminates information relating to social, civic, and economic 
conditions, trains and educates its members, and promotes 
ethical business practices. 
Unlike MCFL's, the Chamber's 
educational activities are not expressly tied to political goals; 
many of its seminars, conventions, and publications are politi-
cally neutral and focus on business and economic issues. The 
Chamber's president and chief executive officer stated that 
one of the corporation's main purposes is to provide "service 
to [its] membership that includes everything from group in-
surance to educational seminars, and ... litigation activities 
on behalf of the business community." 
Deposition of E. 
James Barrett, Nov. 12, 1985, p. 11. 
See also PR News-
wire, July 21, 1989 (Chamber cosponsored the Automotive 
Management Briefing Seminar); PR Newswire, May 9, 1989 
(Chamber cosponsored the Michigan New Product Awards 


[PDF PAGE 12]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
663 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
competition); PR Newswire, June 14, 1988 (Chamber spon-
sored seminar on product liability losses and lawsuits); PR 
Newswire, Feb. 4, 1988 (Chamber cosponsored outreach pro-
gram to increase awareness of investment opportunities in 
the Caribbean Basin). The Chamber's nonpolitical activities 
therefore suffice to distinguish it from MCFL in the context 
of this characteristic. 
We described the second feature of MCFL as the absence 
of "shareholders or other persons affiliated so as to have a 
claim on its assets or earnings. 
This ensures that persons 
connected with the organization will have no economic disin-
centive for disassociating with it if they disagree with its po-
litical activity." 479 U. S., at 264. 
Although the Chamber 
also lacks shareholders, many of its members may be simi-
larly reluctant to withdraw as members even if they disagree 
with the Chamber's political expression, because they wish to 
benefit from the Chamber's nonpolitical programs and to es-
tablish contacts with other members of the business commu-
nity. The Chamber's political agenda is sufficiently distinct 
from its educational and outreach programs that members 
who disagree with the former may continue to pay dues to 
participate in the latter. JUSTICE KENNEDY ignores these 
disincentives for withdrawing as a member of the Chamber, 
stating only that "[ o ]ne need not become a member . . . to 
earn a living." 
Post, at 710 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting). 
Certainly, members would be disinclined to terminate their 
involvement with the organization on the basis of less ex-
treme disincentives than the loss of employment. Thus, we 
are persuaded that the Chamber's members are more similar 
to shareholders of a business corporation than to the mem-
bers of MCFL in this respect. 2 
2 A requirement that the Chamber disclose the nature and extent of its 
political activities, see post, at 707 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting), would not 
eliminate the possible distortion of the political process inherent in inde-
pendent expenditures from general corporate funds. Given the significant 
incentive for members to continue their financial support for the Chamber 


[PDF PAGE 13]
664 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
The final characteristic upon which we relied in MCFL was 
the organization's independence from the influence of busi-
ness corporations. On this score, the Chamber differs most 
greatly from the Massachusetts organization. 
MCFL was 
not established by, and had a policy of not accepting contribu-
tions from, business corporations. Thus it could not "serv[e] 
as [a] condui[t] for the type of direct spending that creates a 
threat to the political marketplace." 4 79 U. S., at 264. 
In 
striking contrast, more than three-quarters of the Chamber's 
members are business corporations, whose political contribu-
tions and expenditures can constitutionally be regulated by 
the State. See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S., at 29 (upholding 
restrictions on political contributions); supra, at 658-661 (re-
garding independent expenditures). 
As we read the Act, a 
corporation's payments into the Chamber's general treasury 
would not be considered payments to influence an election, so 
they would not be "contributions" or "expenditures," see 
§§ 169.204(1), 169.206, and would not be subject to the Act's 
limitations. 
Business corporations therefore could circum-
vent the Act's restriction by funneling money through the 
Chamber's general treasury. 3 
Because the Chamber ac-
cepts money from for-profit corporations, it could, absent 
application of§ 54(1), serve as a conduit for corporate political 
spending. 
In sum, the Chamber does not possess the fea-
in spite of their disagreement with its political agenda, disclosure will not 
ensure that the funds in the Chamber's treasury correspond to members' 
support for its ideas. 
3 A nonprofit corporation's segregated fund, on the other hand, appar-
ently cannot receive contributions from corporations. 
See Mich. Comp. 
Laws § 169.255(3) (1979) (allowing contributions only from "(a) Members of 
the corporation who are individuals. 
(b) Stockholders of members of the 
corporation. ( c) Officers or directors of members of the corporation"). In 
addition, a corporation's payment to a segregated fund would likely be con-
sidered a contribution or expenditure because the sole purpose of such seg-
regated funds is to make political contributions and expenditures. 
§ 169.255(1). The segregated fund, therefore, could not be used as a con-
duit for business corporations' political spending. 


[PDF PAGE 14]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
665 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
tures that would compel the State to exempt it from restric-
tion on independent political expenditures. 
IV 
The Chamber also attacks § 54(1) as underinclusive because 
it does not regulate the independent expenditures of unincor-
porated labor unions. 4 Whereas unincorporated unions, and 
indeed individuals, may be able to amass large treasuries, 
they do so without the significant state-conferred advantages 
of the corporate structure; corporations are "by far the most 
prominent example of entities that enjoy legal advantages en-
hancing their ability to accumulate wealth." 
MCFL, 479 
U. S., at 258, n. 11. 
The desire to counterbalance those ad-
vantages unique to the corporate form is the State's compel-
ling interest in this case; thus, excluding from the statute's 
coverage unincorporated entities that also have the capacity 
to accumulate wealth "does not undermine its justification for 
regulating corporations." Ibid. 
Moreover, labor unions differ from corporations in that 
union members who disagree with a union's political activities 
need not give up full membership in the organization to avoid 
supporting its political activities. 
Although a union and an 
employer may require that all bargaining unit employees be-
come union members, a union may not compel those employ-
ees to support financially "union activities beyond those ger-
mane to collective bargaining, contract administration, and 
grievance adjustment." Communications Workers v. Beck, 
487 U. S. 735, 745 (1988). 
See also Abood v. Detroit Bd. of 
Ed., 431 U. S. 209 (1977) (holding that compelling nonmem-
ber employees to contribute to union's political activities in-
fringes employees' First Amendment rights). An employee 
who objects to a union's political activities thus can decline to 
contribute to those activities, while continuing to enjoy the 
4 The Federal Election Campaign Act restricts the independent expen-
ditures of labor organizations as well as those of corporations. 2 U. S. C. 
§ 441b(a). 


[PDF PAGE 15]
666 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 u. s. 
benefits derived from the union's performance of its duties as 
the exclusive representative of the bargaining unit on labor-
management issues. 
As a result, the funds available for a 
union's political activities more accurately reflects members' 
support for the organization's political views than does a cor-
poration's general treasury. 
Michigan's decision to exclude 
unincorporated labor unions from the scope of§ 54(1) is there-
fore justified by the crucial differences between unions and 
corporations. 
V 
Because we hold that § 54(1) does not violate the First 
Amendment, we must address the Chamber's contention that 
the provision infringes its rights under the Fourteenth 
Amendment. 
The Chamber argues that the statute treats 
similarly situated entities unequally. 
Specifically, it con-
tends that the State should also restrict the independent ex-
penditures of unincorporated associations with the ability to 
accumulate large treasuries and of corporations engaged in 
the media business. 
Because the right to engage in political expression is funda-
mental to our constitutional system, statutory classifications 
impinging upon that right must be narrowly tailored to serve 
a compelling governmental interest. 
Police Department of 
Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92, 101 (1972). 
We find that, 
even under such strict scrutiny, the statute's classifications 
pass muster under the Equal Protection Clause. 
As we ex-
plained in the context of our discussions of whether the stat-
ute was overinclusive, supra, at 660-661, or underinclusive, 
supra, at 665 and this page, the State's decision to regulate 
only corporations is precisely tailored to serve the compelling 
state interest of eliminating from the political process the 
corrosive effect of political "war chests" amassed with the aid 
of the legal advantages given to corporations. 
Similarly, we find that the Act's exemption of media cor-
porations from the expenditure restriction does not render 
the statute unconstitutional. 
The "media exception" ex-


[PDF PAGE 16]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
667 
652 
Opinion of the Court 
eludes from the definition of "expenditure" any "expenditure 
by a broadcasting station, newspaper, magazine, or other pe-
riodical or publication for any news story, commentary, or 
editorial in support of or opposition to a candidate for elective 
office . . . in the regular course of publication or broadcast-
ing," § 169.206(3)(d). 5 The Court of Appeals did not address 
the Chamber's equal protection argument because it found 
that the application of § 54(1) to the Chamber violates the 
First Amendment. 
See 856 F. 2d, at 790. 
The District 
Court, however, appeared to hold that the media exception 
does not implicate the Equal Protection Clause because 
"[a]ny corporation . . . may avail itself of the exemption" by 
entering the news broadcasting or publishing business. 643 
F. Supp., at 405. 
We are persuaded, however, that a Four-
teenth Amendment analysis is necessary in this case. 
It is 
true that the exemption does not refer expressly to "media 
corporations." 
Nevertheless, the exception will undoubt-
edly result in the imposition of fewer restrictions on the ex-
pression of corporations that are in the media business. 
Thus, it cannot be regarded as neutral, and the distinction 
must be justified by a compelling state purpose. 
Although all corporations enjoy the same state-conferred 
benefits inherent in the corporate form, media corporations 
differ significantly from other corporations in that their re-
sources are devoted to the collection of information and its 
dissemination to the public. 
We have consistently recog-
nized the unique role that the press plays in "informing and 
educating the public, offering er iticism, and providing a 
forum for discussion and debate." 
Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 
781. 
See also Mills v. Alabama, 384 U. S. 214, 219 (1966) 
5 The Federal Election Campaign Act contains a similar exemption that 
excludes from the definition of expenditure "any news story, commentary, 
or editorial distributed through the facilities of any broadcasting station, 
newspaper, magazine, or other periodical publication, unless such facilities 
are owned or controlled by any political party, political committee, or can-
didate." 2 U. S. C. § 431(9)(B)(i). 


[PDF PAGE 17]
668 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Opinion of the Court 
494 U.S. 
("[T]he press serves and was designed to serve as a power-
ful antidote to any abuses of power by governmental officials 
and as a constitutionally chosen means for keeping officials 
elected by the people responsible to all the people whom they 
were selected to serve"). 
The Act's definition of "expendi-
ture," § 169.206, conceivably could be interpreted to encom-
pass election-related news stories and editorials. The Act's 
restriction on independent expenditures therefore might dis-
courage incorporated news broadcasters or publishers from 
serving their crucial societal role. 
The media exception en-
sures that the Act does not hinder or· prevent the institu-
tional press from reporting on, and publishing editorials 
about, newsworthy events. 
Cf. H. R. Rep. No. 93-1239, 
p. 4 (1974) (explaining a similar federal media exception, 2 
U. S. C. § 431(9)(B)(i), as "assur[ing] the unfettered right of 
the newspapers, TV networks, and other media to cover and 
comment on political campaigns"); 15 U. S. C. §§ 1801-1804 
(enacting a limited exemption from the antitrust laws for 
newspapers in part because of the recognition of the special 
role of the press). 
A valid distinction thus exists between 
corporations that are part of the media industry and other 
corporations that are not involved in the regular business of 
imparting news to the public. 
Although the press' unique 
societal role may not entitle the press to greater protection 
under the Constitution, Bellotti, supra, at 782, and n. 18, it 
does provide a compelling reason for the State to exempt 
media corporations from the scope of political expenditure 
limitations. We therefore hold that the Act does not violate 
the Equal Protection Clause. 
VI 
Michigan identified as a serious danger the significant pos-
sibility that corporate political expenditures will undermine 
the integrity of the political process, and it has implemented 
a narrowly tailored solution to that problem. 
By requiring 
corporations to make all independent political expenditures 


[PDF PAGE 18]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
669 
652 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
through a separate fund made up of money solicited ex-
pressly for political purposes, the Michigan Campaign Fi-
nance Act reduces the threat that huge corporate treasuries 
amassed with the aid of favorable state laws will be used to 
influence unfairly the outcome of elections. 
The Michigan 
Chamber of Commerce does not exhibit the characteristics 
identified in MC FL that would require the State to exempt it 
from a generally applicable restriction on independent corpo-
rate expenditures. We therefore reverse the decision of the 
Court of Appeals. 
It is so ordered. 
JUSTICE BRENNAN, concurring. 
I join the Court's opinion. As one of the "Orwellian" "cen-
sor[s]" derided by the dissents, post, at 679 (SCALIA, J.); 
post, at 713 (KENNEDY, J.), and as the author of our recent 
decision in FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 
U. S. 238 (1986) (MCFL), I write separately to explain my 
views in this case. 
The Michigan law at issue is not an across-the-board prohi-
bition on political participation by corporations or even a 
complete ban on corporate political expenditures. 
Rather, 
the statute merely requires those corporations wishing to 
make independent expenditures in support of candidates to 
do so through segregated funds or political action committees 
(PAC's) rather than directly from their corporate treasur-
ies.1 As the dissents observe, this restriction still must be 
analyzed with great solicitude and care, because independent 
expenditures constitute expression " 'at the core of our elec-
toral process and of the First Amendment freedoms.'" 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 39 (1976) (per curiam) (quot-
1 In MCFL, 479 U. S. 238 (1986), we observed that the requirement that 
expenditures be made through PA C's "is of course distinguishable from the 
complete foreclosure of any opportunity for political speech that we invali-
dated in the state referendum context in First National Bank of Boston v. 
Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765 (1978)." Id., at 259, n. 12. 


[PDF PAGE 19]
670 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
BRENN AN, J., concurring 
494 u. s. 
ing Williams v. Rhodes, 393 U. S. 23, 32 (1968)). 
I believe, 
however, that the dissents significantly overstate their case 
in several important respects and that the Court's decision 
today is faithful to our prior opinions in the campaign financ-
ing area, particularly MCFL. 
In MCFL, we held that a provision of the Federal Elec-
tion Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), as added, 90 Stat. 490, 
and amended, 2 U. S. C. § 441b, similar to the Michigan law 
at issue here, could not be applied constitutionally to a 
small, antiabortion advocacy group. 
In evaluating the First 
Amendment challenge, however, we "acknowledge[d] the le-
gitimacy of Congress' concern that organizations that amass 
great wealth in the economic marketplace not gain unfair ad-
vantage in the political marketplace." 
4 79 U. S., at 263. 
Specifically, we noted that " [ d]irect corporate spending on 
political activity raises the prospect that resources amassed 
in the economic marketplace may be used to provide an unfair 
advantage in the political marketplace," because "[t]he re-
sources in the treasury of a business corporation . . . are not 
an indication of popular support for the corporation's political 
ideas." 
Id., at 257-258 (emphasis added). 
Instead, these 
resources reflect "the economically motivated decisions of in-
vestors and customers." Id., at 258. 
A stockholder might 
oppose the use of corporate funds drawn from the general 
treasury-which represents, after all, his money-in support 
of a particular political candidate. 
See id., at 260, citing 
FEC v. National Right to Work Committee, 459 U. S. 197, 
208 (1982), and Pipe.fitters v. United States, 407 U. S. 385, 
414-415 (1972). 
The requirement that corporate independ-
ent expenditures be financed through a segregated fund or 
PAC expressly established to engage in campaign spending is 
designed to avert this danger. 
"The resources available to 
[a PAC], as opposed to the corporate treasury, in fact reflect 
popular support for the political positions of the committee." 
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 258. 
We thus adopted the "'underly-
ing theory'" of FECA "'that substantial general purpose 
l


[PDF PAGE 20]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
671 
652 
BRENN AN, J., concurring 
treasuries should not be diverted to political purposes'" and 
that requiring funding by voluntary contributions guarantees 
that "'the money collected is that intended by those who con-
tribute to be used for political purposes and not money di-
verted from another source.'" Ibid. (quoting 117 Cong. Rec. 
43381 (1971) (statement of Rep. Hansen)). 2 
The PAC requirement may be unconstitutional as applied 
to some corporations because they do not present the dan-
gers at which expenditure limitations are aimed. 
Indeed, 
we determined that Massachusetts Citizens for Life-the 
antiabortion advocacy organization at issue in MCFL-fell 
into this category. 3 
We nevertheless predicted that the 
2We cited with approval in First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 
435 U. S. 765 (1978), a discussion of the constitutionality of restrictions on 
union contributions and independent expenditures in candidate elections: 
"[T]he ban on union political contributions and expenditures is not total but 
applies only to general union funds. Contributions and expenditures made 
by a separate fund financed by voluntary contributions are specifically per-
mitted, as are expenditures of general funds to solicit contributions to the 
separate fund. 
In order to engage in political discussion, a union need only 
convince its members that its views are sound enough to merit a contribu-
tion to a union political committee espousing the same political philosophy. 
The necessity of convincing union members of the value of such a contribu-
tion does not amount to a constitutionally invalid burden. 
After all, if 
union members are so unconvinced of the reasonableness of the union's 
position that they refuse to support it, the argument for prohibiting the 
union from spending dues money to support its political views is greatly 
strengthened .... In the case of unions, the statute strikes a legitimate 
and reasonable accommodation by distinguishing between the uses to 
which a separate, voluntary fund and the general treasury fund may be 
put." Comment, The Regulation of Union Political Activity: Majority and 
Minority Rights and Remedies, 126 U. Pa. L. Rev. 386, 409 (1977) (cited in 
Bellotti, supra, at 788, n. 26). 
3 JUSTICE KENNEDY is mistaken when he suggests that by upholding 
the as-applied challenge in MCFL and rejecting it here, we are embarking 
on "value-laden, content-based speech suppression that permits some non-
profit corporate groups but not others to engage in political speech." 
Post, at 695-696 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting). The mere fact that some as-
applied challenges succeed while others fail does not create a system of 


[PDF PAGE 21]
672 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
494 u. s. 
class of exempt organizations would be small, see 4 79 U. S., 
at 264, and we set out three features of MCFL that were "es-
sential" to our holding that it could not be bound by the re-
striction on independent spending. 
Id., at 263. 
First, the 
group "was formed for the express purpose of promoting po-
litical ideas, and [could not] engage in business activities." 
Id., at 264. 
Second, it "ha[d] no shareholders or other per-
sons affiliated so as to have a claim on its assets or earnings. 
This ensure[d] that persons connected with the organization 
[had] no economic disincentive for disassociating with it if 
they disagree[d] with its political activity." 
Ibid. (footnote 
omitted). 
Third, the group "was not established by a busi-
ness corporation or a labor union, and it [ was] its policy not to 
accept contributions from such entities. This prevent[ed it] 
from serving as [a] condui[t] for the type of direct spending 
that creates a threat to the political marketplace." Ibid. 
The majority today persuasively demonstrates that the 
situation in this case is markedly different from that in MCFL. 
The Michigan State Chamber of Commerce (Chamber) is first 
and foremost a business association, not a political advocacy 
organization. 
See ante, at 661-665. 
The Michigan stat-
ute advances the interest identified in MCFL in two distinct 
ways, by preventing both the Chamber and other business 
corporations from using the funds of other persons for pur-
poses that those persons may not support. 
First, the state 
law protects the small businessperson who does not wish his 
or her dues to be spent in support of political candidates, but 
who nevertheless wishes to maintain an association with the 
Chamber because of the myriad benefits it provides that are 
"speech suppression." 
Whether an organization presents the threat at 
which the campaign finance laws are aimed has to do with the particular 
characteristics of the organization at issue and not with the content of its 
speech. Of course, if a correlation between the two factors could be shown 
to exist, a group would be free to mount a First Amendment challenge on 
that basis. Cf. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 97, n. 131 (1976). 
Neither 
appellee nor JUSTICE KENNEDY'S dissent has provided any reason to be-
lieve that such a relationship exists here. 


[PDF PAGE 22]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
673 
652 
BRENN AN, J., concurring 
unrelated to its political activities. 
See ante, at 662-663. 
The bylaws state that the Chamber's "objectives and pur-
poses" shall be in part "[t]o analyze, compile and disseminate 
information on laws and regulations of interest to the mem-
bers" and "[t]o further the training and education of the 
membership by means of educational materials, seminars, 
conventions, bulletins, newsletters, reports and technical 
materials." App. 43a. 
To attract new members, Chamber 
advertisements promise a wide variety of services, including 
"regular and special publications, legislative briefings, group 
insurance, a business hot-line, and seminars." 
Id., at 42a. 
Its advertising practices indicate that even the Chamber un-
derstands that membership is not a function of support for its 
political causes alone. 
A member faces significant disin-
centives to withdraw, even if he disagrees with the Cham-
ber's expenditures in support of a particular candidate. 
In addition, the Michigan law protects dissenting share-
holders of business corporations that are members of the 
Chamber to the extent that such shareholders oppose the use 
of their money, paid as dues to the Chamber out of general 
corporate treasury funds, for political campaigns. 
See 
MCFL, supra, at 260-261; cf. post, at 686 (SCALIA, J., dis-
senting). 
The Michigan law prevents the Chamber from 
"serv[ing] as a conduit for corporate political spending." 
Ante, at 664. 
Even JUSTICE KENNEDY, by repeatedly using 
the qualifier "nonprofit" throughout his opinion, appears to 
concede that the Michigan law legitimately may be applied to 
for-profit business corporations, or at least that the Court's 
rationale might "suffice to justify restricting political speech 
by for-profit corporations." 
Post, at 703 (dissenting opin-
ion). 
If that is so, JUSTICE KENNEDY'S failure to sustain the 
statute as applied in this case is perplexing, because the 
Chamber, unlike other nonprofits such as MCFL, is clearly a 
conduit for corporations barred from making independent ex-


[PDF PAGE 23]
674 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
494 u. s. 
penditures directly. 4 
A corporation cannot under Michigan 
law make a contribution to a PAC out of its general treasury 
funds, see ante, at 664, n. 3, and we have upheld similar rules 
restricting the groups from whom PA C's may solicit con-
tributions. See FEC v. National Right to Work Committee, 
459 U. S., at 207-211; California Medical Assn. v. FEC, 453 
U. S. 182, 193-199 (1981) (plurality opinion). It is common 
ground that a segregated fund, even if it is a "nonprofit cor-
poration," cannot be used as a conduit for independent expen-
ditures by business corporations; I find it unremarkable that 
the Chamber and other nonprofits cannot perform such a 
function either. 
Of course, a member could resign from the Chamber and a 
stockholder could divest from a business corporation that 
used the Chamber as a conduit, but these options would im-
pose a financial sacrifice on those objecting to political expen-
ditures. 5 
See MCFL, 479 U. S., at 260. It is therefore ir-
relevant that "[t]o the extent that members disagree with a 
nonprofit corporation's policies, they can seek change from 
within, withhold financial support, cease to associate with the 
group, or form a rival group of their own." 
Post, at 710 
(KENNEDY, J., dissenting). 
Moreover, none of the alterna-
tives proposed by JUSTICE KENNEDY would protect a captive 
J According to JUSTICE KENNEDY'S dissent, the majority holds that "it 
is now a felony in Michigan for the Sierra Club, or the American Civil Lib-
erties Union" to make independent expenditures. 
Post, at 698. 
This 
characterization is inaccurate. 
Not only are those groups not part of 
the proceeding before us, but the dissent has overlooked the central lesson 
of MCFL that the First Amendment may require exemptions, on an as-
applied basis, from expenditure restrictions. 
If a nonprofit corporation 
is formed with the express purpose of promoting political ideas, is not com-
posed of members who face an economic incentive for disassociating with 
it, and does not accept contributions from business corporations or labor 
unions, then it would be governed by our MCFL holding. 
5 In addition, shareholders in a large business corporation may find it 
prohibitively expensive to monitor the activities of the corporation to de-
termine whether it is making expenditures to which they object. 


[PDF PAGE 24]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
675 
652 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
stockholder of a business corporation that used the Chamber 
as a conduit. 6 
While the State may have no constitutional 
duty to protect the objecting Chamber member and corpo-
rate shareholder in the absence of state action, cf. Abood v. 
Detroit Board of Education, 431 U. S. 209, 232-237 (1977), 
the State surely has a compelling interest in preventing a cor-
poration it has chartered from exploiting those who do not 
wish to contribute to the Chamber's political message. "A's 
right to receive information does not require the state to per-
mit B to steal from C the funds that alone will enable B to 
make the communication." Brudney, Business Corporations 
and Stockholders' Rights Under the First Amendment, 91 
Yale L. J. 235, 247 (1981). 
Cf. Communications Workers v. 
Beck, 487 U. S. 735 (1988); Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 
7 40 (1961). We have long recognized the importance of state 
corporate law in "protect[ing] the shareholders" of corpora-
tions chartered within the State. 
CTS Corp. v. Dynamics 
Corp. of America, 481 U. S. 69, 91 (1987). 
The Michigan law is concededly "underinclusive" insofar as 
it does not ban other types of political expenditures to which 
6JUSTICE KENNEDY'S argument is also inconsistent with his focus on 
nonprofit corporations. The leading theory of nonprofit enterprises holds 
that the rationale for use of the nonprofit form lies chiefly in the so-called 
"nondistribution constraint" -i. e., the fact that while ordinary business 
corporations have shareholders who are allowed to receive the residual 
earnings of the enterprise, the members of a nonprofit corporation are ex-
pressly prohibited from receiving any part of the assets or property of the 
corporation for themselves. 
See Hansmann, Reforming Nonprofit Cor-
poration Law, 129 U. Pa. L. Rev. 497, 502-507, 557 (1981); Hansmann, The 
Role of Nonprofit Enterprise, 89 Yale L. J. 835, 843-845 (1980). The non-
distribution constraint helps overcome contractual failure in situations 
where the activities of the corporation are difficult to monitor, by removing 
the "profit motive" and assuring those who contribute to, and contract 
with, the corporation that the nonprofit's managers will not exploit in-
formational deficiencies to pursue their own private interests. 
Hence, 
JUSTICE KENNEDY's proposed reliance on a nonprofit's donors to monitor 
and police the corporation's activities overlooks the raison d'etre of the 
nonprofit form. 


[PDF PAGE 25]
676 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
494 u. s. 
a dissenting Chamber member or corporate shareholder 
might object. See post, at 685-686 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). 
The particular provision at issue prohibits corporations from 
using treasury funds only for making independent expendi-
tures in support of, or in opposition to, any candidate in state 
elections. 
See ante, at 655-656. 
A corporation remains 
free, for example, to use general treasury funds to support an 
initiative proposal in a state referendum. 7 
See First Na-
tional Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765 (1978). 
I do not find this underinclusiveness fatal, for several rea-
sons. 8 First, as the dissents recognize, discussions on candi-
7 This very "underinclusiveness" belies the dissents' charge that the 
Michigan law is a broad restriction on corporate political expression; many 
avenues of communication are open to the Chamber. In addition, the seg-
regated fund requirement in practice has not burdened significantly the 
Chamber's speech with respect to candidate-oriented expenditures. The 
Chamber established a PAC in 1977 and has drawn from that fund in every 
election since then. The Chamber has an eligible class of about 50,000 in-
dividuals from whom it can solicit contributions to its PAC under the Michi-
gan statute, and it has been quite successful in doing so. 
During the 
1983-1984 election cycle, the Chamber PAC raised over $102,000, and its 
projected resources for the 1986 primary and general elections amounted 
to more than $140,000. 
See App. in No. 86-1867 (CA6), pp. 164, 184. 
The District Court found that "the record in this case amply demonstrates 
that the Chamber PAC frequently makes independent expenditures to in-
fluence political elections, and those efforts have been tremendously suc-
cessful in electing Chamber PAC endorsed candidates." App. to Juris. 
Statement 66a-67a. 
8JUSTICE SCALIA also maintains that protection of dissenting share-
holders cannot qualify as a valid state interest because shareholders pur-
chase their stock on the understanding that the corporation will use their 
money for any profitmaking purpose, including support for political candi-
dates with whom the shareholders may not agree. See post, at 686-687. 
We have already rejected this argument in the context of labor unions. 
See Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U. S. 209, 234-235 (1977); 
Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 740, 764 (1961). 
Rather than assuming 
that an employee accepts as "the deal," post, at 686, that the union will use 
his dues for any purpose that will advance the interests of the bargaining 
unit, including political contributions and expenditures, we have deter-
mined that "the authority to impose dues and fees [is] restricted at least to 


[PDF PAGE 26]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
677 
652 
BRENNAN, J., concurring 
date elections lie "at the heart of political debate." 
Post, 
at 698 (KENNEDY, J.); see also post, at 680, 692 (SCALIA, 
J.). 
But just as speech interests are at their zenith in 
this area, so too are the interests of unwilling Chamber mem-
bers and corporate shareholders forced to subsidize that 
speech. The State's decision to focus on this especially sen-
sitive context is a justifiable one. 9 Cf. MCFL, 479 U. S., at 
258, n. 11. 
Second, in light of our decisions in Bellotti, 
supra, Consolidated Edison Co. of New York v. Public Serv-
ice Comm'ri of New York, 447 U. S. 530, 533-535 (1980), and 
related cases, a State cannot prohibit corporations from mak-
ing many other types of political expenditures. One purpose 
of the underinclusiveness inquiry is to ensure that the prof-
fered state interest actually underlies the law. 
See, e. g., 
the 'extent of denying the unions the right, over the employee's objection, 
to use his money to support political causes which he opposes,' ... even 
though Congress was well aware that unions had historically expended 
funds in the support of political candidates and issues." Ellis v. Railway 
Clerks, 466 U. S. 435, 447 (1984) (quoting Street, supra, at 768) (emphasis 
added). 
Given the extensive state regulation of corporations, shareholder expec-
tations are always a function of state law. 
It is circular to say, as does 
JUSTICE SCALIA, that if a State did not protect shareholders, they would 
have no expectation of being protected, and therefore that the State has no 
legitimate interest in protecting them. 
JUSTICE SCALIA concedes, as he 
must, that an expenditure "not plausibly tied to [a corporation's] ability to 
make money for its shareholders" can be prohibited. 
Post, at 691. 
But 
States have always been permitted to define what qualifies as "plausibly 
tied" to the corporation's purpose of making money, i. e., what qualifies as 
"corporate waste," see Rogers v. Hill, 289 U. S. 582, 591-592 (1933), in-
cluding wasteful speech, see Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 795; Cort v. Ash, 422 
U. S. 66, 84 (1975). 
I believe it entirely proper for a State to decide to 
promote the ability of investors to purchase stock in corporations without 
fear that their money will be used to support candidates with whom they 
do not agree. 
9 As JUSTICE STEVENS notes in his concurring opinion today, post, at 
678-679, n., our decision in Bellotti expressly distinguished "state and fed-
eral laws regulating corporate participation in partisan candidate elec-
tions." 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26 (emphasis added). 


[PDF PAGE 27]
678 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
STEVENS, J., concurring 
494 u. s. 
Florida Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S. 524, 540 (1989); FCC v. 
League of Women Voters of California, 468 U. S. 364, 396 
(1984). 
But to the extent that the Michigan statute is "un-
derinclusive" only because it does not regulate corporate 
expenditures in referenda or other corporate expression 
(besides merely commercial speech), this reflects the require-
ments of our decisions rather than the lack of an important 
state interest on the part of Michigan in regulating expendi-
tures in candidate elections. In this sense, the Michigan law 
is not "underinclusive" at all. Finally, the provision in Michi-
gan corporate law authorizing shareholder actions against cor-
porate waste might serve as a remedy for other types of politi-
cal expenditures that have no legitimate connection to the 
corporation's business. 
See Mich. Comp. Laws § 600.3605 
(l)(b) (1979); 10 cf. Bellotti, supra, at 795. 
For these reasons, I concur in the Court's opinion. 
JUSTICE STEVENS, concurring. 
In my opinion the distinction between individual expendi-
tures and individual contributions that the Court identified 
in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 45-47 (1976), should have 
little, if any, weight in reviewing corporate participation in 
candidate elections. In that context, I believe the danger of 
either the fact, or the appearance, of quid pro quo relation-
ships provides an adequate justification for state regulation 
of both expenditures and contributions. 
Moreover, as we 
recognized in First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 
U~ S. 765 (1978), there is a vast difference between lobbying 
and debating public issues on the one hand, and political cam-
paigns for election to public office on the other.* 
Accord-
ingly, I join the Court's opinion and judgment. 
10 I express no definitive view of the proper interpretation of this provi-
sion of state law inasmuch as it is not part of the case before us. 
* "In addition to prohibiting corporate contributions and expenditures 
for the purpose of influencing the vote on a ballot question submitted to the 
voters, § 8 also proscribes corporate contributions or expenditures 'for the 
purpose of aiding, promoting or preventing the nomination or election of 


[PDF PAGE 28]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
679 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
JUSTICE SCALIA, dissenting. 
"Attention all citizens. To assure the fairness of elections 
by preventing disproportionate expression of the views of 
any single powerful group, your Government has decided 
that the following associations of persons shall be prohibited 
from speaking or writing in support of any candidate: --. " 
In permitting Michigan to make private corporations the first 
object of this Orwellian announcement, the Court today en-
dorses the principle that too much speech is an evil that the 
democratic majority can proscribe. 
I dissent because that 
any person to public office, or aiding, promoting, or antagonizing the inter-
ests of any political party.' ... In this respect, the statute is not unlike 
many other state and federal laws regulating corporate participation in 
partisan candidate elections. Appellants do not challenge the constitution-
ality of laws prohibiting or limiting corporate contributions to political can-
didates or committees, or other means of influencing candidate elections. 
Cf. Pipe.fitters v. United States, 407 U. S. 385 (1972); United States v. 
Automobile Workers, 352 U. S. 567 (1957); United States v. C/0, 335 U. S. 
106 (1948). About half of these laws, including the federal law, 2 U. S. C. 
§ 441b (1976 ed.) (originally enacted as the Federal Corrupt Practices Act, 
34 Stat. 864), by their terms do not apply to referendum votes. Several of 
the others proscribe or limit spending for 'political' purposes, which may or 
may not cover referenda. 
See Schwartz v. Romnes, 495 F. 2d 844 (CA2 
1974). 
"The overriding concern behind the enactment of statutes such as the 
Federal Corrupt Practices Act was the problem of corruption of elected 
representatives through the creation of political debts. See United States 
v. Automobile Workers, supra, at 570-575; Schwartz v. Romnes, supra, at 
849-851. The importance of the governmental interest in preventing this 
occurrence has never been doubted. The case before us presents no com-
parable problem, and our consideration of a corporation's right to speak on 
issues of general public interest implies no comparable right in the quite 
different context of participation in a political campaign for election to 
public office. 
Congress might well be able to demonstrate the existence 
of a danger of real or apparent corruption in independent expenditures 
by corporations to influence candidate elections. 
Cf. Buckley v. Valeo, 
[424 U. S. 1, 46 (1976)]; Comment, The Regulation of Union Political Activ-
ity: Majority and Minority Rights and Remedies, 126 U. Pa. L. Rev. 386, 
408-410 (1977)." First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 
788, n. 26. 


[PDF PAGE 29]
680 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
principle is contrary to our case law and incompatible with 
the absolutely central truth of the First Amendment: that 
government cannot be trusted to assure, through censorship, 
the "fairness" of political debate. 
I 
A 
The Court's opinion says that political speech of corpora-
tions can be regulated because "[s]tate law grants [them] spe-
cial advantages," ante, at 658, and because this "unique state-
conferred corporate structure . . . facilitates the amassing of 
large treasuries," ante, at 660. This analysis seeks to create 
one good argument by combining two bad ones. Those indi-
viduals who form that type of voluntary association known as 
a corporation are, to be sure, given special advantages - no-
tably, the immunization of their personal fortunes from liabil-
ity for the actions of the association-that the State is under 
no obligation to confer. 
But so are other associations and 
private individuals given all sorts of special advantages that 
the State need not confer, ranging from tax breaks to con-
tract awards to public employment to outright cash subsidies. 
It is rudimentary that the State cannot exact as the price of 
those special advantages the forfeiture of First Amendment 
rights. 
See Pickering v. Board of Education of Township 
High School Dist. No. 205, Will County, 391 U. S. 563 (1968); 
Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513 (1958). 
The categorical 
suspension of the right of any person, or of any association of 
persons, to speak out on political matters must be justified by 
a compelling state need. See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 
44-45 (1976) (per curiam). That is why the Court puts for-
ward its second bad argument, the fact that corporations 
"amas[s] large treasuries." But that alone is also not suffi-
cient justification for the suppression of political speech, un-
less one thinks it would be lawful to prohibit men and women 
whose net worth is above a certain figure from endorsing po-
litical candidates. Neither of these two flawed arguments is 


[PDF PAGE 30]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
681 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
improved by combining them and saying, as the Court in ef-
fect does, that "since the State gives special advantages to 
these voluntary associations, and since they thereby amass 
vast wealth, they may be required to abandon their right of 
political speech." * 
The Court's extensive reliance upon the fact that the ob-
jects of this speech restriction, corporations, receive "special 
advantages" is in stark contrast to our opinion issued just six 
years ago in FCC v. League of Women Voters of California, 
468 U. S. 364 (1984). 
In that decision, striking down a con-
gressionally imposed ban upon editorializing by noncommer-
cial broadcasting stations that receive federal funds, the only 
respect in which we considered the receipt of that "special ad-
vantage" relevant was in determining whether the speech 
limitation could be justified under Congress' spending power, 
as a means of assuring that the subsidy was devoted only to 
the purposes Congress intended, which did not include politi-
cal editorializing. 
We held it could not be justified on that 
basis, since "a noncommercial educational station that re-
ceives only 1 % of its overall income from [federal] grants is 
barred absolutely from all editorializing .... The station has 
*The Court's assertion that the Michigan law "does not impose an abso-
lute ban on all forms of corporate political spending," ante, at 660, is true 
only in a respect that is irrelevant for purposes of First Amendment analy-
sis. A corporation is absolutely prohibited from spending its own funds on 
this form of political speech, and would be guilty of misrepresentation if it 
asserted that a particular candidate was supported or opposed by the cor-
poration. This is to say that the corporation as a corporation is prohibited 
from speaking. What the Michigan law permits the corporation to do is to 
serve as the founder and treasurer of a different association of individuals 
that can endorse or oppose political candidates. The equivalent, where an 
individual rather than an association is concerned, would be to prohibit 
John D. Rockefeller from making political endorsements, but to permit him 
to form an association to which others (though not he himself) can contrib-
ute for the purpose of making political endorsements. 
Just as political 
speech by that association is not speech by John D. Rockefeller, so also 
speech by a corporate PAC that the Michigan law allows is not speech by 
the corporation itself. 


[PDF PAGE 31]
682 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
no way of limiting the use of its federal funds to all non-
editorializing activities, and, more importantly, it is barred 
from using even wholly private funds to finance its editorial 
activity." Id., at 400. Of course the same is true here, even 
assuming that tax exemptions and other benefits accorded to 
incorporated associations constitute an exercise of the spend-
ing power. 
It is not just that portion of the corporation's 
assets attributable to the gratuitously conferred "special 
advantages" that is prohibited from being used for political 
endorsements, but all of the corporation's assets. 
I am at a 
loss to explain the vast difference between the treatment of 
the present case and League of Women Voters. 
Commercial 
corporations may not have a public persona as sympathetic as 
that of public broadcasters, but they are no less entitled to 
this Court's concern. 
As for the second part of the Court's argumentation, the 
fact that corporations ( or at least some of them) possess 
"massive wealth": Certain uses of "massive wealth" in the 
electoral process -whether or not the wealth is the result of 
"special advantages" conferred by the State-pose a substan-
tial risk of corruption which constitutes a compelling need for 
the regulation of speech. 
Such a risk plainly exists when 
the wealth is given directly to the political candidate, to be 
used under his direction and control. 
We held in Buckley 
v. Valeo, supra, however, that independent expenditures to 
express the political views of individuals and associations 
do not raise a sufficient threat of corruption to justify 
prohibition. 
Id., at 45. 
Neither the Court's opinion nor 
either of the concurrences makes any effort to distinguish 
that case-except, perhaps, by misdescribing the case as in-
volving "federal laws regulating individual donors," ante, at 
659, or as involving "individual expenditures," ante, at 678 
(STEVENS, J., concurring). 
Section 608(e)(l) of the Federal 
Election Campaign Act of 1971, 18 U. S. C. § 608(e)(l) (1970 
ed., Supp. V), which we found unconstitutional in Buckley, 
was directed, like the Michigan law before us here, to expen-
ditures made for the purpose of advocating the election or de-


[PDF PAGE 32]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
683 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
feat of a particular candidate, see 424 U. S., at 42. It limited 
to $1,000 (a lesser restriction than the absolute prohibition at 
issue here) such expenditures not merely by "individuals," 
but by "persons," specifically defin•ed to include corporations. 
See id., at 187 (setting forth § 591(g) of the statute). 
The 
plaintiffs in the case included corporations, see id., at 8, and 
we specifically discussed§ 608(e)(l) as a restriction addressed 
not just to individuals but to "individuals and groups," id., at 
39, 48, "persons and groups," id., at 45, "persons and orga-
nizations," ibid., "person[s] [and] association[s]," id., at 50. 
In support of our determination that the restriction was 
"wholly at odds with the guarantees of the First Amend-
ment" we cited Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 
418 U. S. 241 (1974), which involved limitations upon a cor-
poration. 
424 U. S., at 50. 
Of course, if §608(e)(l) had 
been unconstitutional only as applied to individuals and not as 
applied to corporations, we might nonetheless have invali-
dated it in toto for substantial overbreadth, see Broadrick v. 
Oklahoma, 413 U. S. 601, 611-613 (1973), but there is not a 
hint of that doctrine in our opinion. 
Our First Amendment 
law is much less certain than I had thought it to be if we are 
free to recharacterize each clear holding as a disguised "over-
breadth" determination. 
Buckley v. Valeo should not be overruled, because it is en-
tirely correct. 
The contention that prohibiting overt advo-
cacy for or against a political candidate satisfies a "compelling 
need" to avoid "corruption" is easily dismissed. 
As we said 
in Buckley, "[i]t would naively underestimate the ingenuity 
and resourcefulness of persons and groups desiring to buy in-
fluence to believe that they would have much difficulty devis-
ing expenditures that skirted the restriction on express advo-
cacy of election or def eat but nevertheless benefited the 
candidate's campaign." 424 U. S., at 45. 
Independent ad-
vocacy, moreover, unlike contributions, "may well provide 
little assistance to the candidate's campaign and indeed may 
prove counterproductive," thus reducing the danger that it 
will be exchanged "as a quid pro quo for improper commit-


[PDF PAGE 33]
684 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
ments from the candidate." 
Id., at 47. 
The latter point 
seems even more plainly true with respect to corporate advo-
cates than it is with respect to individuals. 
I expect I could 
count on the fingers of one hand the candidates who would 
generally welcome, much less negotiate for, a formal en-
dorsement by AT&T or General Motors. 
The advocacy of 
such entities that have "amassed great wealth" will be effec-
tive only to the extent that it brings to the people's attention 
ideas which-despite the invariably self-interested and prob-
ably uncongenial source-strike them as true. 
The Court does not try to defend the proposition that inde-
pendent advocacy poses a substantial risk of political "corrup-
tion," as English speakers understand that term. Rather, it 
asserts that that concept (which it defines as "'financial quid 
pro quo' corruption," ante, at 659) is really just a narrow sub-
species of a hitherto unrecognized genus of political corrup-
tion. "Michigan's regulation," we are told, "aims at a differ-
ent type of corruption in the political arena: the corrosive and 
distorting effects of immense aggregations of wealth that are 
accumulated with the help of the corporate form and that 
have little or no correlation to the public's support for the 
corporations's political ideas." 
Ante, at 659-660. 
Under 
this mode of analysis, virtually anything the Court deems po-
litically undesirable can be turned into political corruption -
by simply describing its effects as politically "corrosive," 
which is close enough to "corruptive" to qualify. It is sad to 
think that the First Amendment will ultimately be brought 
down not by brute force but by poetic metaphor. 
The Court's opinion ultimately rests upon that proposition 
whose violation constitutes the "New Corruption": Expendi-
tures must "reflect actual public support for the political 
ideas espoused." 
Ante, at 660. 
This illiberal free-speech 
principle of "one man, one minute" was proposed and soundly 
rejected in Buckley: 
"It is argued, however, that the ancillary govern-
mental interest in equalizing the relative ability of indi-


[PDF PAGE 34]
652 
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
685 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
viduals and groups to influence the outcome of elections 
serves to justify the limitation on express advocacy of 
the election or defeat of candidates imposed by § 608(e) 
(l)'s expenditure ceiling. 
But the concept that govern-
ment may restrict the speech of some elements of our so-
ciety in order to enhance the relative voice of others is 
wholly foreign to the First Amendment, which was de-
signed 'to secure "the widest possible dissemination of 
information from diverse and antagonistic sources,"' and 
'"to assure unfettered interchange of ideas for the bring-
ing about of political and social changes desired by the 
people.""' 424 U. S., at 48-49 (citations omitted). 
But it can be said that I have not accurately quoted today's 
decision. 
It does not endorse the proposition that govern-
ment may ensure that expenditures "reflect actual public 
support for the political ideas espoused," but only the more 
limited proposition that government may ensure that expen-
ditures "reflect actual public support for the political ideas es-
poused by corporations." Ante, at 660 (emphasis added). 
The limitation is of course entirely irrational. Why is it per-
fectly all right if advocacy by an individual billionaire is out of 
proportion with "actual public support" for his positions? 
There is no explanation, except the effort I described at the 
outset of this discussion to make one valid proposition out of 
two invalid ones: When the vessel labeled "corruption" begins 
to founder under weight too great to be logically sustained, 
the argumentation jumps to the good ship "special privilege"; 
and when that in turn begins to go down, it returns to "cor-
ruption." Thus hopping back and forth between the two, the 
argumentation may survive but makes no headway towards 
port, where its conclusion waits in vain. 
B 
JUSTICE BRENNAN's concurrence would have us believe 
that the prohibition adopted by Michigan and approved by 
the Court is a paternalistic measure to protect the corporate 


[PDF PAGE 35]
686 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 U.S. 
shareholders of America. 
It is designed, we are told, "to 
avert [the] danger" that "corporate funds drawn from the 
general treasury-which represents, after all, [the share-
holder's] money," might be used on behalf of a political can-
didate he opposes. Ante, at 670 (BRENNAN, J., concurring). 
But such solicitude is a most implausible explanation for the 
Michigan statute, inasmuch as it permits corporations to take 
as many ideological and political positions as they please, so 
long as they are not "in assistance of, or in opposition to, the 
nomination or election of a candidate." Mich. Comp. Laws 
§ 169.206(1) (1979). 
That is indeed the Court's sole basis for 
distinguishing First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 
U. S. 765 (1978), which invalidated restriction of a corpora-
tion's general political speech. The Michigan law appears to 
be designed, in other words, neither to protect shareholders, 
nor even (impermissibly) to "balance" general political de-
bate, but to protect political candidates. Given the degree of 
political sophistication that ought to attend the exercise of 
our constitutional responsibilities, it is regrettable that this 
should come as a surprise. 
But even if the object of the prohibition could plausibly 
be portrayed as the protection of shareholders (which the 
Court's opinion, at least, does not even assert), that would 
not suffice as a "compelling need" to support this blatant re-
striction upon core political speech. 
A person becomes a 
member of that form of association known as a for-profit cor-
poration in order to pursue economic objectives, i. e., to 
make money. 
Some corporate charters may specify the line 
of commerce to which the company is limited, but even that 
can be amended by shareholder vote. Thus, in joining such 
an association, the shareholder knows that management may 
take any action that is ultimately in accord with what the ma-
jority (or a specified supermajority) of the shareholders 
wishes, so long as that action is designed to make a profit. 
That is the deal. 
The corporate actions to which the share-
holder exposes himself, therefore, include many things that 


[PDF PAGE 36]
I 
I' 
Ii 
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
687 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
he may find politically or ideologically uncongenial: invest-
ment in South Africa, operation of an abortion clinic, publica-
tion of a pornographic magazine, or even publication of a 
newspaper that adopts absurd political views and makes cata-
strophic political endorsements. 
His only protections 
against such assaults upon his ideological commitments are 
(1) his ability to persuade a majority (or the requisite minor-
ity) of his fellow shareholders that the action should not be 
taken, and ultimately (2) his ability to sell his stock. 
(The 
latter course, by the way, does not ordinarily involve the 
severe psychic trauma or economic disaster that JUSTICE 
BRENNAN's opinion suggests.) It seems to me entirely fan-
ciful, in other words, to suggest that the Michigan statute 
makes any significant contribution toward insulating the ex-
clusively profit-motivated shareholder from the rude world of 
politics and ideology. 
But even if that were not fanciful, it would be fanciful to 
think, as JUSTICE BRENNAN's opinion assumes, that there is 
any difference between for-profit and not-for-profit corpora-
tions insofar as the need for protection of the individual mem-
ber's ideological psyche is concerned. Would it be any more 
upsetting to a shareholder of General Motors that it endorsed 
the election of Henry Wallace (to stay comfortably in the 
past) than it would be to a member of the American Civil Lib-
erties Union that it endorsed the election of George Wallace? 
I should think much less so. 
Yet in the one case as in the 
other, the only protection against association-induced trauma 
is the will of the majority and, in the last analysis, with-
drawal from membership. 
C 
In Part V of its opinion, the Court accurately sets forth our 
longstanding First Amendment law as follows: 
"Because the right to engage in political expression 
is fundamental to our constitutional system, statutory 
classifications impinging upon that right must be nar-


[PDF PAGE 37]
688 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 U.S. 
rowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental inter-
est." Ante, at 666. 
The Court finds this requirement fully met for the following 
reason: 
"As we explained in the context of our discussions of 
whether the statute was overinclusive, supra, at 660-
661, or underinclusive, supra, at 665 and this page, the 
State's decision to regulate only corporations is precisely 
tailored to serve the compelling state interest of elimi-
nating from the political process the corrosive effect of 
political 'war chests' amassed with the aid of the legal ad-
vantages given to corporations." Ibid. 
That state interest (assuming it is compelling) does indeed 
explain why the State chose to silence "only corporations" 
rather than wealthy individuals as well. 
But it does not ex-
plain (what "narrow tailoring" pertains to) why the State 
chose to silence all corporations, rather than just those that 
possess great wealth. 
If narrow tailoring means anything, 
surely it must mean that action taken to counter the effect of 
amassed "war chests" must be targeted, if possible, at 
amassed "war chests." And surely such targeting is possi-
ble-either in the manner accomplished by the provision that 
we invalidated in Buckley, i. e., by limiting the prohibition to 
independent expenditures above a certain amount, or in some 
other manner, e. g., by limiting the expenditures of only 
those corporations with more than a certain amount of net 
worth or annual profit. 
No more satisfactory explanation for the obvious lack of 
"narrow tailoring" is to be found in the Court's discussion of 
overinclusiveness, to which the above-quoted passage refers. 
That discussion asserts that we "rejected a similar argument" 
in FEC v. National Right to Work Comm., 459 U. S. 197 
(1982) (NRWC), where we said that "'we accept Congress' 
judgment'" that "'the special characteristics of the corporate 
structure' " create a " 'potential for . . . influence that de-


[PDF PAGE 38]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
689 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
mands regulation."' 
Ante, at 661, quoting 459 U. S., at 
209-210 (emphasis added by the Court). 
Today's opinion 
then continues: "Although some closely held corporations, 
just as some publicly held ones, may not have accumulated 
significant amounts of wealth, they receive from the State 
the special benefits conferred by the corporate structure and 
present the potential for distorting the political process. 
This potential for distortion justifies § 54(1)'s general applica-
bility to all corporations." Ante, at 661. 
The Court thus holds, for the first time since Justice 
Holmes left the bench, that a direct restriction upon speech is 
narrowly enough tailored if it extends to speech that has the 
mere potential for producing social harm. NRWC (which in 
any event involved not a direct restriction upon corporate 
speech but a restriction upon corporate solicitation of funds 
for candidates) is no authority for that startling proposition, 
since it did not purport to be applying the First Amendment 
narrow-tailoring requirement. 
The principle the Court 
abandons today-that the mere potential for harm does not 
justify a restriction upon speech-had its origin in the "clear 
and present danger" test devised by Justice Holmes in 1919, 
see Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47, 49-51, and cham-
pioned by him and Justice Brandeis over the next decade in a 
series of famous opinions opposing the affirmance of convic-
tions for subversive speech, see Abrams v. United States, 
250 U. S. 616, 624 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting); Gitlow v. 
New York, 268 U. S. 652, 672 (1925) (Holmes, J., dissenting); 
Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 374 (1927) (Brandeis, 
J., concurring). 
The Court finally adopted their view in 
1937, see Herndon v. Lowry, 301 U. S. 242, 258; see also 
Bridges v. California, 314 U. S. 252, 263 (1941); Thornhill 
v. Alabama, 310 U. S. 88, 105 (1940); West Virginia Board 
of Education v. Barnette, 319 U. S. 624, 639 (1943); Termi-
niello v. Chicago, 337 U. S. 1, 4-5 (1949). 
Today's reversal 
of field will require adjustment of a fairly large number of sig-
nificant First Amendment holdings. 
Presumably the State 


[PDF PAGE 39]
690 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 U.S. 
may now convict individuals for selling books found to have a 
potentially harmful influence on minors, Butler v. Michigan, 
352 U. S. 380 (1957), ban indecent telephone communications 
that have the potential for reaching minors, Sable Communi-
cations of California v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115 (1989), restrain 
the press from publishing information that has the potential 
for jeopardizing a criminal defendant's right to a fair trial, 
Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539 (1976), or the 
potential for damaging the reputation of the subject of an in-
vestigation, Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 
435 U. S. 829 (1978), compel publication of the membership 
lists of organizations that have a potential for illegal activity, 
see NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S. 449, 
464 (1958), and compel an applicant for bar membership to re-
veal her political beliefs and affiliations to eliminate the po-
tential for subversive activity, Baird v. State Bar of Arizona, 
401 u. s. 1 (1971). 
It is perplexing, or perhaps revealing, to compare the 
Court's cavalier treatment of the narrow-tailoring require-
ment today with its elaborate discussion of that issue six 
years ago in League of Women Voters. 
See 468 U. S., at 
392-395, 397-398. As my earlier discussion makes clear, it 
would make no difference if the law were narrowly tailored to 
serve its goal, since that goal is not compelling. But the fact 
that, even having made that first error, the Court must make 
yet a second in order to reach today's judgment suggests 
what an impregnable fortress our First Amendment jurispru-
dence has been. 
The Court's explicit acceptance of "poten-
tial danger" as adequate to establish narrow tailoring, even 
more than its recognition of an insubstantial interests as 
"compelling," greatly weakens those defenses. 
D 
Finally, a few words are in order concerning the Court's 
approval of the Michigan law's exception for "media corpora-
tions." This is all right, we are told, because of "the unique 


[PDF PAGE 40]
I 
I 
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
691 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
role that the press plays in 'informing and educating the pub-
lic, offering criticism, and providing a forum for discussion 
and debate."' Ante, at 667 (citation omitted). 
But if one 
believes in the Court's rationale of "compelling state need" to 
prevent amassed corporate wealth from skewing the political 
debate, surely that "unique role" of the press does not give 
Michigan justification for excluding media corporations from 
coverage, but provides especially strong reason to include 
them. Amassed corporate wealth that regularly sits astride 
the ordinary channels of information is much more likely to 
produce the New Corruption (too much of one point of view) 
than amassed corporate wealth that is generally busy making 
money elsewhere. 
Such media corporations not only have 
vastly greater power to perpetrate the evil of overinforming, 
they also have vastly greater opportunity. General Motors, 
after all, will risk a stockholder suit if it makes a political en-
dorsement that is not plausibly tied to its ability to make 
money for its shareholders. 
But media corporations make 
money by making political commentary, including endorse-
ments. For them, unlike any other corporations, the whole 
world of politics and ideology is fair game. 
Yet the Court 
tells us that it is reasonable to exclude media corporations, 
rather than target them specially. 
Members of the institutional press, despite the Court's ap-
proval of their illogical exemption from the Michigan law, will 
find little reason for comfort in today's decision. The theory 
of New Corruption it espouses is a dagger at their throats. 
The Court today holds merely that media corporations may 
be excluded from the Michigan law, not that they must be. 
We have consistently rejected the proposition that the insti-
tutional press has any constitutional privilege beyond that of 
other speakers. 
See Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 782, and cases 
cited. 
Thus, the Court's holding on this point must be put 
in the following unencouraging form: "Although the press' 
unique societal role may not entitle the press to greater pro-
tection under the Constitution, Bellotti, supra, at 782, and 


[PDF PAGE 41]
692 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
n. 18, it does provide a compelling reason for the State to ex-
empt media corporations from the scope of political expendi-
ture limitations." Ante, at 668. 
One must hope, I suppose, 
that Michigan will continue to provide this generous and vol-
untary exemption. 
II 
I would not do justice to the significance of today's decision 
to discuss only its lapses from case precedent and logic. Infi-
nitely more important than that is its departure from long-
accepted premises of our political system regarding the 
benevolence that can be expected of government in managing 
the arena of public debate, and the danger that is to be antici-
pated from powerful private institutions that compete with 
government, and with one another, within that arena. 
Perhaps the Michigan law before us here has an unquali-
fiedly noble objective-to "equalize" the political debate by 
preventing disproportionate expression of corporations' 
points of view. 
But governmental abridgment of liberty is 
always undertaken with the very best of announced objec-
tives (dictators promise to bring order, not tyranny), and 
often with the very best of genuinely intended objectives 
(zealous policemen conduct unlawful searches in order to 
put dangerous felons behind bars). The premise of our Bill 
of Rights, however, is that there are some things-even 
some seemingly desirable things - that government cannot 
be trusted to do. 
The very first of these is establishing the 
restrictions upon speech that will assure "fair" political de-
bate. 
The incumbent politician who says he welcomes full 
and fair debate is no more to be believed than the entrenched 
monopolist who says he welcomes full and fair competition. 
Perhaps the Michigan Legislature was genuinely trying to as-
sure a "balanced" presentation of political views; on the other 
hand, perhaps it was trying to give unincorporated unions (a 
not insubstantial force in Michigan) political advantage over 
major employers. Or perhaps it was trying to assure a "bal-
anced" presentation because it knows that with evenly bal-


[PDF PAGE 42]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
693 
652 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
anced speech incumbent officeholders generally win. 
The 
fundamental approach of the First Amendment, I had always 
thought, was to assume the worst, and to rule the regulation 
of political speech "for fairness' sake" simply out of bounds. 
I doubt that those who framed and adopted the First 
Amendment would agree that avoiding the New Corruption, 
that is, calibrating political speech to the degree of public 
opinion that supports it, is even a desirable objective, much 
less one that is important enough to qualify as a compelling 
state interest. 
Those Founders designed, of course, a sys-
tem in which popular idea:s would ultimately prevail; but also, 
through the First Amendment, a system in which true ideas 
could readily become popular. 
For the latter purpose, the 
calibration that the Court today endorses is precisely back-
wards: To the extent a valid proposition has scant public sup-
port, it should have wider rather than narrower public cir-
culation. 
I am confident, in other words, that Jefferson and 
Madison would not have sat at these controls; but if they did, 
they would have turned them in the opposite direction. 
Ah, but then there is the special element of corporate 
wealth: What would the Founders have thought of that? 
They would have endorsed, I think, what Tocqueville wrote 
in 1835: 
"When the members of an aristocratic community 
adopt a new opinion or conceive a new sentiment, they 
give it a station, as it were, beside themselves, upon the 
lofty platform where they stand; and opinions or senti-
ments so conspicuous to the eyes of the multitude are 
easily introduced into the minds or hearts of all around. 
In democratic countries the governing power alone is 
naturally in a condition to act in this manner; but it is 
easy to see that its action is always inadequate, and often 
dangerous. . . . No sooner does a government attempt to 
go beyond its political sphere and to enter upon this new 
track than it exercises, even unintentionally, an insup-
portable tyranny . . . . Worse still will be the case if the 


[PDF PAGE 43]
694 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
SCALIA, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
government really believes itself interested in prevent-
ing all circulation of ideas; it will then stand motionless 
and oppressed by the heaviness of voluntary torpor. 
Governments, therefore, should not be the only active 
powers; associations ought, in democratic nations, to 
stand in lieu of those powerful private individuals whom 
the equality of conditions has swept away." 
2 A. de 
Tocqueville, Democracy in America 109 (P. Bradley ed. 
1948). 
While Tocqueville was discussing "circulation of ideas" in 
general, what he wrote is also true of candidate endorse-
ments in particular. 
To eliminate voluntary associations-
not only including powerful ones, but especially including 
powerful ones -from the public debate is either to augment 
the always dominant power of government or to impoverish 
the public debate. The case at hand is a good enough exam-
ple. Why should the Michigan voters in the 93d House Dis-
trict be deprived of the information that private associations 
owning and operating a vast percentage of the industry of the 
State, and employing a large number of its citizens, believe 
that the election of a particular candidate is important to 
their prosperity? 
Contrary to the Court's suggestion, the 
same point cannot effectively be made through corporate 
PACs to which individuals may voluntarily contribute. It is 
important to the message that it represents the views of 
Michigan's leading corporations as corporations, occupying 
the "lofty platform" that they do within the economic life 
of the State-not just the views of some other voluntary as-
sociations to which some of the corporations' shareholders 
belong. 
Despite all the talk about "corruption and the appearance 
of corruption" -evils that are not significantly implicated and 
that can be avoided in many other ways - it is entirely obvi-
ous that the object of the law we have approved today is not 
to prevent wrongdoing but to prevent speech. 
Since those 


[PDF PAGE 44]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
695 
652 
KENNEDY' J.' dissenting 
private associations known as corporations have so much 
money, they will speak so much more, and their views will be 
given inordinate prominence in election campaigns. 
This is 
not an argument that our democratic traditions allow-nei-
ther with respect to individuals associated in corporations nor 
with respect to other categories of individuals whose speech 
may be "unduly" extensive (because they are rich) or "un-
duly" persuasive (because they are movie stars) or "unduly" 
respected (because they are clergymen). The premise of our 
system is that there is no such thing as too much speech-
that the people are not foolish but intelligent, and will sepa-
rate the wheat from the chaff. As conceded in Lincoln's aph-
orism about fooling "all of the people some of the time," that 
premise will not invariably accord with reality; but it will as-
suredly do so much more frequently than the premise the 
Court today embraces: that a healthy democratic system can 
survive the legislative power to prescribe how much political 
speech is too much, who may speak, and who may not. 
* 
* 
* 
Because today's decision is inconsistent with unrepudiated 
legal judgments of our Court, but even more because it is 
incompatible with the unrepealable political wisdom of our 
First Amendment, I dissent. 
JUSTICE KENNEDY' with whom JUSTICE O'CONNOR and 
JUSTICE SCALIA join, dissenting. 
The majority opinion validates not one censorship of speech 
but two. 
One is Michigan's content-based law which decrees 
it a crime for a nonprofit corporate speaker to endorse or op-
pose candidates for Michigan public office. 
By permitting 
the statute to stand, the Court upholds a direct restriction on 
the independent expenditure of funds for political speech for 
the first time in its history. 
The other censorship scheme, I most regret to say, is of 
our own creation. 
It is value-laden, content-based speech 


[PDF PAGE 45]
696 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
suppression that permits some nonprofit corporate groups, 
but not others, to engage in political speech. After failing to 
disguise its animosity and distrust for the particular kind of 
political speech here at issue-the qualifications of a candi-
date to understand economic matters - the Court adopts a 
rule that allows Michigan to stifle the voices of some of the 
most respected groups in public life on subjects central to the 
integrity of our democratic system. Each of these schemes 
is repugnant to the First Amendment and contradicts its cen-
tral guarantee, the freedom to speak in the electoral process. 
I dissent. 
I 
To understand the force of the Michigan statutory censor-
ship scheme, one need not go beyond the facts of the case be-
fore us. The Michigan State Chamber of Commerce (Cham-
ber) is a nonprofit corporation with an interest in candidates 
and public policy issues throughout the State of Michigan. 
The Chamber sought, on its own initiative and without com-
munication with the candidate, to place a newspaper ad-
vertisement in support of one Richard Bandstra, a candidate 
for the House of Representatives in Michigan. 
(The pro-
posed advertisement is reproduced in the Appendix to this 
opinion.) 
The advertisement discussed the local economy 
and unemployment and explained why the candidate sup-
ported by the Chamber would understand and improve local 
economic conditions. 
This communication is banned by the 
law here in question, the Michigan Campaign Finance Act 
(Act), 1976 Mich. Pub. Acts 388, Mich. Comp. Laws§ 169.201 
et seq. (1979). 
The Act prohibits "a corporation," including a nonprofit 
corporation, from making any "expenditure" in connection 
with an election campaign for state office. 1 An expenditure 
1 Section 54 of the Act states: 
"Sec. 54. (1) Except with respect to the exceptions and conditions in 
subsections (2) and (3) and section 55, and to loans made in the ordinary 
course of business, a corporation may not make a contribution or expendi-


[PDF PAGE 46]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
697 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
includes any payment or other contribution in "assistance of, 
or in opposition to, the nomination or election of a candidate 
• 
• 
• 
• "
2 
The Act by its terms forbids corporations to 
make "independent expenditures" undertaken without any 
coordination or even communication with a candidate's orga-
nization. 3 Under the Act, a corporate expenditure made for 
ture or provide volunteer personal services which services are excluded 
from the definition of a contribution pursuant to section 4(3)(a). 
"(4) Nothing in this section shall preclude a corporation or joint stock 
company from making an independent expenditure in any amount for the 
qualification, passage, or defeat of a ballot question. 
A corporation mak-
ing an independent expenditure under this subsection shall be considered a 
ballot question committee for the purposes of this act." 
Mich. Comp. 
Laws § 169.254 (1979). 
2 Section 6 provides: 
"Sec. 6. (1) 'Expenditure' means a payment, donation, loan, pledge, or 
promise of payment of money or anything of ascertainable monetary value 
for goods, materials, services, or facilities in assistance of, or in opposition 
to, the nomination or election of a candidate, or the qualifaction, passage, 
or def eat of a ballot question. . . . 
"(2) Expenditure includes a contribution or a transfer of anything of as-
certainable monetary value for purposes of influencing the nomination or 
election of any candidate or the qualification, passage, or defeat of a ballot 
question. 
"(3) Expenditure does not include: 
"(c) An expenditure for communication on a subject or issue if the com-
munication does not support or oppose a ballot issue or candidate by name 
or clear inference or an expenditure for the establishment, administration, 
or solicitation of contributions to a fund or independent committee. 
"(d) An expenditure by a broadcasting station, newspaper, magazine, or 
other periodical or publication for any news story, commentary, or edito-
rial in support of or opposition to a candidate for elective office, or a ballot 
question in the regular course of publication or broadcasting." 
Mich. 
Comp. Laws § 169.206 (1979). 
3 Section 9(1) states: 
"Sec. 9. (1) 'Independent expenditure' means an expenditure as defined 
in section 6 by a person if the expenditure is not made at the direction of, or 
under the control of, another person and if the expenditure is not a con-
tribution to a committee." Mich. Comp. Laws § 169.209(1) (1979). 


[PDF PAGE 47]
698 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
purposes of communicating on issues of public policy is per-
missible only if it does not support or oppose a candidate by 
name or by "inference." 4 
Violation of the Act is a felony. 5 
A 
The State has conceded that among those communications 
prohibited by its statute are the publication by a nonprofit 
corporation of its own assessment of a candidate's voting 
record. 
With the imprimatur of this Court, it is now a fel-
ony in Michigan for the Sierra Club, or the American Civil 
Liberties Union, or the Michigan Chamber of Commerce, to 
advise the public how a candidate voted on issues of urgent 
concern to its mernbers. 
In both practice and theory, the 
prohibition aims at the heart of political debate. 
As the majority must acknowledge, and as no party con-
tests, the advertisement in this case is a paradigm of political 
speech. 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 14-15 (1976). 
The 
Michigan statute bans it, however, along with all other com-
munications by nonprofit corporate speakers that carry an in-
ference of support for, or opposition to, a candidate, on the 
sole ground that the speaker is organized in corporate form. 
The Act operates to prohibit information essential to the abil-
ity of voters to evaluate candidates. In my view, this speech 
cannot be restricted. 
Far more than the interest of the Chamber is at stake. 
We confront here society's interest in free and informed dis-
cussion on political issues, a discourse vital to the capacity for 
self-government. "In the realm of protected speech, the leg-
islature is constitutionally disqualified from dictating the sub-
jects about which persons may speak and the speakers who 
See n. 2, supra. 
5 Section 54(5) states: 
"(5) A person who knowingly violates this section is guilty of a felony 
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.00 or imprisoned for 
not more than 3 years, or both, and if the person is other than an individ-
ual, the person shall be fined not more than $10,000.00." 
Mich. Comp. 
Laws § 169.254(5) (1979). 


[PDF PAGE 48]
1, 
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
699 
652 
KENNEDY' J.' dissenting 
may address a public issue." First National Bank of Boston 
v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 784-785 (1978). 
There is little 
doubt that by silencing advocacy groups that operate in the 
corporate form and forbidding them to speak on electoral 
politics, Michigan's law suffers from both of these constitu-
tional defects. 
First, the Act prohibits corporations from speaking on a 
particular subject, the subject of candidate elections. It is a 
basic precept that the State may not confine speech to certain 
subjects. Content-based restrictions are the essence of cen-
sorial power. 
Ibid. (invalidating statute that allowed cor-
porations to speak on referenda issues that materially af-
fected their business, but not on other subjects). 
See also 
Consolidated Edison Co. of New York v. Public Service 
Comm'n of New York, 447 U. S. 530, 537 (1980) ("The First 
Amendment's hostility to content-based regulation extends 
not only to restrictions on particular viewpoints, but also to 
prohibition of public discussion of an entire topic"). 
Second, the Act discriminates on the basis of the speaker's 
identity. 
Under the Michigan law, any person or group 
other than a corporation may engage in political debate over 
candidate elections; but corporations, even nonprofit corpora-
tions that have unique views of vital importance to the elec-
torate, must remain mute. 
Our precedents condemn this 
censorship. See Bellotti, supra, at 784-786; Police Dept. of 
Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92 (1972) (invalidating state 
statute that prohibited picketing near certain buildings but 
allowed certain labor picketers); Carey v. Brown, 447 U. S. 
455 (1980). 
The protection afforded core political speech is not dimin-
ished because the speaker is a nonprofit corporation. 
Even 
in the case of a for-profit corporation, we have upheld the 
right to speak on ballot issues. 
The Bellotti Court stated: 
"If the speakers here were not corporations, no one 
would suggest that the State could silence their proposed 
speech. It is the type of speech indispensable to deci-


[PDF PAGE 49]
700 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
sionmaking in a democracy, and this is no less true be-
cause the speech comes from a corporation rather than 
an individual. 
The inherent worth of the speech in 
terms of its capacity for informing the public does not de-
pend upon the identity of its source, whether corpora-
tion, association, union, or individual." 
435 U. S., at 
777 (footnotes omitted). 
By using distinctions based upon both the speech and the 
speaker, the Act engages in the rawest form of censorship: 
the State censors what a particular segment of the political 
community might say with regard to candidates who stand 
for election. 
The Court's holding cannot be reconciled with 
the principle that "'legislative restrictions on advocacy of the 
election or defeat of political candidates are wholly at odds 
with the guarantees of the First Amendment.'" Meyer v. 
Grant, 486 U. S. 414, 428 (1988), quoting Buckley v. Valeo, 
supra, at 50. 
B 
The second censorship scheme validated by today's holding 
is the one imposed by the Court. 
In FEC v. Massachusetts 
Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238 (1986) (MCFL), a First 
Amendment right to use corporate treasury funds was recog-
nized for the nonprofit corporation then before us. 
Those 
who thought that the First Amendment exists to protect all 
points of view in candidate elections will be disillusioned by 
the Court's opinion today; for that protection is given only to 
a preferred class of nonprofit corporate speakers: small, sin-
gle issue nonprofit corporations that pass the Court's own 
vague test for determining who are the favored participants 
in the electoral process. 
There can be no doubt that if a 
State were to enact a statute empowering an administrative 
board to determine which corporations could place candidate 
advertisements in newspapers and which could not, with au-
thority to enforce the guidelines the Court adopts today to 
distinguish between the Massachusetts Citizens for Life and 
the Michigan Chamber of Commerce, the statute would be 


[PDF PAGE 50]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
701 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
held unconstitutional. 
The First Amendment does not per-
mit courts to exercise speech suppression authority denied to 
legislatures. 
The Court draws support for its discrimination among non-
profit corporate speakers from portions of our opinion in 
MCFL, supra. 
It must be acknowledged that certain lan-
guage in MCFL, in particular the discussion which pointed to 
the express purpose of the organization to promote political 
ideas, id. at 263-265, lends support to the majority's test. 
That language, however, contravenes fundamental principles 
of neutrality for all political speech. 
It should not stand in 
the way of giving full force to the essential and vital holding 
of MCFL, which is that a nonprofit corporation engaged in 
political discussion of candidates and elections has the full 
protection of the First Amendment. 
II 
The Act does not meet our standards for laws that burden 
fundamental rights. 
The State cannot demonstrate that a 
compelling interest supports its speech restriction, nor can it 
show that its law is narrowly tailored to the purported stat-
utory end. 
See Bellotti, supra, at 786, 793-795. 
Restric-
tions on independent expenditures are unconstitutional if 
they fail to meet both of these standards. Buckley v. Valeo, 
424 U. S. 1 (1976); First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 
supra; FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Com-
mittee, 470 U. S. 480 (1985) (NCPAC); MCFL, supra. The 
majority opinion cannot establish either of these predicate 
conditions for the speech restriction imposed by the State. 6 
6 As the primary objective of the statute is itself prohibited by the First 
Amendment, there is no need to explain that the statute is invalid also be-
cause it is vague and imprecise. 
It should be noted, however, that the 
criminal prohibition of speech which by "inference" can be taken to support 
a candidate, see Mich. Comp. Laws § 169.206(3)(c) (1979), must in itself 
chill speech on public issues, which the Court has already found protected 
in Bellotti. 


[PDF PAGE 51]
702 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
A 
Our cases acknowledge the danger that corruption poses 
for the electoral process, but draw a line in permissible regu-
lation between payments to candidates ("contributions") and 
payments or expenditures to express one's own views ("inde-
pendent expenditures"). Today's decision abandons this dis-
tinction and threatens once-protected political speech. 
The 
Michigan statute prohibits independent expenditures by a 
nonprofit corporate speaker to express its own views about 
candidate qualifications. 
Independent expenditures are en-
titled to greater protection than campaign contributions. 
MCFL, supra, at 259-260. 
See also Buckley, 424 U. S., at 
20-21. "[E]xpenditure ceilings impose significantly more se-
vere restrictions on protected freedoms of political expres-
sion and association than do . . . limitations on financial con-
tributions." Id., at 23. 
Candidate campaign contributions 
are subject to greater regulation because of the enhanced 
risk of corruption from the possibility that a large contribu-
tion would be given to secure political favors; independent 
expenditures pose no such risk: 
"Unlike contributions, such independent expenditures 
may well provide little assistance to the candidate's cam-
paign and indeed may prove counterproductive. 
The 
absence of prearrangement and coordination of an ex-
penditure with the candidate or his agent not only under-
mines the value of the expenditure to the candidate, but 
also alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given 
as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the 
candidate." Id., at 47. 
Appellants' reliance on cases involving contributions, such as 
FEC v. National Right to Work Committee, 459 U. S. 197 
(1982), is misplaced. 
The proper analysis must follow our cases on independent 
expenditures. We have established that limitations on inde-


[PDF PAGE 52]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
703 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
pendent political expenditures are subject to exacting First 
Amendment scrutiny. In Buckley, we invalidated a federal 
limitation on independent expenditures because they had no 
tendency to corrupt. By like analysis, we invalidated a ban 
on independent corporate expenditures for referenda issues, 
First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, supra, and a fed-
eral limitation which prohibited political committees from 
spending more than $1,000 in support of any candidate who 
had accepted public funding, NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 491. 
In 
NCPAC, we found that the mere hypothetical possibility that 
candidates may take notice of and reward political action 
committee (PAC) expenditures by giving official favors was 
insufficient to demonstrate that the threat of corruption justi-
fied the spending regulation. 
Id., at 497. 
The majority almost admits that, in the case of independ-
ent expenditures, the danger of a political quid pro quo is in-
sufficient to justify a restriction of this kind. Since the spec-
ter of corruption, which had been "the only legitimate and 
compelling government interes[t] thus far identified for re-
stricting campaign finances," NCPAC, supra, at 496-497, is 
missing in this case, the majority invents a new interest: 
combating the "corrosive and distorting effects of immense 
aggregations of wealth," ante, at 660, accumulated in corpo-
rate form without shareholder or public support. 
The ma-
jority styles this novel interest as simply a different kind of 
corruption, but has no support for its assertion. While it is 
questionable whether such imprecision would suffice to jus-
tify restricting political speech by for-profit corporations, it is 
certain that it does not apply to nonprofit entities. 
The evil of political corruption has been defined in more 
precise terms. We have said: "Corruption is a subversion of 
the political process" whereby "[e]lected officials are influ-
enced to act contrary to their obligations of office by the pros-
pect of financial gain .... " 
NCPAC, supra, at 497. 
In 
contrast, the interest touted by the majority is the impermis-


[PDF PAGE 53]
704 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
sible one of altering political debate by muting the impact of 
certain speakers. 
The regulatory mechanism adopted by the Michigan stat-
ute is aimed at reducing the quantity of political speech, a ra-
tionale endorsed by today's majority. 
The First Amend-
ment rests on quite the opposite theory. 
As we have 
already said in the context of political expenditures: 
"A restriction on the amount of money a person or 
group can spend on political communication during a cam-
paign necessarily reduces the quantity of expression by 
restricting the number of issues discussed, the depth of 
their exploration, and the size of the audience reached. 
This is because virtually every means of communicating 
ideas in today's mass society requires the expenditure of 
money." Buckley, 424 U. S., at 19 (footnote omitted); 
see also id., at 39. 
In Buckley and Bellotti, acting on these precepts, we re-
jected the argument that the expenditure of money to in-
crease the quantity of political speech somehow fosters cor-
ruption. The key to the majority's reasoning appears to be 
that because some corporate speakers are well supported and 
can buy press space or broadcast time to express their ideas, 
government may ban all corporate speech to ensure that it 
will not dominate political debate. 
The argument is flawed 
in at least two respects. 
First, the statute is overinclusive 
because it covers all groups which use the corporate form, in-
cluding all nonprofit corporations. 
Second, it assumes that 
the government has a legitimate interest in equalizing the 
relative influence of speakers. 
With regard to nonprofit corporations in particular, there 
is no reason to assume that the corporate form has an intrin-
sic flaw that makes it corrupt, or that all corporations possess 
great wealth, or that all corporations can buy more media 
coverage for their views than can individuals or other groups. 
There is no reason to conclude that independent speech by 


[PDF PAGE 54]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
705 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
a corporation is any more likely to dominate the political 
arena than speech by the wealthy individual, protected in 
Buckley v. Valeo, supra, or by the well-funded PAC, pro-
tected in NCP AC, supra (protecting speech rights of PAC's 
against expenditure limitations). 
In NCPAC, we discred-
ited the argument that because PA C's spend larger amounts 
than individuals, the potential for corruption is greater. Id., 
at 497-498. 
We distinguished between the campaign con-
tribution at issue in FEC v. National Right to Work Commit-
tee, supra, and independent expenditures, by noting that 
while "the compelling governmental interest in preventing 
corruption supported the restriction of the influence of polit-
ical war chests funneled through the corporate form" with 
regard to candidate campaign contributions, a similar find-
ing could not be supported for independent expenditures. 
NCPAC, supra, at 500-501. 
In addition, the notion that the government has a legiti-
mate interest in restricting the quantity of speech to equalize 
the relative influence of speakers on elections is antithetical 
to the First Amendment: 
"[T]he concept that government may restrict the speech 
of some elements of our society in order to enhance the 
relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First 
Amendment, which was designed 'to secure "the widest 
possible dissemination of information from diverse and 
antagonistic sources,"' .... The First Amendment's 
protection against governmental abridgment of free ex-
pression cannot properly be made to depend on a per-
son's financial ability to engage in public discussion." 
Buckley, supra, at 48-49 (citations omitted). 
That those who can afford to publicize their views may suc-
ceed in the political arena as a result does not detract from 
the fact that they are exercising a First Amendment right. 
Meyer v. Grant, 486 U. S., at 426, n. 7 (upholding First 
Amendment right to use paid petition circulators). 
As we 


[PDF PAGE 55]
706 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY' J.' dissenting 
494 u. s. 
stated in Bellotti, paid advocacy "may influence the outcome 
of the vote; this would be its purpose. But the fact that ad-
vocacy may persuade the electorate is hardly a reason to sup-
press it." 435 U. S., at 790. 
The suggestion that the gov-
ernment has an interest in shaping the political debate by 
insulating the electorate from too much exposure to certain 
views is incompatible with the First Amendment. 
"[T]he 
people in our democracy are entrusted with the responsibility 
for judging and evaluating the relative merits of conflicting 
arguments." Id., at 791; see also Meyer, supra, at 426, n. 7; 
Brown v. Hartlage, 456 U. S. 45, 60 (1982). 
An argument similar to that made by the majority was re-
jected in Bellotti. 
There, we rejected the assumption that 
"corporations are wealthy and powerful and their views may 
drown out other points of view" or "exert an undue influence" 
on the electorate in the absence of a showing that the relative 
voice of corporations was significant. 
435 U. S., at 789. 
And even were we to assume that some record support for 
this assertion would make a constitutional difference, it has 
not been established here. The majority provides only con-
jecture. All censorship is suspect; but censorship based on 
vague surmise is not permissible in any case. 
The Act, as the State itself says, prevents a nonprofit cor-
porate speaker from using its own funds to inform the voting 
public that a particular candidate has a good or bad voting 
record on issues of interest to the association's adherents. 
Though our era may not be alone in deploring the lack of 
mechanisms for holding candidates accountable for the votes 
they cast, that lack of accountability is one of the major con-
cerns of our time. 
The speech suppressed in this case was 
directed to political qualifications. The fact that it was spo-
ken by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce, and not a man 
or woman standing on a soapbox, detracts not a scintilla from 
its validity, its persuasiveness, or its contribution to the po-
litical dialogue. 


[PDF PAGE 56]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
707 
652 
KENNEDY' J.' dissenting 
The Court purports to distinguish MC FL on the ground 
that the nonprofit corporation permitted to speak in that case 
received no funds from profit-making corporations. It is un-
disputed that the Michigan Chamber of Commerce is itself a 
nonprofit corporation. 
The crucial difference, it is said, is 
that the Chamber receives corporate contributions. But this 
distinction rests on the fallacy that the source of the speak-
er's funds is somehow relevant to the speaker's right of ex-
pression or society's interest in hearing what the speaker has 
to say. There is no reason that the free speech rights of an 
individual or of an association of individuals should turn on 
the circumstance that funds used to engage in the speech 
come from a corporation. 
Many persons can trace their 
funds to corporations, if not in the form of donations, then in 
the form of dividends, interest, or salary. 
That does not 
provide a basis to deprive such individuals or associations of 
their First Amendment freedoms. 
The more narrow alter-
native of recordkeeping and funding disclosure is available. 
See MCFL, 479 U. S., at 262. A wooden rule prohibiting in-
dependent expenditures by nonprofit corporations that re-
ceive funds from business corporations invites discriminatory 
distinctions. The principled approach is to acknowledge that 
where political speech is concerned, freedom to speak ex-
tends to all nonprofit corporations, not the special favorites of 
a majority of this Court. 
B 
The majority concludes that the Michigan Act is narrowly 
tailored. First, it seeks support in the availability of PA C's 
as an alternative to direct speech. Second, the majority ad-
vances the rationale that the restriction protects sharehold-
ers from the use of corporate funds to support speech with 
which they may not agree. Third, it asserts that independ-
ent expenditures funded by corporate wealth pose inherent 
dangers. None of these justifications can suffice to save the 
Act. 


[PDF PAGE 57]
708 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
That the censorship applies to the nonprofit corporate 
speaker itself and not to a PAC that it has organized, far 
from being a saving feature of the regulation, further con-
demns it. The argument that the availability of a PAC as an 
alternative means, see Mich. Comp. Laws § 169.255 (1979), 
can save a restriction on independent corporate expenditures 
was rejected by the Court in MCFL, 479 U. S., at 253-255; 
id., at 266 (OiCONNOR, J., concurring), as a costly and bur-
densome disincentive to speech. 
The record in this case 
tended to show that between 25 and 50 percent of a PA C's 
funds are required to establish and administer the PAC. 
See App. 103a, 108a. 
While the corporation can direct the 
PAC to make expenditures on behalf of candidates, the PAC 
can be funded only by contributions from shareholders, direc-
tors, officers, and managerial employees, and cannot receive 
corporate treasury funds. 
Mich. Comp. Laws § 169.255(3) 
(1979). 
That the avenue left open is more burdensome than 
the one foreclosed is "sufficient to characterize [a statute] as 
an infringement on First Amendment activities." 479 U. S., 
at 255. 
Consolidated Edison Co., 447 U. S., at 541, n. 10; 
see also Virginia Pharmacy Bd. v. Virginia Citizens Con-
sumer Council, Inc., 425 U. S. 748, 757, n. 15 (1976). 
As 
the Court reaffirmed just two Terms ago, "[t]he First 
Amendment protects appellees' right not only to advocate 
their cause but also to select what they believe to be the most 
effective means for so doing." Meyer v. Grant, 486 U. S., at 
424. 
The secondhand endorsement structure required by the 
Michigan state law debases the value of the voice of nonprofit 
corporate speakers. 
The public is not interested in what a 
PAC says; it does care what the group itself says, so that the 
group itself can be given credit or blame for the candidates it 
has endorsed or opposed. 
PAC's suffer from a poor public 
image. 
See App. 92a, 104a, 108a. 
An advertisement for 
which a nonprofit group takes direct responsibility, in all like-
lihood, will have more credibility and generate less distrust 
than one funded by a PAC. P AC's are interim, ad hoc orga-


[PDF PAGE 58]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
709 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
nizations with little continuity or responsibility. 
The re-
spected organizations affected by this case have a continuity, 
a stability, and an influence that makes it critical for their 
members and the public at large to evaluate their official poli-
cies to determine whether the organizations have earned 
credibility over a period of time. If a particular organization 
supports a candidate who injures its cause or offends its 
ideals, the organization itself, not some intermediary commit-
tee, ought to take the blame. It is a sad irony that the group 
before us wishes to assume that responsibility but the action 
of the State, endorsed by this Court, does not allow it to do so. 
The diffusion of the corporate message produced by the 
PAC requirement also ensures a lack of fit between the stat-
ute's ends and its means. If the concern is that nonprofit cor-
porate speech distorts the political process, it would seem that 
injecting the confusion of a PAC as an intermediary, albeit one 
controlled and directed by the corporation, further diffuses 
responsibility. Even if there were any possibility of corrup-
tion by allowing the Michigan Chamber of Commerce to fi-
nance the proposed advertisement supporting a candidate, it 
makes no sense to argue that such a possibility would be elimi-
nated by requiring the disclaimer at the bottom to read "Paid 
for by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce PAC" rather than 
"Paid for by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce." 
The majority relies on the state interest in protecting 
members from the use of nonprofit corporate funds to sup-
port candidates whom they may oppose. 
We should reject 
this interest as insufficient to save the Act here, just as we 
rejected the argument in Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 792-793. 
See also Consolidated Edison Co., supra, at 543. 
The Court takes refuge in the argument that some mem-
bers or contributors to nonprofit corporations may find their 
own views distorted by the organization, and cites our hold-
ing in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U. S. 209 
(1977). 
Abood does not apply here, as the disincentives to 
dissociate are not comparable. Bellotti, supra, at 794, n. 34 
(noting "crucial distinction" between union members and 


[PDF PAGE 59]
710 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY' J.' dissenting 
494 u. s. 
shareholders). One need not become a member of the Michi-
gan Chamber of Commerce or the Sierra Club in order to 
earn a living. 
To the extent that members disagree with a 
nonprofit corporation's policies, they can seek change from 
within, withhold financial support, cease to associate with the 
group, or form a rival group of their own. Allowing govern-
ment to use the excuse of protecting shareholder rights to sti-
fle the speech of private, voluntary organizations undermines 
the First Amendment. 
To create second-class speakers that can be stifled on the 
subject of candidate qualifications is to silence some of the 
most significant participants in the American public dialogue, 
as evidenced by the amici briefs filed on behalf of the 
Chamber of Commerce by the American Civil Liberties 
Union, the Center for Public Interest Law, the American 
Medical Association, the National Association of Realtors, 
the American Insurance Association, the National Organiza-
tion for Women, Greenpeace Action, the National Abortion 
Rights Action League, the National Right to Work Commit-
tee, the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, the 
Fund for the Feminist Majority, the Washington Legal Foun-
dation, and the Allied Educational Foundation. I reject any 
argument based on the idea that these groups and their views 
are not of importance and value to the self-fulfillment and 
self-expression of their members, and to the rich public dia-
logue that must be the mark of any free society. To suggest 
otherwise is contrary to the American political experience 
and our own judicial knowledge. 
It is a distinctive part of the American character for indi-
viduals to join associations to enrich the public dialogue. 
See, e.g., R. Horn, Groups and the Constitution 13-18 
(1956). 
The theme of group identity is part of the history of 
American democracy. 
See, e.g., The Federalist No. 10 
(J. Madison). 
As Toqueville observed: 
"Americans of all ages, all conditions, and all dispositions 
constantly form associations. 
They have not only com-


[PDF PAGE 60]
652 
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
711 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
mercial and manufacturing companies, in which all take 
part, but associations of a thousand other kinds, reli-
gious, moral, serious, futile, general or restricted, enor-
mous or diminutive. . . . If it is proposed to inculcate 
some truth or to foster some feeling by the encourage-
ment of a great example, they form a society. 
Wher-
ever at the head of some new undertaking you see the 
government in France, or a man of rank in England, in 
the United States you will be sure to find an associa-
tion." 2 A. de Toqueville, Democracy in America 106 
(P. Bradley ed. 1948). 
Finally, the majority's conclusion that the statute is not 
overinclusive because independent expenditures by nonprofit 
corporations may be assumed to have a pernicious, distorting 
effect on political processes does not withstand the rigorous 
scrutiny applicable to bans on speech. 
See NCPAC, 470 
U. S., at 501. 
It even contradicts MCFL, where we said: 
"[A]ssociations do not suddenly present the specter of cor-
ruption merely by assuming the corporate form." 4 79 U. S., 
at 263. 
The Court reasons that the Chamber of Commerce 
benefits from a "unique state-conferred corporate structure 
that facilitates the amassing of large treasuries." Ante, at 
660. 
This proposition is not self-evident and has little or 
no relation to the suppression of ideas. 
The reality, of 
course, is that some groups and organizations, particularly 
those with many members, may find that the nonprofit corpo-
rate form is the only feasible way of organizing so that they 
can transmit important views to the public as a whole. 
Be-
cause the unincorporated association structure carries with 
it a high risk of personal liability for members and operates 
in an uncertain legal climate, groups often prefer to organize 
in nonprofit corporate form. 
The corporate form provides 
clear rights and responsibilities and limits the liability of 
members. 
E. Hadden & B. French, Nonprofit Organiza-
tions 12 (1987); H. Oleck, Non profit Corporations, Organiza-
tions and Associations 30-31 (4th ed. 1982); M. Lane, Legal 


[PDF PAGE 61]
712 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
Handbook for Nonprofit Organizations 4, 22-26, 43, 59-61, 
124 (1980). 
For these reasons, in recent years the number 
of important unincorporated associations has dwindled while 
the number of incorporated associations has proliferated. 
Oleck, supra, at 31. 
By deciding to operate as a nonprofit 
corporation rather than an unincorporated association, a 
group does not forfeit its First Amendment protection to par-
ticipate in political discourse. 
III 
An independent ground for invalidating this statute is the 
blanket exemption for media corporations. It is beyond per-
adventure that the media could not be prohibited from speak-
ing about candidate qualifications. 
The First Amendment 
would not tolerate a law prohibiting a newspaper or televi-
sion network from spending on political comment because it 
operates through a corporation. See Mills v. Alabama, 384 
u. s. 214, 218-220 (1966). 
As JUSTICE BRENNAN, sup-
ported by a majority of the Court in Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. 
v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U. S. 749 (1985), stated: 
"[T]he rights of the institutional media are no greater and no 
less than those enjoyed by other individuals or organizations 
engaged in the same activities." Id., at 784 (dissenting opin-
ion, joined by MARSHALL, BLACKMUN' and STEVENS, JJ. ); 
id., at 773 (WHITE, J., concurring in judgment) ("[T]he First 
Amendment gives no more protection to the press ... than it 
does to others exercising their freedom of speech"). The ar-
gument relied on by the majority, that media corporations 
are in the business of communicating and other corporations 
are not, is unsatisfying. All corporations communicate with 
the public to some degree, whether it is their business or not; 
and communication is of particular importance for nonprofit 
corporations. 
The web of corporate ownership that links media and 
nonmedia corporations is difficult to untangle for the purpose 


[PDF PAGE 62]
AUSTIN v. MICHIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
713 
652 
KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
of any meaningful distinction. 
Newspapers, television net-
works, and other media may be owned by parent corpora-
tions with multiple business interests. Nothing in the statu-
tory scheme prohibits a business corporate parent from 
directing its newspaper to support or oppose a particular can-
didate. The Act not only permits that discretion or control, 
but makes it a crime for a public-interest nonprofit corpora-
tion to bring to light such activity if to do so infers candidate 
support or opposition. 
I can find no permissible basis under 
the First Amendment for the States to make this unsup-
ported distinction among corporate speakers. 
IV 
The Court's hostility to the corporate form used by the 
speaker in this case and its assertion that corporate wealth is 
the evil to be regulated is far too imprecise to justify the most 
severe restriction on political speech ever sanctioned by this 
Court. 
In any event, this distinction is irrelevant to a non-
profit corporation. "Where at all possible, government must 
curtail speech only to the degree necessary to meet the par-
ticular problem at hand, and must avoid infringing on speech 
that does not pose the danger that has prompted regulation." 
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 265. 
The wholesale ban on corporate 
political speech enacted by the Michigan Legislature is "too 
blunt an instrument for such a delicate task." Ibid. 
By constructing a rationale for the jurisprudence of this 
Court that prevents distinguished organizations in public af-
fairs from announcing that a candidate is qualified or not 
qualified for public office, the Court imposes its own model of 
speech, one far removed from economic and political reality. 
It is an unhappy paradox that this Court, which has the role 
of protecting speech and of barring censorship from all as-
pects of political life, now becomes itself the censor. 
In the 
course of doing so, the Court reveals a lack of concern for 
speech rights that have the full protection of the First 
Amendment. 
I would affirm the judgment. 


[PDF PAGE 63]
714 
OCTOBER TERM, 1989 
Appendix to opinion of KENNEDY, J., dissenting 
494 u. s. 
Michigan Needs 
Richard Bandstra 
To Help Us Be 
Job Competitive 
Again 
The Michigan State Chamber of 
Commerce, an organization of over 
8,000 member companies. associations 
and local chambers of commerce, Is 
committed to making Michigan more 
competitive for business Investment 
and job creation. With that goal in mind, 
we'd like to share some facts with the 
electors in the 93rd House District 
before they vote in tomorrow's special 
election. 
To be Job competitive, Michigan 
needs to have fair regulatory policies on 
business regarding such important 
issues as workers' compensation and 
we need to encourage greater efficiency 
in state government by lowering the 
state personal income tax. 
Currently, workers· compensation 
costs are 20% higher in Michigan than 
those in neighboring states. Why? Our 
eligibility standards are not the same as 
most other states. Too many people are 
allowed to qualify for too long a period of 
a time. 
Many Grand Rapids businesses 
are competing with firms in other states 
having lower regulatory costs. Unless 
checked, this disadvantage may con-
tinue to cost Michigan jobs ... jobs that 
are lost when businesses leave Michi-
gan, expand out of state, or when out-
state companies seeking to expand 
don't locate here in Michigan. 
To ensure that Michigan is job com-
petitive, we need legislators at the State 
Capitol who will show courage and 
stand up to special interests that advo-
cate greater regulation and taxes. 
The Michigan State Chamber of 
Commerce believes Richard Bandstra 
has the background and training to do 
the best job in Lansing for the people of 
the 93rd House District. We believe he 
will work to reduce workers' compensa-
tion costs and for an early rollback of 
the personal income tax rate. 
The State Chamber is committed to 
job development in Michigan. We 
believe Richard Bandstra shares that 
commitment. 
On Monday June 10th, 
Elect Richard Bandstra 
State Representative 
93rd House District 
Special Election 
;;~~ 
''~CHAMBER 
,,•.: Cf COvlv1cRCE 
Not authorized by the Candidate Committee. of Richard Bandstra 
Paid for by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce • Suite 400,. 200 N. Washington Square • Lansing, Michigan 48933 
