7 

4 
hs 
F 
3 


© | FILED 
AUG 10 1994 q 
No. 93-1677 orice oF Tic eu | | 
In the | 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


STATE OF OKLAHOMA, EX REL. 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
Petitioner, 
US. 


JEFFERSON LINES, INC., 
Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 


STANLEY P. JOHNSTON * STEPHEN D. DERUYTER* 
Deputy General Counsel LOREN A. UNTERSEHER 
Cralc S. KEY LEONARD, STREET & DEINARD 
Assistant General Counsel 150 South Fifth St., Suite 2300 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION Minneapolis, MN 55402 
P.O. Box 53248 Telephone: (612) 335-1500 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152 Counsel for Respondent 
Telephone: (405) 521-3141 
Counsel for Petitioner 


*Counsel of Record 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED APRIL 21, 1994 
CERTIORARI GRANTED JUNE 13, 1994 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Relevant Docket Entries 


Stipulation of the Parties, filed Feb. 10, 1992 


Order of the Bankruptcy Court, filed May 14, 1992... 


Memorandum and Order of the U.S. District Court 
on Appeal, filed Dec. 22, 1992 


Opinion of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, 
filed Jan. 21, 1994 


‘ 


a i at- 


\ 
~ 


1 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


ea Pp ee ee eee a ee ee | 


DATE 


ENTRY 


Aug. 15, 1990 


Aug. 15, 1990 


Aug. 16, 1990 


Aug. 16, 1990 


Nov. 1, 1990 


Jan. 23, 1991 


Jan. 23, 1991 


Feb. 10, 1992 


Proof of Claim of the Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Claim # 603 


Proof of Claim of the Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Claim # 604 


Proof of Claim of the Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Claim # 605 


Proof of Claim of the Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Claim # 606 


Debtor’s Notice of Hearing and Om- 
nibus Objection to Proofs of Claim 
Numbered 138, 168, 199, 317, 368, 
375, 396, 415, 471, 603, 604, 605, 606 
and 610 and Memorandum 


Amended Proof of Claim of the Okla- 
homa Tax Commission, Claim # 617 


Amended Proof of Claim of the Okla- 
homa Tax Commission, Claim # 618 


Stipulation of Oklahoma Tax 
Commission and Debtor, Jefferson 


Lines, Inc. 


2 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES (cont’d) 


DATE 


ENTRY 


May 14, 1992 


Dec. 22, 1992 


Jan. 21, 1994 


Order of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, 
District of Minnesota, Third Division, 
sustaining -Debtor’s Objection to the 
Claim of the Oklahoma Tax Com- 
mission 


Memorandum and Order of the U.S. 
District Court, District of Minnesota, 
Third Division, affirming the Order 
of the Bankruptcy Court 


Opinion and Judgment of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Eighth 
Circuit, affirming the judgment of 
the District Court. 


3 


IN THE UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURT 
DISTRICT OF MINNESOTA 
THIRD DIVISION 


IN RE: 
JEFFERSON LINES, INC., CASE NO. 3-89-04137-DDO 


Debtor. [Filed Feb. 10, 1992] 


STIPULATION 


The Oklahoma Tax Commission (“Commission”) 
and Jefferson Lines, Inc. (“Jefferson”) hereby stipulate, by 
and through their respective representatives, to the 
following facts and legal issues, and further stipulate that 
the same shall be accepted as true and correct for purposes 
of the above-referenced Bankruptcy Case, No. 3-89-04137- 
DDO, without the necessity of any evidence being offered 
in support thereof. All stipulated facts and issues shall be 
conclusive only for the purpose of the above-referenced 
case, including appeals. This stipulation will not be 
conclusive in any subsequent proceeding to which either 
Jefferson or the Commission is a party. 


1. Jefferson is acorporation organized pursuant 
to the laws of Minnesota. Jefferson was qualified to do 
business in the State of Oklahoma on April 11, 1988. 


2. Jefferson operated in Oklahoma as a com- 
mon carrier providing bus services. Jefferson sells tickets 


4 


for both intrastate and interstate routes. “Intrastate” 
routes are those which both originate and terminate 
within the State of Oklahoma. “Interstate” routes are 
those which originate in Oklahoma and terminate in a 
state other than Oklahoma. 


3. K.G. Lines, Inc., operated under Oklahoma 
Sales Tax Permit No. 195433. 


4. M.K.& QO. Coach Lines, Inc., operated under 
Oklahoma Sales Tax Permit No. 246600. 


5. Oklahoma Transportation Company operated 
under Oklahoma Sales Tax Permit No. 268820. 


6. Jefferson filed for bankruptcy protection in 
this Court on October 27, 1989. 


7. The Commission, in response to Jefferson’s 
bankruptcy, filed four proof of claims represented herein as 
Nos. 603, 604, 605 and 606 on August 15, 1990, August 15, 
1990, August 16, 1990, and August 16, 1990, respectively. 


8. On Octcher 31, 1990, Jefferson filed an 
Omnibus Objection to Proof of Claim objecting to Claim 
Nos. 603, 604, 605 and 606. 


9. On January 23, 1991, the Commission filed 
Amended Proof of Claim Nos. 617 and 618 (which amend 
Claim Nos. 603 and 604 respectively), purporting to 
represent priority and administrative claims for various 
sales and withholding taxes. 


10. The only periods and amounts involvéd in 
this present proceeding are those pursuant to Sales Tax 


5 


Permit No. 246600. The dispute involves the months of 
September, 1989; October, 1989; January, 1990; and 
February, 1990. The total amount in controversy is 
$46,659.15. The Commission hereby withdraws all 
amounts listed in Claim Nos. 603, 604, 605, 607, 617 and 
618, which are claimed against Jefferson that relate to 
Sales Tax Permit Nos. 195433, 268820, or Withholding 
Tax Permit No. 730566792F 1-27, 731250251F 1-27. 


11. Jefferson has been operating under a con- 
firmed Plan of Reorganization since August 3, 1990. 


12. The disputed amount relates to tickets sold 
in Oklahoma where the ultimate destination was outside 
the State of Oklahoma. 


13. Jefferson deducted all interstate tickets sold 
in Oklahoma from its total taxable sales for purposes of 
determining the amount of sales tax due the State of 
Oklahoma. 


14. The Commission reviewed M.K.& O. Coach 
Lines, Inc. sales tax reports for Permit No. 246600 and 
disallowed the interstate ticket sales deduction. 


15. Oklahoma sales tax is applied at the same 
tax rate to all intrastate and interstate tickets which are 
sold in Oklahoma regardless of point of origin or des- 
tination. 


ISSUE 
Under the Oklahoma Statute 68 O.S. § 1354(C) may 


the State of Oklahoma assess and collect a sales tax on 
tickets sold in Oklahoma where the trip originates in 


6 


Oklahoma and terminates in a state other than Okla- 
homa? 


/s/ Douglas Price 
DOUGLAS PRICE 

OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION 
February 7, 1992 


/s/ James M. Blackford 
JAMES M. BLACKFORD 


Sr. Vice President and Chief 

Financial Officer 
JEFFERSON LINES, INC. 
February 10, 1992 


7 
UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURT 


DISTRICT OF MINNESOTA 
THIRD DIVISION 
In re: Chapter 11 Case 
Jefferson Lines, Inc., BKY Case No. 3-89-4137 
Debtor. ORDER 


[Filed May 14, 1992] 


This matter came before the Court on objection by 
Jefferson Lines, Inc. (“Debtor”) to Claim Nos. 603-606 of 
the Oklahoma Tax Commission (“Commission”) for unpaid 
sales tax in the consolidated amount of $46,659.15. Steven 
D. DeRuyter represents the Debtor. Douglas F. Price 
represents the Commission. The Court, having considered 
the briefs of the parties, and being fully advised in the 
matter, now makes this ORDER pursuant to the Federal 
and Local Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure. 


I. 


The facts are undisputed. Debtor, a Minnesota 
corporation, is a common carrier providing bus service in 
Oklahoma and numerous other states. Debtor sells 
transportation tickets within Oklahoma for both intrastate 
and interstate routes. “Intrastate routes” are those which 
originate and terminate within the State of Oklahoma. 
“Interstate routes” are those which originate in Oklahoma 


8 


and terminate in a state other than Oklahoma.’ The 
Commission, under authority of Oklahoma law, applies a 
sales tax at a single specified rate to all intrastate tickets, 
and to all interstate tickets sold by a common carrier for 
transportation originating in Oklahoma. 


Debtor filed for Chapter 11 relief on October 27, 
1989. While operating under Sales Tax Permit No. 
246600, Debtor deducted all interstate route tickets suld in 
Oklahoma in computing its total taxable sales. The 
Commission filed claims in the Debtor’s estate seeking 
payment of the tax on interstate route tickets sold during 
September and October, 1989 and January and February, 
1990. The total amount in controversy is $46,659.15. 


‘ Additionally, Debtor has routes which originate outside 
of Oklahoma and terminate within Oklahoma; and routes which 
originate outside of Oklahoma, pass through Oklahoma, and 
terminate in a state other than Oklahoma. Although these are 
also interstate routes, Oklahoma does not tax interstate transac- 


tions regarding transportation that does not originate in 


Oklahoma. Accordingly, except where specifically referenced, 
the term “interstate routes” in this opinion means only those 
interstate routes for transportation originating in Oklahoma. 


* The Commission filed Proofs of Claim Nos. 603 and 604 
on August 15, 1990, and 605 and 606 on August 16, 1990. The 
Commission asserts entitlement under these claims to treatment 
as a priority and administrative creditor for sales and withhol- 
ding taxes. In its Omnibus Objection to Proofs of Claim, Debtor 
objects to these claims. On January 23, 1991, the Commission 
filed Amended Proofs of Claim Nos. 617 and 618, which amended 
Claim Nos. 603 and 604. 


The parties agree that the Commission has reduced all 
amounts listed in Claim Nos. 603, 604, 605, 606, 617 and 618 by 
sales or withholding tax collected, other than the amount of sales 
tax due Oklahoma under Sales Tax Permit No. 246600. 


Debtor objects to allowance of the claims on the grounds 
that applying Oklahoma’s sales tax to the gross receipts of 
tickets sold in Oklahoma for its interstate routes violates 
the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution. 


Il. 


Does the Oklahoma sales tax statute which levies 
a tax on the gross receipts from sales of transportation 
over interstate routes violate the Commerce Clause of the 
United States Constitution? 


Il. 


Oklahoma collects sales tax from the Debtor under 
the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. 68 O.S. § 1354 (1XC).° 
The Debtor argues that Oklahoma’s imposition of a tax on 
the gross receipts of tickets sold in Oklahoma for interstate 


> 68 O.S. § 1354 (1XC) reads in pertinent part: 


(1) There is hereby levied upon all sales, not 


* 
| 
i 
X 
4 
: 
: 


otherwise exempted in Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, Section 1350 
et seg. of this title, an excise tax of four and one-half percent 
(4.5%) of the gross receipts or gross proceeds of each sale of the 


following: 


(C) Transportation for hire to persons by common 
carriers, including railroads both steam and electric, motor 
transportation companies, taxicab companies, pullman car 
companies, airlines, and other means of transportation for hire. 


10 


route transportation violates the Commerce Clause. U.S. 
Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 3.‘ 


Prior to 1977, the United States Supreme Court 
held that, 


[iJt was not the purpose of the commerce 
clause to relieve those engaged in interstate 
commerce from their just share of state tax 
burden even though it increases the cost of 
doing business. 


Western Live Stock v. Bureau of Revenue, 303 U.S. 250, 254 
(1938). Thus, state taxation of transactions involving 
interstate commerce was not necessarily regarded as a 
violation of the Commerce Clause. However, the Court 
also had ruled that any state tax levied for the expressed 
“privilege of doing business” in a state was a per se 
violation of the Commerce Clause. See: Spector Motor 
Service, Inc. v. O’Connor, 340 U.S. 602 (1951). In 1977, the 
Court abandoned the per se analysis in Spector Motor 
Service in favor of a four-part test to determine whether a 
challenged state tax on interstate commercial transactions 
withstands constitutional scrutiny, regardless of its 
statutorily expressed purpose. See: Complete Auto 
Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274 (1977). 


In Complete Auto Transit, the Court recognized 
prior decisions which held that such a tax does not violate 
the Commerce Clause if: 


~ Art. I, § 8, cl. 3 reads in pertinent part: 


The Congress shall have Power . . . To regulate Com- 
merce with foreign Nations; and among the several States, and 
with the Indian Tribes. 


11 


the tax is applied to an activity with a 
substantial nexus with the taxing State, is 
fairly apportioned, does not discriminate 
against interstate commerce, and is fairly 
related to the services provided by the State. 


Id. at 279.° See also: American Trucking Assoc. v. 
Scheiner, 483 U.S. 266 (1978); Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 
252 (1989). Therefore, in order for the Oklahoma tax to 
survive a Commerce Clause challenge, its application must 
satisfy each part of the Complete Auto Transit test. 


A. The tax must be applied to an activity 
with a substantial nexus to the taxing 
State. 


The Debtor claims that the Oklahoma statute fails 
to meet the first part of the Complete Auto Transit test, 
arguing that the mere purchase of an interstate ticket in 
Oklahoma constitutes the only connection between the 
activity taxed and the taxing state. However, the 
Supreme Court has found that maintenance of two non- 
sales offices in California by a non-profit corporation 
created a sufficient nexus to justify a tax on sales made to 
California residents from the corporation’s headquarters in 
Washington, D.C. National Geographic Soc’y v. California 
Bd. of Equalization, 430 U.S. 551 (1977). Debtor’s contact 
with Oklahoma involves more than mere sales of 
interstate route tickets. It also sells intrastate tickets, 


* The Court went on to affirm the Mississippi Supreme 
Court’s judgment that a Mississippi tax on the “privilege of 
doing [interstate] business” was not a violation of the Commerce 
Clause,noting that the appellant relied only on the Spector per 
se rule, and did not object to the tax based on application of the 
four-part test. See Complete Auto Transit, 430 U.S. at 289. 


12 


pays sales tax on intrastate ticket sales, and maintains a 
presence in Oklahoma to facilitate both intrastate and 
interstate ticket sales. Additionally, Oklahoma issues the 
Debtor sales tax permits to facilitate collection and 
payment of sales tax. Although the Debtor views its nexus 
with Oklahoma as de minimis, it has a sufficient nexus to 
the taxing state under National Geographic to satisfy the 
first part of the Complete Auto Transit test. 


B. The tax must be fairly apportioned. 


In 1989, the Goldberg Court held “the central 
purpose behind the apportionment requirement is to 
ensure that each State taxes only its fair share of an 
interstate transaction.” Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 260-261. 
See: Container Corp. of America v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 
U.S. 159, 169 (1983). To determine whether the apportion- 
ment part of the Complete Auto Transit test is satisfied, 
the Court examines whether the tax is internally and 
externally consistent. Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 261. Ameri- 
can Trucking, 483 U.S. at 284-285. 


“To be internally consistent, a tax must be struc- 
tured so that if every State were to impose an identical 
tax, no multiple taxation would result.” Goldberg, 488 
U.S. at 261. See: Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169. The 
Debtor suggests the Oklahoma tax lacks internal consis- 
tency because other states may enact laws that tax the 
interstate portion of the tickets sold in Oklahoma. How- 
ever, the Goldberg Court declared the proper standard for 
the internal consistency test to be comparison with an 
identical tax, not a similar tax. Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 261. 
Therefore, each state could enact an identical tax without 
producing multiple taxation if it were levied against 
interstate route tickets sold only within its own state for 
transportation originating there. Under the Goldberg 
standard, the Oklahoma sales tax is internally consistent. 


13 


The external consistency test is satisfied if the State 
taxes only that portion of revenues from the interstate 
activity which reasonably reflects the in-state component 


of the interstate activity being taxed. Goldberg, 488 U.S. 


262. See: Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169. In making a 
practical inquiry, the Court noted: 


[in previous cases we have endorsed appor- 
tionment formulas based on the miles a bus, 
train, or truck traveled within the taxing 
State. But those cases all dealt with the 
movement of large physical objects over 
identifiable routes, where it was practicable 
to keep track of the distance actually 
traveled within the taxing State. 


Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 264.° See, eg., Central Greyhound 


Lines v. Mealey, 334 U.S. 653 (1948) (buses); American 


Trucking, 483 U.S. 266 (1987) (trucks); Japan Line uv. 
County of Los Angeles, 441 U.S. 434 (1979) (cargo con- 
tainers); Complete Auto Transit, 430 U.S. 274 (1977) (motor 


carriers); Michigan-Wisconsin Pipe Line v. Calvert, 347 


U.S. 157 (1954) (oil pipelines). In Central Greyhound, a 
case with similar facts, New York taxed the gross receipts 
from ticket sales for interstate routes out of New York. 


The Central Greyhound Court held that the New York tax 


would withstand a Commerce Clause challenge if it were 
apportioned by mileage traveled within New York. 
Central Greyhound, 334 U.S. at 663-664. The Court found 
that: 


* The Goldberg Court held that apportioning by mileage 
the electronic impulses of a telephonic transmission would create 
“insurmountable administrative and technological barriers.” 


14 


[bly its very nature an unapportioned gross 
receipts tax makes interstate transportation 
bear more than ‘a fair share of the cost of 
the local government whose protection it 
enjoys.’ 


Central Greyhound, 334 U.S. at 663, quoting, Freeman v. 
Hewit, 329 U.S. 249 (1947). 


The Commission argues that the sales tax is self- 
apportioning since Oklahoma does not tax interstate 
tickets sold for routes which originate outside of Oklahoma 
and terminate within Oklahoma. However, in this Court’s 
view, the Central Greyhound analysis is controlling. By 
taxing the gross receipts from interstate route tickets, the 
Commission has taxed more than the in-state component 
of the interstate activity. Accordingly, section 1354(1XC) 
is not externally consistent. The tax is not fairly appor- 
tioned, and therefore, it fails the second part of the 
Complete Auto Transit test. 


C. The tax must not discriminate against 
interstate commerce. 


The Debtor argues that the identical four and one- 
half percent (4.5%) tax on interstate and intrastate tickets 
clearly discriminates against interstate commerce. In past 
cases, the Supreme Court has decided that “a tax may 
violate the Commerce Clause if it is facially discrimi- 
natory, has a discriminatory intent or has the effect of 
unduly burdening interstate commerce”. Amerada Hess 
Corp. v. Director, Div. of Taxation, N.J. Dep’t of the 
Treasury, 490 U.S. 66, 75-79 (1989). 


Section §1354(1XC) is applied to all common car- 
riers. Therefore, this statute allocates the tax burden in 
a facially neutral manner. 


15 


To determine if a tax has a discriminatory intent, 
the Amerada Court considered whether the tax was 
motivated by an intent to confer a benefit on local industry 
at the expense of interstate commerce. See also: Bacchus 
Imports v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984), in which a Hawaiian 
tax exemption for fruit wine was found to promote the 
local pineapple-wine industry. It does not appear from 
these facts that § 1354(1XC) was enacted to promote or 
benefit Oklahoma common carriers at the expense of out- 
state common carriers. 


In American Trucking, the Supreme Court in- 
validated the imposition of unapportioned lump-sum 
annual taxes on the operation of trucks and truck tractors 
as discriminating against interstate commerce. Accor- 
dingly, an unapportioned tax discriminates against inter- 
state commerce, except (as in Goldberg) where lack of 
apportionment can be justified by administrative burdens. 
Therefore, in failing the apportionment part of the 
Complete Auto Transit test, the Oklahoma tax discrimi- 
nates against interstate commerce. Section 1354(1XC) fails 
the third part of the Complete Auto Transit test. 


D. The tax must be fairly related to the 
services provided by the State. 


The fourth part of the Complete Auto Transit test 
requires that the tax be fairly related to the activities of 
the Debtor in Oklahoma. Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 266. This 
part “focuses on the wide range of benefits provided to the 
taxpayer, not just the precise activity connected to the 
interstate activity at issue.” Id. at 267. In D. H. Holmes 
Co. v. McNamara, 486 U.S. 24, the Supreme Court found 
that police and fire protection, mass transit service and 
public road maintenance provided by the State of 
Louisiana caused the tax to be related to the activities of 


16 


Holmes in running retail stores and a mail order business 
in Louisiana. Holmes, 486 U.S. at 32. In this case, the 
Debtor receives police and fire protection, along with other 
public services, at the locations where it sells tickets and 
loads its buses. The Debtor also receives benefit from 
police protection and public road maintenance on its 
Oklahoma routes. Therefore, the Oklahoma tax is fairly 
related to the business activities of the Debtor in Ok- 
lahoma. 


IV. 


Based on the foregoing, the Debtor is entitled to an 
order sustaining its objection on the grounds that the 
claim is for the payment of a tax on the gross receipts from 
the Debtor’s sales of transportation over interstate routes 
which tax is levied in violation of the Commerce Clause of 
the Untied States Constitution. 


Now, therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED: 


The objection of the Debtor to the claim of the 
Oklahoma Tax Commission is sustained. 


Dated: 5/13/92 


s/ Dennis D, O’Bri 
Dennis D. O’Brien 
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge 


17 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
DISTRICT OF MINNESOTA 
THIRD DIVISION 

In re: 
Jefferson Lines, Inc., 

Debtor, 
State of Oklahoma, 
ex rel. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Civ No. 3-92-467 

Appellant, MEMORANDUM 


AND ORDER 


Vv. 


Jefferson Lines, Inc., [Filed Dec. 22, 1992] 
and Wesley B. Huisinga, 


United States Trustee, 


Appellees. 


4 


The State of Oklahoma appeals the bankruptcy 
court’s' upholding of Jefferson Lines Inc.’s objection to the 
Oklahoma Tax Commission’s claims for unpaid sales taxes. 
For reversal, Oklahoma argues that the levy of its sales 
tax on the gross sale price of interstate bus tickets sold in 


+ The Honorable Dennis D. O’Brien, United States 
Bankruptcy Judge for the District of Minnesota. 


18 


Oklahoma does not violate the Commerce Clause of the 
United States Constitution. The Court affirms. 


I. BACKGROUND 


The parties stipulate to the facts and to the legal 
issue in this case. Jefferson provides bus service in 
Oklahoma on both intra- and interstate routes. Jefferson 
filed for bankruptcy protection in the District of Minnesota 
in 1989. In response, the Commission filed several proofs 
of claims, all of which relate to tickets sold in Oklahoma 
for travel from Oklahoma to a destination in another state. 


According to the Commission, Okla. Stat. tit. 68, § 
1354(1XC) (1991) required Jefferson to collect and remit a 
sales tax on the gross price of every bus ticket it sold in 
Oklahoma, regardless of what state the trip originated or 
terminated in. In remitting its taxes for the relevant 
periods, however, Jefferson deducted from its total sales 
the amount attributable to the sales of interstate tickets. 
When the Commission submitted its proofs of claims with 
respect to these amounts, Jefferson objected. The parties 
stipulated that the legal issue before the bankruptcy court 
was “Under the Oklahoma Statute 68 O.S. § 1354(C) may 
the State of Oklahoma assess and collect a sales tax on 
tickets sold in Oklahoma where the trip originates in 
Oklahoma and terminates in a state other than Okla- 
homa?” By an order dated May 13, 1992, the bankruptcy 
court sustained Jefferson’s objections, ruling that the tax 
imposed by § 1354(1XC) violates the Commerce Clause, 
U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3, because it is not fairly appor- 
tioned and because it discriminates against interstate 
commerce. 


19 


II. DISCUSSION 


Under 28 U.S.C. § 158(A) (1988), this Court has 
appellate jurisdiction over final judgments and orders of 
the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of 
Minnesota. On appeal, this Court is to review de novo the 
bankruptcy court’s conclusions of law. In re Muncrief, 900 
F.2d 1220, 1224 (8th Cir. 1990). 


A state tax on interstate commerce does not violate 
the Commerce Clause if it “[1] is applied to an activity 
with a substantial nexus with the taxing State, [2] is fairly 
apportioned, [3] does not discriminate against interstate 
commerce, and [4] is fairly related to the services provided 
by the state.” Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 
U.S. 274, 279 (1977). As Oklahoma’s tax must satisfy all 
four prongs of the Complete Auto test to survive a Com- 
merce Clause challenge, see Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 
252 (1989), a finding that it fails one prong would obviate 
the need to apply the other prongs. 


The Court turns first to the apportionment prong. 
“(The central purpose behind the apportionment require- 
ment is to ensure that each state taxes only its fair share 
of an interstate transaction.” Jd. at 260-61. To determine 
whether a tax is fairly apportioned, a court must examine 
whether it is internally and externally consistent. Id. at 
261. 


A tax is internally consistent if no multiple tax- 
ation would result were every state to impose an identical 
tax. Id. As a bus ticket can be sold in only one state, even 
if every state were to tax the sale of bus tickets within its 
borders, no purchasers would be taxed more than once. 
Therefore, Oklahoma’s tax is internally consistent. 


A tax is externally consistent if it is levied only on 
“that portion of the revenues from the interstate activity 


20 


which reasonably reflects the in-state component of the 
activity being taxed.” Jd. at 262. Oklahoma’s tax on the 
gross purchase price of intrastate bus tickets probably 
reasonably reflects the relative benefit Oklahoma confers 
on intrastate riders in the form of highway maintenance 
and other such services. However, by also taxing the 
entire purchase price of an interstate ticket, Oklahoma 
receives revenues that exceed the amount reasonably attri- 
butable to the Oklahoma leg of the bus journey. Thus, 
Oklahoma’s tax does not appear to be fairly apportioned. 
See Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Mealy, 334 U.S. 653, 662-63 
(1948) (invalidating a state tax on the gross receipts of bus 
company when the tax was levied on the entire mileage of 
a bus trip although part of the trip was outside the state). 


Nevertheless, Oklahoma argues that its tax is 
externally consistent, relying on Goldberg. The tax 
challenged in Goldberg was levied on the gross charge of 
interstate telecommunications originated or received in 
Illinois and charged to an Illinois service address. Gold- 
berg, 488 U.S. at 257. Illinois provided a credit to any 
taxpayer who was taxed by another state on a call taxed 
by Illinois. Id. 


The Goldberg Court concluded that the Illinois tax 
was externally consistent because the risk of multiple 
taxation was slight and because apportioning a tax upon 
telecommunications was administratively virtually im- 
possible. The Court concluded that the risk of multiple 
taxation was slight because states through which a 
telephone signal merely passes probably do not have a 
sufficient nexus to tax the call. Jd. at 263. The Goldberg 
Court believed that only two states could have a nexus 
substantial enough to tax a particular interstate telephone 
call; a state that taxed interstate calls charged to a service 
address within the state, and a state that taxed interstate 


21 


calls billed or paid within the state. Jd. Thus, under the 
Illinois tax it was possible that a taxpayer with service 
and billing addresses in different states could be taxed 
twice on the same call. Jd. This “limited possibility” of 
multiple taxation was not enough to invalidate the Illinois 
tax because Illinois provided for a credit in the event of 
multiple taxation. Jd. at 264. 


The Goldberg Court also found that apportioning 
the tax on a telephone call would “produce insurmountable 
administrative and technological barriers.” Jd. at 264-65. 
The Court noted that telephone networks offer billions of 
potential paths from one point to another, and that 
computers can switch calls rapidly and frequently from one 
path to another without regard to state lines. Jd. at 
254-55. Thus, it is virtually impossible to trace and record 
the path of an individual call. Id. at 255. Accordingly, the 
Court held that the Illinois tax was fairly apportioned 
because the risk of multiple taxation was low, Illinois 
provided a credit in case of multiple taxation, and it is not 
administratively feasible to apportion taxes on telephone 
calls. Id. at 265. 


Oklahoma argues that its tax is analogous to the 
tax in Goldberg under the external consistency test 
because Oklahoma is the only state with a sufficient nexus 
to tax the purchase of bus tickets. Oklahoma emphasizes 
that its tax is a sales tax upon the purchasers of bus 
tickets which “retailers” such as Jefferson collect and hold 
in trust for the state. Because its tax is only on the sale 
of tickets within the state, Oklahoma argues, no other 
state can impose such a tax on the same ticket. Thus, 
Oklahoma concludes, Goldberg controls and its tax, like 
Illinois’ telecommunications tax, is externally consistent. 


The Goldberg Court emphasized that the external 
consistency test “is essentially a practical inquiry.” Jd. at 


22 


264. Hence, Oklahoma describes its analysis as practical. 
However, Oklahoma’s analysis exalts formalism over 
prectical inquiry because it ignores a very real potential 
for double taxation. For example, Texas could tax Jeffer- 
son on the revenue it derived from the transportation of 
passengers within Texas. See, e.g., Greyhound Lines, 334 
U.S. at 662-63 (endorsing such a method of apportion- 
ment). If that were the case, a Jefferson passenger 
traveling from Tulsa to Houston would effectively be taxed 
twice on the Texas portion of the journey. The fact that 
Oklahoma levies a sales tax on the ticket purchaser while 
Texas would levy its tax on Jefferson makes no practical 
difference, as Jefferson would pass the Texas tax on to the 
purchaser by increasing the price of the ticket. Thus, 
although Oklahoma may be the only state with a sufficient 
nexus to tax the purchase of a bus ticket in Oklahoma, 
other states still have a sufficient nexus to tax the very 
same activity that Oklahoma is taxing. Because the 
potential for multiple taxation is much higher in this case 
than in Goldberg, and because Oklahoma provides no 
credit in case of multiple taxation, Oklahoma’s tax is quite 
unlike the telecommunications tax in Goldberg. 


Oklahoma’s tax also differs from the tax in Gold- 
berg in that apportioning a tax on bus ticket purchasers 
poses no significant administrative burden. Although the 
Goldberg Court held that apportioning a tax on telecom- 
munications was not feasible, it noted that in previous 
cases the Supreme Court has endorsed apportionment 
formulas based on the number of miles a bus, train, or 
truck travels with a taxing state. Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 
264. These cases, it stated, all involved “the movement of 
large physical objects over identifiable routes, where it was 
practicable to keep track of the distance actually traveled 
within the taxing State.” Jd. Oklahoma does not argue, 


23 


nor does the Court have reason to believe, that appor- 
tioning a tax on bus travel on the basis of the number of 
miles traveled within the state is impracticable. 


Therefore, the Court concludes that, under the 
standard enunciated in Goldberg, Okla. Stat. tit. 68, § 
1354(1XC) (1991) is not externally consistent when applied 
to bus tickets purchased in Oklahoma for travel to a 
destination in another state. Because the Oklahoma 
statute thus fails the apportionment prong of the Complete 
Auto test, it violates the Commerce Clause. Accordingly, 
the order of the bankruptcy court is AFFIRMED. 


DATED: December 22, 1992. 


/s/ Donald D. Alsop _ 
DONALD D. ALSOP, 


Senior Judge 
United States District Court 


24 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-1684MN 


Jefferson Lines, Inc., 


In re Jefferson Lines, Inc., * 
x 
Debtor; ° 
® On Appeal 
State of Oklahoma ex rel. ° from the 
Oklahoma Tax Commission, * United States 
* District Court 
Appellant, ° for the District 
v. . of Minnesota. 
x 
x 
*x 


Appellee. 


Submitted: November 11, 1993 
Filed: January 21, 1994 


Before RICHARD S. ARNOLD, Chief Judge, BEAM, 
Circuit Judge, and JACKSON’, District Judge. 


RICHARD S. ARNOLD, Chief Judge. 


The Hon. Carol E. Jackson, United States District Judge 
for the Eastern District of Missouri, sitting by designation. 


25 


In 1989, the Oklahoma Tax Commission sought 
payment from Jefferson Lines, Inc., the debtor in a Chap- 
ter 11 bankruptcy proceeding, for unpaid sales tax on the 
gross price of interstate bus tickets sold in Oklahoma. The 
State law, Okla. Stat. Title 68, § 1354(1XC), requires 
Jefferson to collect and remit sales tax on the gross price 
of every bus ticket sold in Oklahoma.' The statute applies 
to the sale of all tickets sold in Oklahoma, regardless of 
where the trip begins or ends. Jefferson is a bus line 
providing transportation service for both intrastate and 
interstate travel. Jefferson objects to paying the sales tax 
for the miles travelled outside of Oklahoma, arguing that 
the sales tax violates the Commerce Clause of the United 
States Constitution, Article I, § 8, cl. 3. The Bankruptcy 


1 The relevant part of Okla. Stat. Title 68, § 1354 (Supp. 
1988), states: 


(1) There is hereby levied upon all 
sales, not otherwise exempted in Oklahoma Sales 
Tax Code, Section 1350 et seg. of this title, an 
excise tax of four percent (4%) of the gross re- 
ceipts or gross proceeds of each sale of the fol- 
lowing: 


“* * 


(C) Transportation for hire to persons 
by common carriers, including railroads both 
steam and electric, motor transportation com- 
panies, taxicab companies, pullman car com- 
panies, airlines, and other means of transpor- 
tation for hire. 


26 


Court’ agreed with Jefferson. The District Court’ af- 
firmed. So do we. 


A state tax on interstate commercial activity 
violates the Commerce Clause unless it “is applied to an 
activity with a substantial nexus to the taxing State, is 
fairly apportioned, does not discriminate against interstate 
commerce, and is fairly related to the services or benefits 
provided by the State.” Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. 
Brady, 430 U.S. 274, 279 (1977). If a tax statute fails to 
meet any of these four standards, the statute will offend 
the Commerce Clause. See Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 
252 (1989). Both the District Court and the Bankruptcy 
Court held the statute was not fairly apportioned, thus 
failing the second standard of Complete Auto. We begin 
our inquiry by examining the issue of apportionment. 


To determine whether a tax is fairly apportioned a 
court must ask whether the tax is both “internally” and 
“externally consistent.” Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 261. The 
purpose of this inquiry “is to ensure that each State taxes 
only its fair share of an interstate transaction.” Goldberg, 
488 U.S. at 260-61. 


For a tax to be internally consistent, it “must be 
structured so that if every State were to impose an iden- 
tical tax, no multiple taxation would result.” Jd., at 261. 
The Oklahoma tax meets this test. As noted by the 
District Court and the Bankruptcy Court, an individual 
bus ticket can be sold in only one state. Therefore, even if 
every state taxed bus tickets sold within its borders, for all 


* The Honorable Dennis D. O’Brien, United States Bank- 


ruptcy Judge for the District of Minnesota. 


* The Honorable Donald D. Alsop, Senior United States 


District Judge for the District of Minnesota. 


27 


transportation originating within that state, no customer 
would be taxed more than once. Thus, the Oklahoma tax 
is internally consistent. 

But is the Oklahoma tax externally consistent? 
“The external consistency test asks whether the State has 
taxed only that portion of the revenues from the interstate 
activity which reasonably reflects the in-state component 
of the activity being taxed.” Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 262. 
When we evaluate the arguments, we must look beyond 
formalism and consider the practical and economic effect 
of the tax on interstate commerce. Jd. at 264; see also 
Central Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Mealy, 334 U.S. 653, 
659-60 (1948). 


The Commission contends that the tax is externally 
consistent and does not need to be apportioned because the 
tax is on the sale of the ticket and therefore is imposed 
only on local activity. To defend the assertion that only 
the sale of the ticket is taxed and not the use of the ticket, 
the Commission explains that the Oklahoma sales tax is 
based solely on the purchase price of the ticket, and that 
once the sale has occurred, the taxable event is complete. 
In essence, the Commission argues that the taxable 
activity is the sale of a ticket, not of transportation. This 
argument is too technical and flies in the face of how bus- 
ticket prices are set. A ticket price is set, at least partial- 
ly, on the number of miles travelled. To say that only the 
purchase of a ticket is taxed, and not the use of the ticket, 
ignores the fact that the real value of the ticket is the 
right to ride a bus. The ticket without the travel would be 
of scant value to a customer. We will not separate the sale 
of a piece of paper from the service which it represents. To 
hold otherwise would elevate form over substance and 
require this Court to ignore economic realities. 


28 


Both courts below relied, correctly we think, on 
Central Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Mealy, supra. In this 
1948 case, New York levied a gross-receipts tax on a New 
York-based bus company. All of the company’s revenues 
were subject to the tax, even though they included large 
sums attributable to transportation services performed in 
New Jersey. The Supreme Court held the tax invalid 
because it was not apportioned as between intrastate and 
interstate transportation revenues. The Court said that 
“(bly its very nature an unapportioned gross receipts tax 
makes interstate transportation bear more than ‘a fair 
share of the cost of local government whose protection it 
enjoys.’” 334 U.S. at 663 (quoting Freeman v. Hewit, 329 
U.S. 249, 253 (1946)). The vice of the New York gross- 
receipts tax was that “it [laid] ‘a direct burden upon every 
transaction in [interstate] commerce by withholding, for 
the use of the State, a part of every dollar received in such 
transactions.” Central Greyhound, 334 U.S. at 663 
(quoting Crew Levick Co. v. Pennsylvania, 245 U.S. 292, 
297 (1917)) (citations omitted). 


The same thing is true here. By levying a sales tax 
on the total price of tickets for interstate transportation, 
Oklahoma is attempting to tax the gross receipts from the 
sale of transportation outside its borders. It is taxing more 
than the in-state component of the interstate activity. If 
a customer, for example, buys a ticket in Tulsa, Oklahoma, 
to travel from Tulsa to Nashville, Tennessee, most of the 
trip will occur outside of Oklahoma. Under the scheme 
urged by the Commission, Oklahoma receives tax revenues 
attributable to the entire trip, even though it bears none 
of the cost of repairing roads in Arkansas, nor does it 
provide any police or fire protection for miles travelled in 
Tennessee. Like the New York tax in issue in Central 
Greyhound, the Oklahoma sales tax is a direct burden on 


29 


every transaction in interstate commerce, and the amount 
of the burden bears no relationship to the portion of the 
trip that occurs within the taxing state. 

The Commission suggests that Central Greyhound 
is distinguishable, because the tax there was a gross- 
receipts tax, formally levied upon the seller, whereas here 
a sales tax is involved, formally levied on the buyer, 
though collected by the seller and remitted to the State by 
it. The distinction is not significant enough to bear the 
weight that the Commission seeks to place upon it. Sales 
taxes and gross-receipts taxes have much in common. 
They are both measured by the gross receipts of the bus 
company, and are due whether the company makes a profit 
or not, and regardless of the cost to it of rendering the 
transportation service represented by the ticket sold. A 
gross-receipts tax is obviously an important part of the bus 
company’s cost of doing business. The likelihood that it 
will be passed on to the customer, in whole or in part, is 
great, if the company expects to continue in business. 
Conversely, a sales tax, though in form levied upon the 
buyer of the ticket, has to be paid by the bus company 
whether it collects the tax from its customers or not. The 
bus company must remit the tax to the state whether or 
not it has added the tax to the price of the ticket as such. 
Okla. Stat. Title 68, § 1361(A) (Supp. 1988). In both 
situations, the amount of the tax varies directly with the 
amount of miles travelled, whether those miles are inside 
the taxing state or outside. This is a classic instance of an 
unapportioned tax, in our view. Central Greyhound was 
decided before the adoption of the presently applicable 
four-part analysis by the Complete Auto Court, but we 
believe that the reasoning of Central Greyhound is still 
good when considering whether a tax is externally consis- 
tent as that term is used in Complete Auto. 


30 


The unapportioned Oklahoma sales tax on inter- 
state travel is not externally consistent when applied to 
bus tickets bought in Oklahoma for travel to another state. 
Apportioning the tax in accordance with the miles 
travelled within the state does not present insurmountable 
administrative burdens, nor is it technologically unfeasible 
for any reason. See Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 264. Therefore, 
this tax fails the apportionment standard of Complete 
Auto. Because the tax is not fairly apportioned, it is un- 
necessary to examine any of the other Complete Auto 
factors to hold that the tax violates the Commerce Clause. 
Accordingly, the judgment of the District Court is 


Affirmed. 


[Clerk’s attestation omitted in printing.] 


