EN De TE Sy es een te. PTE eh OPE © ine aD ane Yo ENG Sv Zin 
n ie ¢ we * as i? by il Des a: Os; Vie Sr . £ ong ee Pie Sa = os 
reise Ko 


dl In the 
3 Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


STATE OF OKLAHOMA, EX REL. 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
Petitioner, 
US. 


4 JEFFERSON LINES, INC., 
4 Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


STANLEY P. JOHNSTON 
Deputy General Counsel 
(Counsel of Record) 
Cralc S. KEY 
Assistant General Counsel 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION 
a P.O. Box 53248 
a Oklahoma City, OK 73152 
a Telephone: (405) 521-3141 


Counsel for Petitioner 


PSS ae Meee 4 rer eee 
Ara. 3 OR OT ES CY BEE es ae A eee POPS eee Tape aL Sade 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the State of Oklahoma may constitutionally 
impose on the in-state purchaser, and require the in-state 
vendor to collect, a sales tax on the purchase of bus 
transportation sold within the State, measured by the full 
purchase price of the ticket, even though the ultimate 
destination or a portion of the route to be travelled extends 
beyond the State’s borders. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QGUBBIBON PRESENTED .... 2c ccc ccc ccc cece. i 
Dee. tke caniece 1 
EL SEE EEE PETE 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
UE EEO OED oo ccc ccc ccc cces 2 
ee TSE 4 
1. Nature of the Controversy .................. 4 
Ere 5 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ............... 7 
EE SSS PETE EEEEET 9 
Oklahoma’s Sales Tax on the In-State Purchase 
of Transportation By Bus, Measured By The Full 
Purchase Price of the Ticket, Is Completely Con- 
sonant With All Four Prongs Of The Complete 
Auto Test And Is Constitutionally Permissible, 
Regardless Of The Purchaser’s Ultimate Des- 


EEE EE EE i] 


A. The Activity Here Taxed Is The Sale Within The 
State By A Vendor Physically Present Therein, 
Which Satisfies The Nexus Requirement. ..... 10 


ili 


TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


Page 


B. The Oklahoma Sales Tax At Issue Is Both Inter- 
nally And Externally Consistent And Is, There- 
fore, Fairly Apportioned. .................. 11 


1. The Oklahoma sales tax is internally consis- 
tent because if each state identically taxed the 
sale of transportation, no multiple taxation 
CP uk bESGE Ske ce beeceREeeeies < 11 


2. The Oklahoma sales tax is externally consis- 
tent because the entire activity being taxed 
occurs in Oklahoma and the possibility of 
multiple taxation is nonexistent. ......... 12 


C. The Oklahoma Sales Tax Does Not Discriminate 
Against Interstate Commerce. .............. 20 


D. The Oklahoma Sales Tax Is Fairly Related To 
Services Provided By The State. ............ 21 


ET Go as oCatereecceueosbacnenxen 21 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Amerada Hess Corp. v. Director, Div. of 
Fe re es Ee I 0 8 cco cs sc cwdcccess 20 
Central Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Mealey, 
I re 6,12 


Colonial Pipeline Co. v. Traigle, 421 U.S. 100 (1975) . 16 


Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 


SE ee ee ee passim 
D. H. Holmes Co. Ltd. v. McNamara, 486 U.S. 24 

SP wo 6.6 bo 0k 6d CS wee ed a oh bes Cee 17,21 
Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 252 (1989) .... 11,17,18,21 
Itel Containers Int’l Corp. v. Huddleston, 

SOF UE _, BAB AG. BE CRD ccc cccces 19 
Koch Fuels v. State ex rel. Tax Comm’n, 

862 P.2d 471 (Okla. 1993) ............. 14,15,17,18 
Liberty Steel Co. v. Oklahoma Tax Commission, 

SG ee ES ETD bcc cb ceccceescees 11,13,15 
Liggett & Myers Tobacco Co. v. United States, 

I, ecko) he eas BEN Cw ee eb = aad 14 

v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
McGoldrick v. Berwind-White Coal Mining Co., 
I Ee ee ee ere eee passim 
National Bellas Hess, Inc. v. Department of 
Revenue of Ill., 386 U.S. 753 (1967) ............ 11 
National Geographic Society v. California Bd. of 
Equalization, 430 U.S. 551 (1977) .............. 11 


Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sisters of 
The Sorrowful Mother, 97 P.2d 888 (Okla. 1940) .. 13 


Quill Corp. v. North Dakota by and through 
Heitkamp, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992) 10,11 


State of Oklahoma ex rel. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission v. Jefferson Lines, Inc. (In re 


Jefferson Lines, Inc.), 15 F.3d 90 (8th Cir. 1994) .... 1 
State Tax Commission v. Pacific States Cast 

Iron Pipe Co., 372 U.S. 605 (1963) ............. 15 
Tyler Pipe Industries, Inc. v. Washington 

Dept. of Revenue, 483 U.S. 232 (1987) ........... 17 
Wardair Canada, Inc. v. Florida Dept. of Revenue, 

og) eb Ee ee ee ye ee ee ee 19 
Western Live Stock v. Bureau of Revenue, 

rr ee sake cee ee eee e oe i 9,14 

vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 

CONSTITUTION 
ee Os OO occ chee ccsewecvccesa 2,9 
STATUTES 
OKLA. STAT. tit. 68, § 1354(1) (Supp. 1988) ...... 2,3,4 
OKLA. STAT. tit. 68, § 1361 (Supp. 1988) .......... 3,4 
ES Te ah aan a Emre tS 5 
I, oe og hc eae aw ous heeds bo% ben 2 
OTHERS 
L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law, 446 

i. 264 cnneee a edb ash euessbbensess 15 


In the 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


No. 93-1677 


STATE OF OKLAHOMA, EX REL. 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
Petitioner, 
US. 


JEFFERSON LINES, INC., 
Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals is 
reported as State of Oklahoma ex rel. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission v. Jefferson Lines, Inc. (In re Jefferson Lines, 
Inc.), 15 F.3d 90 (8th Cir. 1994), and is reprinted in the 
Joint Appendix at J.A. 24. 


The Memorandum and Order of the United States 
District Court for the District of Minnesota, Third Divi- 
sion, has not been reported. It is reprinted in the Joint 
Appendix at J.A. 17. The Order of the United States 


2 


Bankruptcy Court for the District of Minnesota, Third 
Division, is not reported and is reprinted in the Joint 
Appendix at J.A. 7. 


JURISDICTION 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Eighth 
Circuit was entered on January 21, 1994. The petition for 
writ of certiorari was filed in this Court on April 21, 1994, 
and was granted on June 13, 1994. The jurisdiction of this 
Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


The Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, 
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3, provides: 


The Congress shall have Power... To regulate 
Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the 
several States, and with the Indian Tribes. .. . 


Pertinent sections of the Oklahoma Sales Tax statutes 
are as follows: 


OKLA. STAT. tit. 68, § 1354(1) (Supp. 1988): 


There is hereby levied upon all sales, not otherwise 
exempted in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, an excise 
tax of four percent (4%)' of the gross receipts or gross 
proceeds of each sale of the following: 


(A) Tangible personal property; 


** * * 


' The rate was changed to 4%% effective Feb. 1, 1990. 1989 
Okla. Sess. Laws, Ist Ex.Sess., ch.2, § 101. 


3 


(C) Transportation for hire to persons by common 
carriers, including railroads both steam and electric, 
motor transportation companies, taxicab companies, 
pullman car companies, airlines, and other means of 
transportation for hire; 


** * * 


OKLA. STAT. tit. 68, § 1361 (Supp. 1988): 


(A) The tax levied by this article shall be paid by the 
consumer or user to the vendor as trustee for and on 
account of this state. Each and every vendor in this 
state shall collect from the consumer or user the full 
amount of the tax levied by this article, or an amount 
equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the 
average equivalent thereof. Every person required to 
collect any tax imposed by this article, and in the case 
of a corporation, each principal officer thereof, shall be 
personally liable for said tax. 


(B) Vendors shall add the tax imposed by this article, 
or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price, 
charge, consideration, gross receipts or gross proceeds 
of the sale of tangible personal property or services 
taxed by this article, and when added such tax shall 
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a 
debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, 
and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as 
other debts. 


** * * 


4 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


1. Nature of the Controversy 


The Oklahoma Sales Tax Code imposes a tax, to be paid 
by the purchaser and collected by the vendor, upon the 
sale of tangible personal property and certain services, 
‘including transportation for hire by common carriers such 
as bus companies, where such sales occur within the State. 
The tax is added to the purchase price of the item or 
service purchased, and constitutes a debt from the con- 
sumer/user to the vendor until paid. The vendor becomes 
liable if the vendor fails to collect or remit the tax. OKLA. 
Strat. tit. 68, §§ 1354(1), 1361 (Supp. 1988). 


Jefferson Lines, Inc. (“Jefferson”) is a common carrier 
providing bus service in Oklahoma as well as other states, 
and sells tickets in Oklahoma from various locations across 
the state. J.A. 3-4. All of the sales here in question were 
made within the State. J.A. 5. Jefferson’s ticket sales can 
be classified into two categories. The first category 
consists of tickets sold in Oklahoma for transportation that 
both originates and terminates within the State of Ok- 
lahoma. The second category consists of tickets sold in 
Oklahoma for transportaticn originating in Oklahoma and 
terminating in some other state. Ibid. 


During the periods in question Jefferson, operating 
under an Oklahoma sales tax permit previously issued to 
M. K. & O. Coach Lines, Inc.,” collected and remitted 
Oklahoma sales tax only on ticket sales involving solely 
intrastate travel. On its Oklahoma sales tax reports, 
Jefferson reported all sales made in Oklahoma, but then 


2 Prior to the periods in question, M. K. & O. Coach Lines, 
Inc. was merged into Jefferson Lines, Inc., with Jefferson as the 
survivor. 


5 


deducted those sales where the ultimate destination was 
outside the State. J.A. 4. Taxes were not collected or 
remitted on those sales. The Oklahoma Tax Commission 
(“Commission”), conducting a routine office audit of 
Jefferson’s M. K. & O. sales tax reports for September and 
October, 1989, and January and February, 1990, dis- 
covered Jefferson was not collecting or remitting tax on 
sales made in Oklahoma where the bus routes involved 
travel outside the State. The Commission disallowed the 
sales deductions taken by Jefferson on its sales tax reports 
and determined the amount of sales tax due on the 
deducted sales to be $46,659.15. J.A. 4-5. 


2. The Proceedings Below 


Jefferson filed a petition for voluntary relief under 
Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the United States 
Bankruptcy Court for the District of Minnesota, Third 
Division, on October 27, 1989. On relation of the Tax 
Commission, the State of Oklahoma filed proofs of claim 
for priority taxes and administrative claims for the sales 
taxes that Jefferson, as vendor, was required to collect, but 
did not, on the bus tickets sold in Oklahoma. The bank- 
ruptcy court’s jurisdiction to hear and decide those claims 
is provided by 28 U.S.C., § 157. 


Jefferson objected to the Commission’s claims, arguing 
that the imposition of Oklahoma’s sales tax on bus tickets 
sold in Oklahoma violates the Commerce Clause of the 
United States Constitution, where the trip originates in 
Oklahoma and terminates in another state. J.A. 5-6. The 
bankruptcy court agreed, and sustained Jefferson’s objec- 
tion. J.A. 16. 


Analyzing Oklahoma’s tax on the sales in question 
under the four-prong test of Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. 
Brady, 430 U.S. 274 (1977), the bankruptcy court found 


6 


that Jefferson’s physical presence within the state, its 
conducting of sales there and its maintenance of facilities 
in Oklahoma both for sales purposes and for the other 
physical operations of its business, were sufficient both to 
satisfy the nexus requirement of Complete Auto and to 
show that the tax was fairly related to the services 
provided by the state. J.A. 11-12, 15-16. 


As to the apportionment prong of Complete Auto, the 
court concluded that, since only one state could tax the 
sale of bus tickets occurring within its borders, the tax was 
internally consistent. J.A. 12. However, relying on this 
Court’s decision in Central Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. 
Mealey, 334 U.S. 653 (1948) (a case involving a gross 
receipts tax on a bus company’s revenues from providing 
interstate transportation), the bankruptcy court concluded 
that the application of Oklahoma’s sales tax to the gross 
selling price of a bus ticket, without apportionment 
according to the in-state miles to be travelled, taxed more 
than the in-state component of an interstate activity and 
was therefore not externally consistent. J.A. 13-14. 
Having concluded that Oklahoma’s sales tax was therefore 
not “fairly apportioned,” the bankruptcy court then 
concluded that the tax necessarily discriminated against 
interstate commerce. J.A. 15. Accordingly, Jefferson’s 
objection to the Commission’s claim for uncollected and 
unremitted sales taxes was sustained. 


On appeal, the district court affirmed. J.A. 23. That 
court, examining only the apportionment prong of the 
Complete Auto test, agreed that Oklahoma’s sales tax was 
internally consistent but, also relying on Central Grey- 
hound, similarly concluded that by taxing the entire 
purchase price of an “interstate” ticket, Oklahoma “re- 
ceives revenues that exceed the amount reasonably 
attributable to the Oklahoma leg of the bus journey.” J.A. 


7 


20. For external consistency purposes, the district court 
opined that if another state levied a tax on Jefferson on 
the revenues it derived from the transportation of pas- 
sengers within that state—again citing Central Grey- 
hound—that tax would be passed on to the ticket purchaser 
by an increase in the price of the ticket, thus “effectively” 
taxing the ticket purchaser twice on the “same activity” 
that Oklahoma had taxed. J.A. 22. According to the 
court, the fact that Oklahoma levies a sales tax on the 
ticket purchaser, while the other state would levy its tax 
on the bus company, “makes no practical difference.” Ibid. 
The order of the bankruptcy court was thus affirmed. 


The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court, also 
relying, as had the courts below, on Central Greyhound 
Lines v. Mealey. Adopting the reasoning of the lower 
courts, the court of appeals further opined that there was 
no “significant” distinction between the gross receipts 
(income) tax on the bus company in Central Greyhound and 
the sales tax levied here on the ticket purchaser. J.A. 
28-29; 15 F.3d 92-93. Therefore, the court concluded, the 
lack of apportionment of Oklahoma’s sales tax on the 
purchase of a bus ticket in accordance with the miles 
subsequently to be travelled in Oklahoma was as fatal for 
external consistency purposes as was the unapportioned-by- 
mileage gross income tax on the bus company in Central 
Greyhound. Consequently, the opinion and judgment of 
the district court was affirmed. Jbid. 


Certiorari to review the decision of the Eighth Circuit 
Court of Appeals was granted on June 13, 1994. 


SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 


The State of Oklahoma imposes a tax, levied upon the 
consumer and collected by the vendor, upon the sale of 


8 


tangible personal property and certain services, including 
transportation for hire by bus. The tax is imposed upon 
the sale itself, not upon the thing purchased nor upon 
anyone’s occupation or income; and it is imposed only 
when the sale occurs within the State. The taxable event 
is complete when the sale is made—in this case, when the 
bus ticket is bought and paid for. 


The courts below erroneously concluded that when the 
bus transportation purchased included travel outside the 
State of Oklahoma, the State’s sales tax, measured by the 
full purchase price of the ticket, violated the Commerce 
Clause. The courts’ error stems from a misunderstanding 
and mischaracterization of the taxable transaction at 
issue—the sale. This mischaracterization led the courts 
below to shift their focus and constitutional analysis away 
from the activity actually being taxed, the sale of transpor- 
tation, to the transportation itself. 


Contrary to the opinions below, the State’s sales tax is 
not upon the purchaser’s ultimate use or enjoyment of the 
thing purchased, nor upon the vendor’s income or receipts 
for the providing of it. In arriving at a contrary con- 
clusion, the courts below misconstrued the state statutes 
themselves, and ignored the Oklahoma Supreme Court’s 
construction thereof. 


In reaching their conclusions, the courts below relied 
upon a 1948 decision that is totally inapposite to the case 
at bar—both as to the type of tax involved and the nature 
of the activity taxed—and completely disregarded the 
applicable decisions of this Court which have upheld the 
states’ power to tax a discrete transaction which occurs 
solely within the state’s borders. 


When seen for what it truly is, Oklahoma’s tax here is 
a “garden-variety” sales tax imposed upon the in-state 


9 


purchaser as a result of a discrete, unijurisdictional event 
which no other state can tax. The tax clearly does not 
discriminate against interstate commerce, nor can it 
subject the purchaser to multiple taxation, and is legally 
indistinguishable from similar sales taxes previously 
upheld by this Court. The decisions below should be 
reversed. 


ARGUMENT 


OKLAHOMA'S SALES TAX ON THE IN-STATE 
PURCHASE OF TRANSPORTATION BY BUS, 
MEASURED BY THE FULL PURCHASE PRICE 
OF THE TICKET, IS COMPLETELY CON- 
SONANT WITH ALL FOUR PRONGS OF THE 
COMPLETE AUTO TEST AND IS CONSTI- 
TUTIONALLY PERMISSIBLE, REGARDLESS 
OF THE PURCHASER’S ULTIMATE DESTI- 
NATION. 


The United States Constitution provides that “Congress 
shall have Power .. . To regulate Commerce with foreign 
Nations, and among the several States, and with the 
Indian Tribes. .. .” U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3. But, in 
imposing taxes for state purposes, a state is not exercising 
any power which the Constitution has conferred upon 
Congress. It is only when the tax operates to regulate 
commerce between the states to an extent which infringes 
the authority conferred upon Congress that the tax can be 
said to exceed constitutional limitations. McGoldrick v. 
Berwind-White Coal Mining Co., 309 U.S. 33, 45 (1940). 


It is well settled that the purpose of the Commerce 
Clause is not to relieve those engaged in interstate com- 
merce from their just share of state tax burdens. Western 
Live Stock v. Bureau of Revenue, 303 U.S. 250, 254 (1940). 


10 


An incidental increase in the cost of doing business as a 
result of the tax is not sufficient cause to find the tax 
infringes on the Commerce Clause. Jd. Where the tax is 
imposed only on a local activity, and does not aim at or 
discriminate against interstate commerce, the fact that 
interstate commerce may occur in connection with or 
because of the taxed event does not render the tax un- 
constitutional. McGoldrick, 309 U.S. at 48-50. 


In Complete Auto Transit Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274 
(1977), this Court set forth the test for determining 
whether a state tax improperly impedes Congress’ author- 
ity to regulate commerce between the states. Under the 
four-prong test of Complete Auto, a state tax is consti- 
tutional if the tax: (1) is applied to an activity with a 
substantial nexus with the taxing state; (2) is fairly appor- 
tioned; (3) does not discriminate against interstate com- 
merce; and (4) is fairly related to the services provided by 
the State. Id., at 279. Oklahoma’s tax on the in-state sale 
of transportation for hire passes all four prongs of the 
Complete Auto test, is compatible with McGoldrick and 
succeeding cases relating to sales taxes, and is not an 
improper infringement upon the Commerce Clause. 


A. The Activity Here Taxed Is The Sale Within The 
State By A Vendor Physically Present Therein, 
Which Satisfies The Nexus Requirement. 


The bankruptcy court correctly determined that the 
nexus requirement of Complete Auto was met. This Court 
has established a clear test in sales and use tax cases for 
determining substantial nexus for Commerce Clause 
purposes. If the taxable sale occurs within the taxing state 
by a vendor who is physically present therein, the substan- 
tial nexus requirement is satisfied. Quill Corp. v. North 


a 


11 


Dakota by and through Heitkamp, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 
L.Ed.2d 91 (1992); see also, National Bellas Hess, Inc. v. De- 
partment of Revenue of Ill., 386 U.S. 753, 87 S.Ct. 1389, 18 
L.Ed. 2d 505 (1967); National Geographic Society uv. 
California Bd. of Equalization, 430 U.S. 551, 97 S.Ct. 1386, 
51 L.Ed.2d 631 (1977). Here, this test is clearly satisfied, 
it being stipulated that Jefferson is physically present and 
operating within Oklahoma and that all of the taxes 
involved here are upon sales made by Jefferson within the 
State. 


B. The Oklahoma Sales Tax At Issue Is Both Inter- 
nally And Externally Consistent And Is, There- 
fore, Fairly Apportioned. 


The central purpose behind the apportionment require- 
ment is to ensure that each State taxes only its fair share 
of an interstate transaction. Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 
252, 260-61 (1989). To determine whether a tax is fairly 
apportioned, it must be examined for internal and externai 
consistency. Id., at 261. Oklahoma’s sales tax satisfies 
both of these requirements. 


l. The Oklahoma sales tax is internally consistent 
because if each state identically taxed the sale of 
transportation, no multiple taxation could occur. 

Internal consistency requires a tax be structured so that 
if every state levied an identical tax, no multiple taxation 
would result. Goldberg, at 261. Oklahoma’s sales tax is 
levied on the consumer at the time a sale of transportation 
for hire occurs. The tax is imposed only on sales occurring 
within the state. Liberty Steel Co. v. Oklahoma Tax 

Commission, 554 P.2d 8 (Okla. 1976). 


As the bankruptcy court, the district court and the court 
of appeals all correctly determined, since a bus ticket can 
be sold in only one state, even if every state were to tax 


12 


the sale of bus tickets within its borders, no purchaser 
would be taxed more than once. Thus, as each of those 
courts properly held, Oklahoma’s sales tax is internally 
consistent. 


2. The Oklahoma sales tax is externally consistent 
because the entire activity being taxed occurs in 
Oklahoma and the possibility of multiple taxa- 
tion is nonexistent. 

The lower courts held that Oklahoma’s sales tax failed 
the external consistency requirement of the apportionment 
prong of Complete Auto because the tax is not apportioned 
according to the miles to be travelled in Oklahoma. In 
doing so, each of the lower courts relied upon Central 
Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Mealey, 334 U.S. 653 (1948). That 
reliance was misplaced. 


Central Greyhound is totally inapposite to this case, and 
was wrongly relied upon by the courts below. That case 
involved an income tax on the bus company’s gross 
proceeds or total revenues, while the case at bar involves 
a sales tax on the consumer, measured by the amount of 
the purchase. Central Greyhound conducted bus routes 
that ran primarily in New York but crossed into New 
Jersey and Pennsylvania for a short period. New York 
imposed an income tax on the bus company. The amount 
of tax due was based on the bus company’s gross receipts 
or total income earned. This Court stated the tax was 
improper because part of the bus company’s income was 
generated by bus routes occurring outside New York. In 
essence, New York was attempting to collect income tax on 
income generated outside the state. This case, however, 
involves a sales tax on the consumer—not an income tax 
on the bus company. Jefferson’s revenues, whether gen- 
erated in Oklahoma or otherwise, are not involved in this 
case, nor are they here sought to be taxed. Oklahoma 


13 


requires only that Jefferson collect a sales tax from its Ok- 


lahoma consumer. Jefferson became liable only because it 
failed to do so. 


Central Greyhound provides no guidance for this case. 
The lower courts’ reliance on that case stems from a 
misunderstanding and mischaracterization of the nature of 
the taxes in question and the activity being taxed. In 
Central Greyhound the tax was levied on the service 
provider’s income, and the taxed activity was the produc- 
tion of that income. However, notwithstanding the court 
of appeals’ refusal below to accept the well-recognized 
distinction between the sale of a thing and the thing itself, 
Oklahoma’s sales tax is neither a tax on property (the 
thing purchased) nor a tax on income. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission v. Sisters of The Sorrowful Mother, 97 P.2d 
888, 892 (Okla. 1940). The taxable event is the sale itself. 
Liberty Steel, supra, 554 P.2d at 10. Unlike the gross 
income tax in Central Greyhound, levied on the company’s 
revenues from activities conducted in other states, Ok- 
lahoma’s sales tax is levied on the consumer, and is 
imposed solely with respect to that consumer’s activity 
within the State. Id. 


Nor, contrary to the district court’s suggestion, is there 
any real potential for multiple taxation. That court 
assumed the possibility of double taxation existed because, 
while Oklahoma taxes the consumer at the point of sale, 
other states could impose an income tax on Jefferson’s 
revenues from transporting its passengers through those 
states. Thus, according to the district court, if Jefferson 
passed those taxes on to its customers by increasing the 
price of its ticket, the purchaser would “effectively” be 
taxed twice for the trip. The flaw is this reasoning is 
obvious: First, in order for multiple taxation to occur, the 
incidence of both taxes must fall on the same taxpayer. 


14 


However, it is well established that a tax directly upon a 
supplier or vendor, even though the burden of the tax is 
indirectly passed on to the consumer by including its cost 
in the purchase price, does not amount to an imposition of 
the tax on the purchaser. See, eg., Liggett & Myers 
Tobacco Co. v. United States, 299 U.S. 383, 386 (1937). 
Further, taken to its logical conclusion, the district court’s 
holding would result in a scenario wherein if any state 
imposes an income tax on a company engaged in interstate 
transactions, no additional tax of any type could be 
imposed by any other state upon anyone dealing with that 
business. Such is clearly not the law. This Court has 
consistently held that interstate commerce may be made 
to pay its fair share even if it increases the cost of doing 
business. Western Live Stock, supra. In addition, it is the 
consumer here that is being taxed, and that consumer is 
not subject to multiple taxation. Even the district court 
acknowledged that no other state has sufficient nexus to 
tax the consumer. J.A. 22. 


The opinions below conflict with the applicable decisions 
of the Oklahoma Supreme Court and of this Court, which 
have upheld the states’ power to tax a discrete transaction 
which occurs solely within the State’s borders. For 
example, in Koch Fuels v. State ex rel. Tax Comm’n, 862 
P.2d 471 (Okla. 1993), the Oklahoma Supreme Court 
analyzed Oklahoma’s sales tax under the Complete Auto 
test in the face of a Commerce Clause challenge raising 
many the same arguments as made here, and, insofar as 
pertinent hereto,’ found those statutes constitutional. The 


* The Oklahoma court did find that a statutory exemption 
from sales tax on goods manufactured in Oklahoma and 
transported to another state discriminated against interstate 
commerce, and vacated the tax assessment for that reason, in 

(continued...) 


15 


well-reasoned opinion of the Oklahoma Court studiously 
follows, and is completely consistent with, the applicable 
pronouncements of this Court. Koch Fuel involved the sale 
of fuel oil, with the contract between the parties desig- 
nating Tulsa, Oklahoma as the point of delivery of the 
fuel. The fuel was actually delivered outside the State of 
Oklahoma at various points along an interstate pipeline. 
The Oklahoma Court reasoned that because a sale is an 
insular and discrete transaction that can occur only in one 
place, the sale is taxable only by the state in which it 
occurs. Further, the court said: 


The sales tax here does not arise because oil is being 
transported through [or outside] the state, but because 
Koch sold oil to Burlington Northern in Okla- 
homa. * * * “ The fact that a product has travelled or 
will travel in interstate commerce does not preclude a 
tax being levied at the time of its sale.” L. Tribe, 
American Constitutional Law, 446 (2d ed. 1988). See 
State Tax Conimission v. Pacific States Cast Iron Pipe 
Co., {372 U.S. 605 (1963)], and our opinion in Liberty 
Steel Company v. Oklahoma Tax Commission, 554 P.2d 
8, 10-11 (Okla. 1976). * * * The fact that Burlington 
Northern [the purchaser] consumed the oil outside of 
Oklahoma does not immunize from taxation Koch’s 
sale to Burlington Northern within this State. 


Id., 862 P.2d at 478. 


*%...continued) 
that case only. That element is not present in the case before 
this Court. Further, having struck down that particular 
exemption, the court ruled that, thereafter, there was and would 
be no constitutional impediment to imposition of the tax in the 
same type of case. 862 P.2d at 481. 


16 


Likewise, this Court has traditionally viewed local sales 
taxes favorably in the face of Commerce Clause challenges. 
In McGoldrick v. Berwind-White Coal Mining Co., 309 U.S. 
33 (1940), the tax at issue was a New York City sales tax 
imposed on the sale of goods. New York City levied a tax 
on the consumer that was collected by the retailer at the 
time of the sale. In McGoldrick, a Pennsylvania cor- 
poration maintaining a sales office in New York entered 
into a contract with a New York buyer for the sale of coal. 
The coal was mined in Pennsylvania and shipped to New 
York through channels of interstate commerce. The coal 
was not shipped until the parties entered into the sales 
contract. The seller challenged the New York City sales 
tax, alleging it infringed upon the Commerce Clause due 
to the fact the goods were shipped through interstate 
commerce following the sale. This Court held the New 
York City sales tax valid because the practical effect of the 
tax did not subject interstate commerce to a greater 
burden, or to the danger of a greater burden, than would 
result if no interstate commerce were involved. /d., at 54, 
57-58. 


The economic effect of Oklahoma’s sales tax is identical 
to the economic effect of the New York City sales tax in 
McGoldrick. Regardless of the subsequent interstate bus 
route, it is the sale of transportation which creates the 
taxable transaction. The sale of transportation occurs 
solely in Oklahoma. This Court has stated that the 
taxable transaction determines if a state tax improperly 
infringes the Commerce Clause. Colonial Pipeline Co. v. 
Traigle, 421 U.S. 100. Oklahoma’s sales tax is levied on 
the sale of transportation and not on the interstate bus 
route; for that reason, it passes external consistency. 


In Goldberg the State of Illinois imposed a 5% tax on 
intrastate telecommunications and also on interstate 


17 


telecommunications originating or terminating in the state 
and charged to an Illinois service address, regardless of 
where the telephone call was billed or paid. 


In upholding the Illinois tax under the four-prong test of 
Complete Auto, the Court held that the tax was internally 
consistent for apportionment purposes, because “if every 
State taxed only those interstate phone calls which are 
charged to an in-state service address, only one state would 
tax each interstate call.” Jd., 488 U.S. at 261. Here, the 
same holds true. If every state levied a tax on the sale of 
bus tickets within the state, only one state could tax each 
sale. See, also, Koch Fuels, 862 P.2d at 479. 


As to external consistency, the Court likewise upheld the 
tax, rejecting the argument that a tax on the gross charge 
was not fairly apportioned and could likely result in 
multiple taxation, saying: 


The Director argues that, because the Tax Act has 
the same economic effect as a sales tax, it can be based 
on the gross charge of the telephone call. See, eg., 
McGoldrick v. Berwind-White Coal Mining Co., 309 
U.S. 33, 58 (1940) (sales tax); cf. D. H. Holmes Co. v. 
McNamara, 486 U.S. 24, 31-32 (1988) (use tax); Tyler 
Pipe Industries, Inc. v. Washington Dept. of Revenue, 
483 U.S. 232, 251 (1987) (gross receipts). 


We believe that the Director has the better of this 
argument. The tax at issue has many of the character- 
istics of a sales tax. It is assessed on the individual 
consumer, collected by the retailer, and accompanies 
the retail purchase of an interstate telephone call. 
Even though such a retail purchase is not a purely 
local event since it triggers simultaneous activity in 
several States, cf. McGoldrick, supra, at 58, the Tax 


18 


Act reasonably reflects the way that consumers 
purchase interstate telephone calls. 


Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 262. [Emphasis added.] 


Because of the structure of the Illinois tax statute, which 
levied the tax without regard to where a call is billed or 
paid, the Court reasoned that two states—but only 
two—could tax the same call: the state in which the 
customer’s service address is located and the state where 
the call is billed or paid. The Court then held that “[tJhis 
limited possibility of multiple taxation, however, is not 
sufficient to invalidate the Illinois statutory scheme.” /d., 
at 263-64. The Court in Goldberg did observe that to the 
extent that some other state might tax the same call, 
Illinois’ credit provision operated to avoid multiple 
taxation. Jd., at 264, 109 S.Ct. at 590. However, nowhere 
in Goldberg did the Court say that only a taxing scheme 
that provided for such credits could survive the test of 
constitutionality. It is axiomatic that where there is no 
possibility of multiple taxation, there is no need for credit 
provisions. See, Koch Fuels, 862 P.2d at 478-479. 


The tax at issue here does not merely have “many of the 
characteristics of a sales tax,” it is a sales tax. It is applied 
to a retail purchase that is a purely local event. Differing 
from—and more localized than—the telephone calls in 
Goldberg, the purchase of a bus ticket in Oklahoma does 
not trigger simultaneous activity in several states, or even 
in one other state. Here the sale is complete, and taxable, 
before any transportation of any kind occurs—or even if no 
transportation occurs at all. Travel is not the taxed 
activity. A bus ticket need not be used for its sale to be 
taxable. 


In like vein, this Court has approved, for Commerce 
Clause purposes, state sales taxes on sales of goods 


ae - 


19 


subsequently used solely in interstate or foreign commerce. 
In Wardair Canada, Inc. v. Florida Dept. of Revenue, 477 
U.S. 1 (1986), Florida imposed a state sales tax on all 
aviation fuel sold within the state. The jet fuel was used 
in intrastate, interstate and foreign transportation. There, 
the Court accepted that the sale of fuel was a discrete 
transaction that could occur in only one location, that no 
threat of multiple taxation could exist, and that the tax 
did not contravene the Commerce Clause. /d., at 8-9. 


In Itel Containers International Corporation v. 
Huddleston, 507 U.S. , 113 S.Ct. 1095 (1993), 
Tennessee levied a sales tax on the lease in Tennessee of 
cargo containers which were used solely in foreign 
commerce. The Court upheld the Tennessee Supreme 
Court’s finding that the state sales tax clearly met the 
Complete Auto four-prong test. 113 S.Ct. at 1104. The 
Court found the Tennessee sales tax to be “a fair measure 
of the state’s contacts with a given commercial transaction 
in all four aspects of the Complete Auto test.” Ibid. 
Justice Scalia, in his concurring opinion, stated the 
Tennessee tax to be “nothing more than a garden-variety 
sales tax that clearly does not discriminate against foreign 
[or interstate] commerce.” /d., at 1107 (Scalia, J., 
concurring). 


The Oklahoma sales tax is a “garden-variety” sales tax: 
It is assessed on the individual consumer, collected by the 
retailer, accompanies the retail purchase of a bus ticket, 
and reasonably reflects the way that consumers purchase 
bus tickets—in a single, discrete event—all as recognized 
and upheld in McGoldrick, Goldberg, Itel Containers, 
Wardair and Koch Fuels. The tax reasonably reflects the 
in-state component of the activity being taxed, and offers 
no threat of multiple taxation. The lower courts’ finding 
to the contrary, based upon a mischaracterization of the 


20 


tax as one on interstate transportation or use after the sale, 
is contrary to the applicable decisions of this Court, and 
should be reversed. 


C. The Oklahoma Sales Tax Does Not Discriminate 
Against Interstate Commerce. 


A tax may be impermissible under the Commerce Clause 
if it is “facially discriminatory, has a discriminatory intent 
or has the effect of unduly burdening interstate com- 
merce.” Amerada Hess Corp. v. Director, Div. of Taxation, 
490 U.S. 66, 75-79 (1989). 


The only court below to address the third prong of 
Complete auto, the bankruptcy court, correctly found that 
Oklahoma’s sales tax is not facially discriminatory, nor 
was it enacted with any discriminatory intent. It is levied 
and applied equally at the same rate to all sales of 
transportation for hire by all common carriers. There is 
neither the intent nor the effect of conferring a benefit 
upon local industry or local residents at the expense of 
interstate commerce or nonresidents. 


Nevertheless, the bankruptcy court found the tax 
discriminatory because, in the court’s words, “in failing 
the apportionment part of the Complete Auto Transit test, 
the Oklahoma tax discriminates against interstate 
commerce.” J.A. 15. That, however, is not the test. 
Rather, the inquiry is whether the practical effect of the 
tax is to subject interstate commerce to a greater burden 
than would result if no interstate commerce were involved. 
McGoldrick, 309 U.S. at 54, 57-58. As the purely local 
sales tax in McGoldrick did not do so, neither does it here. 
Discrimination here would occur only if bus tickets 
involving solely intrastate travel were exempted from the 
tax or taxed at a lower rate, and such is not the case. 


21 


D. The Oklahoma Sales Tax Is Fairly Related To 
Services Provided By The State. 


The fourth part of the Complete Auto test requires that 
the tax be fairly related to the presence and activities of 
the taxpayer within the State. Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 266. 
This part “focuses on the wide range of benefits provided 
to the taxpayer, not just the precise activity connected to 
the interstate activity at issue.” Jd. at 267. In D. H. 
Holmes Co. v. McNamara, 486 U.S. 24, 32 (1988), the 
Court noted that a taxpayer’s receipt of police and fire 
protection, the use of public roads and mass transit, and 
the other advantages of civilized society satisfied the 
requirement that the tax be fairly related to benefits 
provided by the State to the taxpayer. In this case, both 
Jefferson and its customers, the true taxpayers, receive 
police and fire protection, along with other public services, 
at the locations where Jefferson sells tickets and loads its 
buses. Jefferson and its customers also receive benefit 
from police protection and public road maintenance on 
Jefferson’s Oklahoma routes. As the bankruptcy court 
correctly found, the Oklahoma tax is fairly related to the 
services provided by Oklahoma. 


CONCLUSION 


The Oklahoma sales tax at issue, which taxes a single 
discrete transaction within the State, is directly related to 
Jefferson and its taxed customers’ activities within the 
State; it is fairly apportioned; it does not discriminate 
against interstate commerce; and it is fairly related to 
services provided by Oklahoma. The Oklahoma tax thus 
satisfies all four parts of the Complete Auto test and is 
constitutionally permissible. 


22 


The decision below should be reversed, and this cause 
should be remanded with instructions to allow and direct 
the payment of Oklahoma’s claims for unpaid sales taxes. 


Respectfully submitted, 


STANLEY P. JOHNSTON 

Deputy General Counsel 

(Counsel of Record) 

CRAIG S. KEY 

Assistant General Counsel 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION 
P.O. Box 53248 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152-3248 
(405) 521-3141 


Counsel for Petitioner 


