BEST AVAILABLE COPY — 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
A. Background 


am mon 


The Proceedings Below 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


ARGUMENT 


THE DISTRICT’S DRUG-TESTING PRO- 
GRAM VIOLATES THE FOURTH AMEND- 
AMENDMENT 


A. The Fourth Amendment Applies To School 
Searches 


B. Drug Testing Is A "Search" 
Standards For Drug Tests 


D. The District’s Drug-Testing Program Is 
Unreasonable 


O 


1. The District’s Program Is A Substan- 
tial Invasion Of Privacy 


i. Y.-S i we on & me we fe i Gr 
_ a an ne ee eS. ee ee 42 66 8 6 6a 6 6 & & 


Drugs In The Sports Program .......... 
The Drug-Testing Program ........... 
Effect Of Drug Testing .............. 
The Drug Test Applied To James ....... 


fe ee he ss mw a - - a 
,e £2 @C_6@6 2424.68 € 2 & BO 2 e 


7 CP 4264.9 6 8 2.86 8 2 6 @ 6 eo 2.6 * Ss & 


~o © 2. 8 ea 2 2 8 2 @ 
i eS oe ee ee a oe oe ef re oe a ae 


CONCLUSION 


Page 
The District’s Interest In Drug Testing 
Is Not Compelling ................ 39 
The Students’ Interest In Privacy Out- 
weighs The District’s Interest In Test- 
Me ah 064K 65 Vo bs baked eck d 49 
ee ee ee ee ee ee ig! 50 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 

Cases 
Brooks v. East Chambers Consol. 
Independent School District, 

730 F.Supp. 759 (S.D.Tex. 1989), 

aff'd without published op., 

Es 6 oo win n 6 0000s eee 0 44 
Chambers v. Maroney, 

I Gs 6 pos avec eves ekéneeset beens 19 
Delaware v. Prouse, 

EE cc nccccceseepececceces 13, 47 
Doe v. Renfrow, 

i ss cn desde ee sei Weeeeen’ 18 
Dunaway v. New York, 

re on is bags bene ene eee es haee 19 
Frank v. Maryland, 
ee 20 
Goss v. Lopez, 

ee Fn ach oe eek bk ee ws 18 
Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc., 
ee re oo ke ok 6 kk Oe 20 
Michigan Dep't of State Police v. Sitz, 

nS roa nies 6 6b eee de kee ees 47 


National Treasury Employees Union 
v. Von Raab, 
Ce ee passim 


New Jersey v. T.L.O., 
4 SL ee 16, 17, 18, 32, 33 


Olmstead v. United States, 
277 U.S. 438 (1928) 


Schaill v. Tippecanoe County 
School Corp., 


679 F.Supp. 833 (N.D.Ind. SEGA b 66x. 29, 30 


Skinner y. Railway Labor 
Executives’ Ass ‘n, 
489 U.S. 602 (1989) 


Stanford v. Texas, 
379 U.S. 476 (1965) 


State ex rel. Juvenile Dep ’ ] 
Pp tv. DuBo 
821 P.2d 1124 (Or.App. 1991) 


State v. Ti ourtillott, 
618 P.2d 423 (Or. 1980), 
cert. denied, 451 U.S. 972 (1981) 


Sterling v. Cupp, 


44 607 P.2d 206 (Or.App. 1980), 
aff'd as modified, 
625 P.2d 123 (Or. 1981) 


Terry v. Ohio, 
392 U.S. 1 (1968) 


Tinker v. Des Moines Indep. 
Community School Dist., 
393 U.S. 503 (1969) 


United States y. Chadwick, 
433 US. 1] (1977) 


United States v. Martinez-Fuerte 
428 U.S. $43 (1975) : 


University of Colorado v. Derdyn, 
863 P.2d 929 (Colo. 1993), 


cert. denied, _ U.S. __ (1994) ........ 


West Virginia State Board of 
Education v. Barnette, 


319 U.S. G24 (1943)... cece cee eees 


Constitutional Provisions and Statutes 


United States Constitution, 


pO A 


Oregon Constitution, 


GR ah eek s ceive eesveces 
Asticie Th, SAIMa) .. we eee eces 


20 U.S.C. §123h(b)(3).......---0--- 
20 U.S.C. §3192(d) ........0 0c eee. 
Or. Rev. Stat. §10.030(2)(c) .......... 


Other Authorities 
Eric Blair a.k.a. George Orwell, 


1984 (New American Library 1981) .... 


K. Zeese, 
DRUG TESTING LEGAL MANUAL 


(rel. #2, Nov. 1994) ........0.000. 


Perey 19 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


James Acton is a student in the Vernonia School Dis- 
trict ("the District") in northwest Oregon. He doesn’t use il- 
licit drugs, and the District has no reason to suspect he does. 
And yet it will not let James participate in school sports 
unless he consents to produce urine on demand to be tested 
for evidence of illicit drug use. The issue is whether this 
drug-testing requirement violates James’s rights under the 
state and federal constitutions to be free from unreasonable 
searches. 


A. Background 


The District operates four schools, including Wash- 
ington Grade School, in Vernonia, Oregon, a small, logging 
community in the Coast Range an hour west of Portland. 
(R. 18; Pl. Ex. 5 at 6). About 700 students attend these 
schools, and most of them participate in at least one of the 
seven interscholastic sports the District offers for grades 
seven and up: football, basketball, cross country, track, vol- 
leyball, wrestling, and golf. (Pl. Ex. 5 at 7; J.A. 20, 37). 
In the late 1980s, the school board concluded that it had a 
drug "problem" within the student body generally and the 
sports program particularly. The board’s first reaction was 
to try to persuade students through lectures and assemblies 
that drugs can be harmful. (J.A. 25-26). But, impatient for 
immediate results, it soon switched from persuasion to coer- 
cion. First, it brought in a drug-sniffing dog -- but only for 
one day -- to search student lockers. (R. 25, 34-35). Then, 
in the fall of 1989, it adopted a mandatory drug-testing pro- 
gram for any student who wishes to participate in school 
sports. The purpose of the program is to protect the "health 
and safety" of athletes, according to the District’s "policy 
state:nent," as well as the officials who designed the pro- 
gram and enforce it. (J.A. 7, 27-28, 61; Pl. Ex. 5 at 16). 


B. The Drug "Problem" 


It is important to carefully describe Vernonia’s drug 
"problem," because the District persistently overstates it. 
For example, in its petition for a writ of certiorari, the 
District told this Court that an "epidemic" of drug use 
within the student body "invaded" the Sports program 
"endangering the very center of activity of the school and 
the community," and leaving the school board with no 
alternative to drug testing but "mass expulsion" of students. 
Pet. at 3, 7 and 10-11. The District tones down the rhetoric 
in its brief on the merits, but nevertheless tries to paint the 
same picture. E.g., Pet. Br. at 28 (referring to a "crisis in 
the classroom and the sports program"). In fact, there is 
little evidence of Vernonia students using drugs, and no 
evidence of any athlete in Vernonia ever competing while 
on drugs, let alone causing or Sustaining injury. 


The evidence consists almost entirely of complaints by 
a few teachers and administrators about a perceived decline 
in student deportment in the mid- to late-1980s. Students 
generally seemed to be less well-mannered than anyone re- 
membered. Some of them refused to pay attention in class 
said rude, obscene, and disrespectful things, laughed aloud 
at serious moments, and generally acted like juveniles -- at 
least, It appeared to some teachers that more students were 
behaving this way than ever before. (J.A. 21-22, 39-40, 47- 
48, 60-61, 66-67). School officials were particularly dis- 
turbed by a group of students who called themselves "the 
Big Elks." It is unclear how many students were at the 
core" of this group -- one teacher said four to six (R. 81) 
which is less then one percent of the student body; another 
Said ten. (J.A. 60). In any event, the Big Elks went around 


2 


Tee te ee 
7 
si 
P 
. 


havior. (J.A. 48). There is no evidence, however, that any 
"Elk" or "Cartellian" ever actually used drugs or that drugs 
were the reason why they behaved as they did. (J.A. 52). 


The perceived decline in student behavior coincided 
with an increase in the number of students referred by 
teachers to administrators for discipline -- known locally as 
“disciplinary referrals." (R. 44, 69). For want of some 
other explanation for the downturn in student deportment, 
the teachers concluded that drug use was on the rise within 
the student body, contrary to national and statewide trends. 
(J.A. 77). This assumption was supported, at least in the 
teachers’ minds, by unconfirmed, second-hand reports of 
off-campus drug use, almost all of it hearsay or hearsay 
within hearsay,' received over the Actons’ continuing ob- 
jections,’ and by reports of students romanticizing drugs in 


' For example, Randy Aultman, a principal, testified: "Four football 
players talked to the football coach and admitted that they have used 
drugs, and amphetamines were those drugs, and the coach told mef[.] 
[T}he kids never came forward and said, you know, they did ... .” 
(J.A. 23). In other words, four students told the football coach that they 
had used amphetamines. The coach told Mr. Aultman what he had 
heard, and he repeated it at trial as if it were fact. Later, Mr. Aultman 
admitted that he had never actually seen or caught a student taking drugs 
and that he was acting on second-hand reports. (J.A. 36). 


Ron Svenson, a coach and teacher, testified: “When I was an assistant 
coach the head football coach was called in and I believe it was in the 
football season of ’85 and apprised of the fact that parents called and 
said that some of their sons -- that other kids on the team had done 
drugs on a road trip... ." (J.A. 53). In other words, the football 
coach told Mr. Svenson that some parents told the football coach that 
some students told the parents that some other students had taken drugs 
during a road trip. 


* As the District notes, Pet. Br. at 4, n.3, the trial court granted the 
Actons a continuing objection, on hearsay grounds, to these second- and 
third-hand reports of students using drugs. (J.A. 22-23; R. 107, 109-10). 

(continued...) 


observed any student taking drugs.‘ 


The District’s assumption that every unruly student j 
unruly because of drugs is, on its face, ieteus ant on - 
record, unsubstantiated. As noted above, there is evidence 
that more students were misbehaving than before, but no 
evidence that any, let alone many or most, of those students 
were acting up because of drugs. Likewise, there is evi- 
dence that disciplinary referrals were up, but no evidence 


? (...continued) 


The court said it would not receive this evi 
. idence for the 
proving that students actually were using drugs, because et wuts . 


cordingly, this evidence cannot support a findin in 
: t st g that there was in fact a 
drug problem in the school district, merely that school Officials thought 


there was. The District’s brief repeatedly i a Senter 
use of its evidence. Eg, Pet. Br. at 6 Y ignores this limitation on the 


’ A teacher who taught compositi 
position to 90 or so students each fe 
13 years testified that 8 or 9 of them -— which wats ont to tes Gon 


, from that distance, that they did not instead contain tobacco. Nor 


that any of those referrals involved drugs. Students who 
misbehaved in class were "referred" whether or not drugs 
were suspected as the reason for their misbehavior. (R. 83). 
Therefore, the District is not justified in contending, based 
on referral numbers alone, that the downturn in student de- 
portment was completely, or even partly, drug-driven.° 


The Actons do not contend that Vernonia has managed, 
through geographic isolation, to escape drug infiltration en- 
tirely, or that no students in Vernonia were using drugs be- 
fore the District adopted its drug-testing program. Nor do 
they contend that even so much as one student on drugs 
would not be a "problem" and reason for concern. Their 
point is simply that it is misleading for the District to assert 
that drug use in Vernonia schools had reached "epidemic" 
proportions, or anything like it, and that "administrators and 
teachers foresaw the need for mass expulsions." Pet. Br. at 
29. On this record, the most that can be said is that 
"some" students appeared to be taking drugs, which is exact- 
ly what the court of appeals concluded when it reviewed the 
evidence. In a finding not challenged by the District, the 
court of appeals said: "[W]e reemphasize that what the evi- 
dence shows, and all it shows, is that there was some drug 
usage in the schools ...." 23 F.3d at 1519 (Pet. App. 
20a)(emphasis added). This is as far as the court of appeals 


* From the early to late 1980s, disciplinary referrals went from 40 or 50 
per year to double that. (J.A. 21). But, of course, one student could 
have multiple referrals, so the absolute number of referrals is not very 
helpful in determining the number of misbehaving students. 


* One witness testified that "massive expulsion" or "some tremendous al- 
ternative,” meaning, apparently, drug testing, were the only two solu- 
tions to the school’s disciplinary problems. (J.A 26-27). But this is 
clearly hyperbole. There is no evidence that any student was expelled 
for using drugs or that the school board even considered expelling a stu- 
dent for that reason, let alone masses of them. 


5 


went in its findings, and as far as the record allowed it to 
7 


go. 
C. Drugs In The Sports Program 


If there is little evidence of drug use in the classroom, 
there is even less of it in the sports program. Indeed, the 
District conceded, in a pre-trial interrogatory, that it is un- 
able to confirm so much as one drug-related injury in the 
entire history of its sports program. (J.A. 79-80). This in- 
cludes, of course, the period of time when, the District now 
says, drug use was rampant in its schools.’ As discussed 


” The District argues that the trial court’s findings were endorsed by the 
court of appeals and thus are entitled to “great weight" in this Court. 
Pet. Br. at 29, n.23. It is true that this Court will defer to the lower 
courts when they concur in their findings, but that is not what happened 
here. The court of appeals did uot simply adopt the trial court’s find- 
ings as its own. To the contrary, it reviewed the record and made its 
own observations about the extent of the drug problem in Vernonia. See 
23 F.3d at 1512 (Pet. App. 2a-4a). Moreover, although the court reject- 
ed the Actons’ contention that there was no evidence of actual drug use, 
merely perceived drug use, id. at 1519 (Pet. App. 18a-19a), it immedi- 
ately went on to "reemphasize" that all the record shows is "some drug 
usage in the schools." /d. (Pet. App. 20a-21la). The court appeared to 
studiously avoid words like “epidemic” and "crisis," which punctuate the 
briefs of the District and the amici supporting it. Indeed, the court 
noted that even the word "problem" may misdescribe the situation: 
"Perhaps dubbing [the District’s drug wxperience] a ‘problem’ is a matter 
of perception or definition. What appears to be a problem in one place 
might seem to be a minor annoyance elsewhere." 23 F.3d at 1519 (Pet. 
App. 20a). 


* The District suspects that one athlete may have been injured while 
competing on drugs, but the evidence in support of that suspicion is 
skimpy at best. The wrestling coach, Ron Svenson, testified that a high 
school student was injured in an "away" match when he failed to react 
as quickly as the coach would have liked to a hold his opponent put on 
him. (J.A. 54-55). A day later Mr. Svenson went to the hotel room the 

(continued...) 


Tne ee Ns CE Me  « 


above, the District concluded that drug use was common- 
place in the classroom because of discipline problems there. 
There is no evidence, however, of similar problems on the 
playing field. It follows that, if students were taking drugs, 
they were not taking them before competing. 


Perhaps the most telling evidence on the extent of drugs 
in the sports program before the drug test is the evidence 
that only two students, both in high school, have flunked the 
test. (Pl. Ex. 5 at 13-15, 25; J.A. 38; R. 64). There are 
several possible explanations for this near-perfect record. 
One is that, as the District now contends, many athletes 
were taking drugs before the drug test was enacted, but they 
all quit immediately and en masse as soon as testing started. 
This seems unlikely, however, if drugs were as embedded in 
the school culture, and are as addictive, as the District sug- 
gests. Another explanation is that, again, many athletes 
were taking drugs, but they all chose to give up sports and 


* (...continued) 

wrestler was sharing with three other students. While there he smelled 
what he believed to be marijuana and concluded that "somebody in the 
room was smoking." Jd. Of course, that "somebody" was not necessari- 
ly the injured wrestler, and even if it were, it does not follow that he 
had also smoked marijuana before competing the day before or, if he 
did, that marijuana played any role in his injury. Mr. Svenson was the 
first to admit that this evidence leads nowhere. “There was no way,” he 
said, “of particularly proving at that point in time whether he was under 
the influence [during the match]." (J.A. 56). 


Mr. Svenson, who also coached football, testified that he watched 
some football game films and noticed that some of the students did not 
react to situations the way he taught them. This led him to wonder if 
they were under the influence of drugs during the games. (J.A. 56). He 
never found out. 


This was as far as the District got in trying to prove that any student 
ever competed in a District-sponsored athletic event while under the in- 
fluence of illegal drugs. 


avoid the test rather than give up drugs. There is no evi- 
dence, however, that participation in school sports dropped 
off when the testing began and, indeed, 110 students were 
tested in just the first three weeks of the program. (Pl. Ex. 
3 at 1; Pl. Ex. 5 at 19). A more plausible explanation for 
so few failed tests is that, in fact, few athletes were taking 
drugs before testing started. 


The District superintendent admitted that the District 
does not know what percentage of students who play sports 
take drugs illegally and that no effort has been made to find 
out except through the drug test. (Pl. Ex. 5 at 15). Since 
the test has detected next to no one, the District is hard 
pressed now to argue that drugs "invaded" the sports pro- 
gram; to the contrary, they appeared to have largely stayed 
out of it. 


D. The Drug-Testing Program 


In response to its concern, justified or not, about drug 
use in school sports, the school board decided to institute a 
mandatory drug-testing program for all student athletes. In 
its present form,’ the program prohibits students from par- 


* The original program was in force from September 1989 to August 
1990 (J.A. 7), and applied to any student who participates in any extra- 
curricular activity, athletic or nonathletic, including, for example, band, 
drama, and student government. (PI. Ex 5 at 16-17; J.A. 29-30). The 
District claims that it amended the program to apply only to athletes in 
order "to assure its legality." Pet. Br. 9. In fact, it may have been mo- 
tivated by funding concerns. As the Solicitor General explains in his 
brief, the District has received $7,500 per year under a 1986 congres- 
sional act that authorized federal grants to local schools for, among other 
things, "non-discriminatory random drug testing programs for students 
voluntarily participating in athletic activities." Br. of United States at 1- 
2 and n.1, quoting 20 U.S.C. §3192(d\emphasis added). If the District 
had stuck with its original program, it would not have been "legal" to 

(continued...) 


ticipating in school sports unless they consent to have their 
urine tested for traces of certain illicit drugs: cocaine, mari- 
juana, amphetamines and, occasionally, LSD. (J.A. 8; PI. 
Ex. 4 at 4-5; Pl. Ex. 5 at 18). Notably absent from this list 
is perhaps the most commonly abused drug, at all age lev- 
els, namely, alcohol. Pet. Br. at 9. Also excluded are ste- 
roids and other substances designed to enhance athletic per- 
formance. (J.A. 86). 


Athletes are tested at the start of each athletic season in 
which they participate. (Pl. Ex. 5 at 221-22). They are also 
subject to random tests, conducted weekly during the season. 
Id. The testing protocol depends on gender. Boys are taken 
to the locker room where, one at a time, they urinate into a 
vial while a male faculty member, either Mr. Aultman, the 
grade school principal, or Mr. Svenson, a teacher and coach 
in the high school, waits close behind. (Pl. Ex. 4 at 3). Mr. 
Aultman testified that sometimes he watches the student 
produce the urine sample, but often he just listens. (J.A. 
31-32). Mr. Svenson denied watching or listening, but both 
he and Mr. Aultman admitted that that is why they are 
there: to observe the students so they don’t cheat. (J.A. 32; 
R. 138-39). The students, of course, don’t know whether or 
when the monitor is watching them. The procedure for giris 
is sightly different. They produce their samples, one at a 
time, in an enclosed stall while a female teacher stands out- 
side listening through a vent in the door for the normal 
sounds of urination. (J.A. 42; R. 78-79; Ex. 4 at 4; Ex. 5 at 
21-22). 


Any student who refuses to be tested is automatically 


* (...continued) 
receive these funds. 


In October, 1994, Congress reauthorized the 1986 act, minus the pro- 
vision for federal funding of drug tests. Br. of United States at 2, n.1. 


9 


suspended from the sports program for the remainder of the 
athletic season. (J.A. 8). A student who flunks the test -- 
that is, a student whose urine sample tests "positive" for the 
target drugs -- is subject to specified and escalating penal- 
ties. For a first "offense," the student is given a choice be- 
tween "[pjarticipating in an assistance program and taking 
weekly drug tests for six weeks" or "be[ing] suspended from 
participating in athletics for the remainder of the current 
season and the next season for which he/she is eligible." (J. 
A. 9). For a second "offense," the first option is removed; 
the student is suspended for the remainder of the current 
season and all of the next season. Jd. A third "offense" re- 
sults in suspension through the next two seasons. /d. 


In addition to submitting their urine for inspection, stu- 
dents who have been taking prescription drugs "must pro- 
vide verification (either by a copy of the prescription or by 
doctor’s authorization) prior to being tested." (J.A. 8).'° 
This information is then shared with the lab that tests the 
urine to aid in interpreting the test results. (Stip. Test. of R. 
Velander at 3). 


The District superintendent, principals, vice principals, 
and athletic directors have direct access to the test results. 
(J.A. 29). Also, other officials who are involved in the ens- 
uing due process hearing, counseling programs, and weekly 
repeat drug tests will necessarily find out when a student 
tests positive. 


E. Effect Of Drug Testing 


The District asserts that the drug-testing policy accom- 
plished its goal of discouraging athletes from competing 
while on drugs. But since there is no evidence that any stu- 


° The form the District uses also requires the students to identify their 
nonprescription medications and the names of their treating physicians. 
(Def. Ex. 109 at 1, C). 


10 


dents were doing that, and since there were as many drug- 
related injuries before the policy took effect as after -- to 
wit, none -- it is impossible to conclude that the policy ac- 
complished anything except to invade student privacy. 


It is true that some teachers noted an improvement in 
classroom behavior after the policy was adopted, but that 
wasn’t the goal of the policy -- at least not the stated goal. 
And since there is no basis for finding that all of the previ- 
ously unruly students were unruly because of drugs, there is 
likewise no basis for concluding that the policy had any- 
thing to do with the turnaround in their behavior. 


Even if classroom discipline was entirely drug-driven, 
and even if the improvement in discipline was due solely to 
a decline in drug use -- big ifs on this record -- it still 
cannot be asserted, without guesswork, that the decline in 
drug use was due to drug testing, rather than to the Dis- 
trict’s other, ongoing drug education and counseling pro- 
grams, which the superintendent called "effective." (R. 63- 
64; Pl. Ex. 5 at 20). The drug-testing program is "only a 
small part" of the District’s anti-drug campaign, according 
to the program’s author. (Pl. Ex. 3 at 1). That being so, 
the District is not justified in now claiming that drug-testing 
was solely responsible for whatever improvement there may 
have been in the drug "problem." 


The District’s own expert, Dr. Robert DuPont, testified 
that drug use among high school students has declined 
steadily, both across the state and across the nation, since 
the mid-1980s, which includes the period of time when the 
District’s drug-testing policy was in force. (J.A. 77). 
Whatever caused this trend -- Dr. DuPont attributes it to de- 
creasing societal tolerance of drugs and widespread publicity 
over the death of Len Bias from an overdose of cocaine 
(id.) -- may also account for the trend in Vernonia, if in fact 
there was one there. 


1] 


As the District notes, one teacher thought that student 
grades improved post-testing, Pet. Br. at 12, but the District 
offered no evidence, such as summaries of transcripts or test 
results, to support that observation. 


F. The Drug Test Applied To James 


In the fall of 1991, James was 12 years old and a sev- 
enth grader in Washington Grade School. He was interested 
in sports and tried out for the football team. (J.A. 16; 
R. 6-7). On the first day of practice, the coach gave him a 
drug-testing consent form, which he took home and dis- 
cussed with his parents. They -- James and his parents -- 
decided not to sign. (J.A. 16-17; R. 7-8). For that reason 
alone, the District kicked James off the team and declared 


him ineligible for school sports until he consents to drug 
testing. (R. 8-9, 12-13). 


James’s father, Wayne, testified that he believes the 
drug test is an invasion of James’s privacy and a violation 
of his civil rights. (R. 9). He also expressed concern that 
drug-testing sends the wrong message to students: a mes- 
sage that, in the government’s eyes, everyone is presumed 
guilty - in James’s case, guilty of using illicit drugs -- until 
proven innocent. (R. 9-10). There is no question, however, 
that James is innocent. As the court of appeals found, "[njo 
evidence suggest[s] that James has ever used drugs or that 


the District has any reason to suspect that he has." 23 F.3d 
at 1517 (Pet. App. 9a). 


G. The Proceedings Below 


a James’s parents, on his behalf, brought this action to en- 
join the District from enforcing its drug-testing program 
against him. In their complaint, they alleged that the pro- 
gram violates his rights under the Fourth Amendment and 
Article I, section 9, of the Oregon Constitution, both of 
which prohibit "unreasonable" government searches. (J.A. 


12 


3-6). Following a bench trial, the district court found no 
violation of either constitution and entered judgment for the 
District. Acton v. Vernonia School Dist. 47J, 796 F.Supp. 
1354 (D.Or. 1992)(Pet. App. B). The Actons appealed, and 
the court of appeals unanimously reversed. Acton v. 
Vernonia School Dist. 47J, 23 F.3d 1514 (9th Cir. 1994) 


(Pet. App. A). 


At the outset of its opinion the court of appeals an- 
nounced that it was "constrained, in the first instance, to de- 
cide this case on Oregon constitutional grounds," 23 F.3d at 
1518 (Pet. App. 16a), "in order to avoid addressing federal 
constitutional claims unnecess-ily." Jd. (Pet. App. 12a- 
13a). This was possible, the court said, because Article I, 
section 9, and the Fourth Amendment are not "coextensive" 
and, moreover, the state provision is more protective than 
the federal provision: "We can say with absolute confidence 
that the Oregon Constitution wii! not be construed to offer 
less protection than the Fourth Amendment. [And] [i]t is 
highly likely that it will be found to offer more protection." 
Id. (Pet. App. 16a). 


A leading Oregon case on suspicionless searches is 
State v. Tourtillott, 618 P.2d 423 (Or. 1980), cert. denied, 
451 U.S. 972 (1981), which approved a police roadblock set 
up on the opening day of deer season to check for unli- 
censed hunters. In reaching that decision, the Oregon Su- 
preme Court relied primarily on this Court’s opinion in 
Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648 (1979). Accordingly, the 
court of appeals turned to Prouse for guidance in construing 
Article I, section 9. From Prouse, the court "distilled" four 
factors to consider in evaluating a suspicionless search: "(1) 
the importance of the governmental interests [served by the 
search]; (2) the degree of physical and psychological intru- 
sion on the citizen’s rights; (3) the amount of discretion the 
procedure vests in individual officials; and (4) the efficiency 
of the procedure -- that is[,] how well it contributes to the 


13 


reaching of its purported goals and how necessary it is." 23 
F.3d at 1521 (Pet. App. 31a). 


Taking these factors in reverse order, the court con- 
cluded, first, that the "efficiency" factor weighed in favor of 
the drug-testing program, but only "slightly." Jd. at 1522 
(Pet. App. 34a). It next concluded that the "discretion" fac- 
tor also favored the District’s position, because the drug test 
is "completely random." Jd. (Pet. App. 36a). That left two 
factors -- "intrusiveness" and "importance" -- and those fac- 
tors, the court said, "are dispositive." Jd. (Pet. App. 37a). 


Compelled urinalysis is a substantial intrusion on pri- 
vacy, the court explained, for schoolchildren as well as 
adults. It noted that "[c)hildren are compelled to attend 
school, but nothing suggests that they lose their right to pri- 
vacy in their excretory functions when they do so." Jd. at 
1525 (Pet. App. 52a)(emphasis in original). "Nor can we 
say," the court continued, "that the privacy interests of ath- 
letes are substantially lower than those of students in gener- 
al." Jd. at 1525 (Pet. App. 53a). 


Turning, then, to the District’s interest in drug testing, 
the court observed that those interests -- preventing unneces- 
sary athletic injuries, reducing the attraction of drugs among 
other students, and improving discipline -- "are not mini- 
mal." Jd. at 1526 (Pet. App. 56a). But, the court said, 
those interests 


suffer by comparison to the kinds of dangers 
that have existed when random drug testing has 
been approved. The extreme dangers in haz- 
ards involved in the prior cases are simply not 
present here. The prospect that an athlete 
might hurt himself or a competitor is real 
enough, but it is not a risk of the same magni- 
tude as an airplane or train wreck, or a gas 
pipeline or nuclear power plant disaster... . 


14 


Id. at 1526 (Pet. App. 56a-57a). 
Balancing all of the factors, the court concluded: 


[W]hen we mix all of the elements together -- 
the slight weight in favor of efficiency, the 
privacy interests, the governmental interest, and 
the discretionary factor -- and step back to look 
at the compound they yield, it becomes appar- 
ent that the policy violates the Fourth Amend- 
ment. It follows that it also violates Article I, 
Section 9[,] of the Oregon Constitution. 


Id. at 1526 (Pet. App. 59a-60a). 


The District petitioned this Court to consider whether its 
drug-testing program offends the Fourth Amendment, not 
whether it offends Article I, section 9, and, indeed, the Dis- 
trict has not briefed the latter issue. For reasons set forth 
below, the Court should hold that the policy does violate the 
Fourth Amendment. If, however, the Court holds otherwise, 
that should not end the case. Instead, it should be remanded 
to the court of appeals to determine, once again, whether the 
program nevertheless violates the more-shielding state con- 
stitution. As the court of appeals put it, the Fourth Amend- 
ment merely establishes "the floor," not "the ceiling," for a 
lawful search in Oregon. 23 F.3d at 1521 (Pet. App. 
33a)."! 


'' In their brief opposing the petition for a writ of certiorari, the Actons 
argued that the Court should deny the writ because the decision below 
rests on state law. The Actons will not repeat that argument here, but 
do not thereby concede that it is proper or advisable for the Court to 
hear this case. They urge the Court to dismiss the writ as improvidently 


granted. 


15 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The Fourth Amendment applies to searches conducted 
by school officials, New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325 
(1969), and drug testing by urinalysis is a search. Skinner 
v. Railway Labor Executives’ Ass'n, 489 U.S. 602 (1989). 


As a general rule, the government cannot search a per- 
son without reason to suspect that he or she is guilty of 
wrongdoing. There is an exception, however, in limited cir- 
cumstances, where: (1) the search serves some "special 
need" beyond the normal need for law enforcement; (2) the 
government’s interest in searching is compelling; and (3) the 
privacy interests affected by the test are minimal. Skinner, 
489 U.S. at 624. Applying this balance-of-interests test, the 
Court upheld drug-testing programs for railroad employees 
who are involved in major train wrecks, Skinner, and 
customs agents who carry lethal weapons, engage in the di- 
rect interdiction of narcotics, or have access to sensitive 
government information, National Treasury Employees 
Union v. Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656 (1989). The Court con- 
cluded in Skinner and Von Raab that the employees covered 
by the tests are engaged in safety- or security-sensitive ac- 
tivities, and often "discharge duties fraught with such risks 
of injury to others that even a momentary lapse of attention 
can have disastrous consequences." Skinner, 489 U.S. at 
628. The government’s "compelling" interest in preventing 
these "disastrous consequences" justified the substantial in- 
vasion of privacy that drug testing causes. 


The District’s drug-testing program fails the Skinner 
and Von Raab balancing test. First, drug testing by 
urinalysis is no less invasive and degrading for minors than 
it is for adults. Students do not surrender their expectations 
of privacy in their excretory functions when they attend 
school or go out for sports, and nothing in their experience 
in the classroom or on the playing field prepares them for 
the school’s present demand to produce urine for inspection. 


16 


Second, the District’s test procedures are much more in- 
trusive than the procedures upheld in Skinner and Von Raab. 
The District requires students to produce the urine sample 
on demand, in school, and under observation by school offi- 
cials. In Skinner and Von Raab, by comparison, the urine 
sample was collected by an independent monitor at an inde- 
pendent site and, at least in Von Raab, with five-days ad- 
vance notice. Furthermore, the District requires students to 
disclose to school officials all of their prescription medica- 
tions, thus enabling the officials to learn, even without test- 
ing, intimate details of the students’ private lives. 


Third, the goal of the District’s drug-testing program -- 
preventing drug-related athletic injuries -- is much less com- 
pelling than the goals of the programs upheld in Skinner and 
Von Raab: preventing train wrecks, misuse of deadly weap- 
ons, compromise of the nation’s borders, and disclosure of 
state secrets. Junior high school athletics is not "safety-" or 
"security-sensitive," as those terms are used in Skinner and 
Von Raab. The typical sports injury in Vernonia is a pulled 
muscle or torn ligament, and the District has never even had 
an injury that it can relate to drugs. 


ARGUMENT 


THE DISTRICT’S DRUG-TESTING PROGRAM 
VIOLATES THE FOURTH AMENDMENT 


A. The Fourth Amendment Applies To 
School Searches 


Public school students do not "shed their constitutional 
rights .. . at the schoolhouse gate." Tinker v. Des Moines 
Indep. Community School Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 506 (1969); 
see also New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. at 334; West Vir- 
ginia State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 637 
(1943). The Fourth Amendment, in particular, protects stu- 


17 


dents while in school. In New Jersey v. T.L.O., the Court 
squarely held that school officials must comply with Fourth 
Amendment strictures when they search students on school 
grounds. 469 U.S. at 333-37. 


Indeed, it is important for them to comply scrupulously. 
"Schools," it has been noted, "are places where we inculcate 
the values essential to the meaningful exercise of rights and 
responsibilities by a self-governing citizenry." Jd. at 373 
(Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). "The 
values [students] learn there, they take with them ir life." 
Id. at 386. One of our most cherished values, of couse, is 
the right to privacy, which Justice Brandeis memorably de- 
scribed as "the right to be let alone -- the most comprehen- 
sive of rights and the right most valued by civilized men." 
Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 478 (1928)(Bran- 
deis, J., dissenting). If a school is not careful to protect that 
right on behalf of its students, they will naturally come to 
view the Fourth Amendment and other constitutional prerog- 
atives as mere platitudes, not to be taken seriously. 


The District’s observation that "public schools are en- 
trusted with the difficult task of preparing students for citi- 
zenship," Pet. Br. at 18, is true, of course, but it hardly sup- 
ports the District’s assertion that school officials are some- 
how excused from the restraints the Constitution places on 
all other governmental agents. To the contrary, the Court 
has repeatedly emphasized that "[t]he authority possessed by 
the State to prescribe and enforce standards of conduct in its 
schools, although concededly very broad, must be exercised 
consistently with constitutional safeguards." Goss v. Lopez, 
419 U.S. 565, 574 (1975). See also West Virginia State Bd 
of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. at 637. As Justice Brennan 
once observed: "Schools cannot expect their students to 
learn the lessons of good citizenship when the school au- 
thorities themselves disregard the fundamental principles un- 
derpinning our constitutional freedoms." Doe v. Renfrow, 


18 


er 


451 U.S. 1022, 1027-28 (1981)(dissenting from denial of 
certiorari)."* 


B. Drug Testing Is A "Search" 


In Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Ass'n, 489 
U.S. at 617, the Court held that a drug test for adults was a 
"search" under the Fourth Amendment, "[bJecause it is clear 
that the collection and testing of urine intrudes upon expec- 
tations of privacy that society has long recognized as reason- 
able." The same can be said of drug tests for minors. 
Thus, the District’s drug-testing program is a search and 
must comply with the Fourth Amendment. The District 
agrees. Pet. Br. at 17, n.13. 


C. Standards For Drug Tests 


The first clause of the Fourth Amendment prohibits 
"unreasonable" searches. In deciding what is reasonable, the 
Court has turned first to the Amendment’s second clause, 
which states that "no Warrants shall issue but upon probable 
cause." Accordingly, the Court has repeatedly held that, as 
a general rule, the government cannot search a person with- 
out probable cause to suspect the person has done something 
wrong. E£.g., Dunaway v. New York, 442 U.S. 200, 214 
(1979); Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 51 (1970). 
Even in cases involving brief, minimally intrusive searches, 
the Court has almost always insisted upon some individu- 
alized suspicion of wrongdoing. E£.g., Terry v. Ohio, 392 
U.S. 1, 30 (1968). 


The history of the Fourth Amendment illustrates the im- 
portance of the individualized suspicion requirement. The 


'2 It should be noted that the oldest of the District’s students are 18 
years old, old enough to vote in elections, Or. Const. art. II, §2(1)\a), 
and to serve on juries, Or. Rev. Stat. §10.030(2)(c), two of the most im- 
portant responsibilities of citizenship. 


19 


Amendment was drafted in reaction to the "general war- 
rants" that allowed British officers to search at large through 
colonial homes and businesses for evidence of crime, anti- 
Crown literature, and illegally imported goods. See general- 
ly Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc., 436 U.S. 307, 311 (1978); 
United States v. Chadwick, 433 U.S. 1, 7-8 (1977); Stanford 
v. Texas, 379 U.S. 476, 481-85 (1965); Frank v. Maryland, 
359 U.S. 360, 363-65 (1959). "The vivid memory by the 
newly independent Americans of these abuses produced the 
Fourth Amendment as a safeguard against such arbitrary ac- 
tion by officers of the new union... ." Frank, 359 US. at 
363. Consistent with its historic origins, this Court has held 
that "some quantum of individualized suspicion is usually a 
prerequisite to a constitutional search and seizure." United 
States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 560 (1975). 


Because individualized suspicion lies at the very core of 
the Fourth Amendment, the Court has strictly limited the cir- 
cumstances in which the government may search without it. 
For example, suspicionless searches are almost never al- 
lowed in criminal cases. See Skinner, 489 U.S. at 619 ("Ex- 


cept in certain well-defined circumstances, a search or sei- © 


zure in [a criminal case] is not reasonable unless accom- 
plished pursuant to a judicial warrant issued upon probable 
cause"). And, even where a search serves "special govern- 
mental needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement," 
it is still necessary to "balance the individual’s privacy ex- 
pectations against the government’s interests to determine 
whether it is impractical to require a warrant or some level 
of individualized suspicion in the particular context." Na- 
tional Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 
665-66, citing Skinner, 489 U.S. at 619-20. 


This is not a toothless test, and the mere invocation of 
"special needs" does not justify a suspicionless search. To 
the contrary, in Skinner and Von Raab, both of which in- 
volved random drug tests for government employees, the 


20 


Court carefully reviewed the government’s interest in testing 
and the employees’ interest in privacy before concluding 
that the challenged drug tests were constitutional as applied 
to some, but not all, of the targeted employees. Therefore, 
to resoive the Fourth Amendment issue presented in this 
case, it is useful to examine in detail the Skinner and Von 
Raab programs and the governmental interests they were de- 
signed to serve. 


Skinner concerned Federal Railroad Administration reg- 
ulations that authorized blood, breath, and urine tests of rail- 
road employees who are involved in major train wrecks or 
who violate specified safety rules. The FRA acted in re- 
sponse to studies that showed a high incidence of drug and 
alcohol abuse within the railroad industry, creating a serious 
safety hazard. According to one study, apparently unchal- 
lenged, 23 percent of operating personnel were "problem 
drinkers"; thirteen percent reported to work at least "a little 
drunk" and five percent "very drunk" during the study year; 
and one in eight drank at least once while on duty. 489 
U.S. at 607, n.1. Another unchallenged study, conducted 
without the benefit of regular, post-accident testing, "identi- 
fied 34 fatalities, 66 injuries and over $28 million in proper- 
ty damage (in 1983 dollars) that resulted from the errors of 
alcohol[-] and drug-impaired employees in 45 train accidents 
and train incidents during the period 1975 through 1983." 
Id. at 608. 


Various labor groups sued to enjoin the regulations, ar- 
guing that the Fourth Amendment prevented the government 
from testing employees without individualized suspicion of 
drug use. The Court concluded, however, that the govern- 
ment’s interest in random testing sufficiently outweighed the 
employee’s privacy expectations to justify relaxing the tradi- 
tional suspicion requirement. The Court described the gov- 
ernment’s interest in testing -- preventing train wrecks -- as, 
variously, "compelling," id. at 628 and 633, and "surpass- 


21 


ing," id. at 634. It also noted that the targeted employees 
are engaged in "safety-sensitive tasks," id. at 620, 629, and 
633, and "discharge duties fraught with such risks of injury 
to others that even a momentary lapse of attention can have 
disastrous consequences." Jd. at 628. These employees, 
like those "Who have routine access to dangerous nuclear 
power facilities," are capable of causing "great human loss 
before any signs of impairment become noticeable to super- 
visors or others." Jd. 


The Court went on to say that these proven and persua- 
sive safety concerns outweighed the privacy intrusions from 
the proposed blood and breath tests which, the Court noted, 
reveal no facts in which the employee has a substantial pri- 
vacy interest, except the presence of alcohol or controlled 
substances. /d. at 626. The urine tests, however, presented 
a "more difficult question," and "raise[d] concerns not impli- 
cated by blood or breath tests." Jd. The Court allowed that 
it "would not characterize these additional privacy concerns 
as minimal in most contexts." /d. It noted, however, that 
the FRA regulations endeavor to reduce the intrusiveness of 
the collection process. For one thing, the regulations do not 
require a monitor to observe the employee while the urine 
sample is produced. For another, they allow the sample to 
be collected in a "medical environment, by personnel unre- 
lated to the railroad employer." Jd. at 627-28. The collec- 
tion procedures were, therefore, "not unlike similar proce- 
dures encountered often in the context of a regular physical 
examination." Jd. at 627. The Court also noted that rail- 
road employees have a diminished expectation of privacy 
"by reason of their participation in an industry that is regu- 
lated pervasively to ensure safety, a goal dependent, in sub- 
stantial part, on the health and fitness of covered employ- 
ees." Jd. at 627. These employees, the Court noted, "have 
long been a principal focus of regulatory concern." /d. at 
628. 


22 


Von Raab involved a drug-testing program for customs 
agents who: (1) are directly involved in drug interdiction, 
(2) carry firearms, or (3) handle classified material. 489 
U.S. at 660-61. Citing Skinner, the Court reiterated that 
drug-testing is a search and that "a search must be sup- 
ported, as a general matter, by a warrant issued upon proba- 
ble cause." Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 664. It also reiterated 
that, in exceptional cases, where the government’s interest in 
testing outweighs the individual’s privacy expectations, the 
government may proceed without the presumptively 
necessary warrant and suspicion. Jd. at 665-66. 


Applying this balancing test, the Court first concluded 
that the government has a "compelling" interest in prevent- 
ing drug use by customs agents involved in drug interdic- 
tion. The Court noted that "[t]he Customs Service is our 
Nation’s first line of defense against one of the greatest 
problems affecting the health and welfare of our popula- 
tion," id. at 668, and that "[t]he physical safety of [Customs] 
employees may be threatened, and many may be tempted 
not only by bribes from traffickers with whom they deal, 
but also by their own access to vast sources of valuable con- 
traband seized and controlled by the Service," id. at 669. 
Therefore, "the Government has a compelling interest in en- 
suring that front-line interdiction personnel are physically 
fit, and have unimpeachable integrity and judgment." Jd. 


The Court also found that the government has a com- 
pelling interest in preventing drug users from promotion to 
positions that require the employee to carry firearms. "Cus- 
toms employees who may use deadly force plainly ‘dis- 
charge duties fraught with such risks of injury to others that 
even a momentary lapse of attention can have disastrous 
consequences."" Jd. at 670, quoting Skinner, 489 U.S. at 
628. 


Against these "compelling interests in safety and the in- 
tegrity of our borders," 489 U.S. at 672, the Von Raab 


23 


Court balanced the employees’ expectations of privacy. 
Those expectations were "diminished," the Court said, be- 
cause "[u]nlike most private citizens or government employ- 
ees in general, employees involved in drug interdiction rea- 
sonably should expect effective inquiry into their fitness and 
probity[,] and [m]uch the same is true of employees who are 
required to carry firearms." Jd. at 672. Moreover, the 
Court said, the agency’s drug-testing procedures were care- 
fully designed to minimize the program’s intrusiveness. 
First, the employee is given five-days advance notice of the 
time and place for collecting the urine sample, id. at 664, 
thus reducing to a minimum any ‘unsettling show of author- 
ity’. . . that may be associated with unexpected intrusions on 
privacy." Jd. at 672, n.2. Second, the employee is not di- 
rectly observed while urinating and, indeed, is allowed to 
produce the urine sample in the privacy of a bathroom stall. 
Id. at 661, 672, n.2. Third, the employee is not required to 
disclose the use of licit drugs, which may affect the test re- 
sults, unless and until the specimen tests positive for illicit 
drugs and, even then, the licit drug information is given to a 
licensed physician, not to the Customs Service. Jd. at 672, 
n.2. Finally, the sample is collected by an "independent con- 
tractor," id. at 661, not someone in the Service. "Taken to- 
gether," the Court said, "these procedures significantly mini- 
mize the intrusiveness of the Service’s drug-screening pro- 
gram." Jd. at 672, n.2. 


In light of these procedural safeguards and the "extraor- 
dinary safety and national security hazards that would attend 
the promotion of drug users to positions that require carry- 
ing firearms or the interdiction of controlled substances," id. 
at 674, the Customs Service was justified in testing appli- 
cants for such positions without the usual requirement of in- 
dividualized suspicion of wrongdoing. 


The Court was unable to determine whether the Service 
was also justified in testing applicants for positions that han- 


24 


dle "classified material" which, under the agency’s scheme 
include, among others, accountants, animal caretakers, attor- 
neys, baggage clerks, co-op students, mail clerks, and mes- 
sengers. Jd. at 678. The Court said these employees are 
subject to urine testing if they have access to "truly sensitive 
information." Jd. at 677. It remanded the case to the lower 
courts to determine whether the designated positions do in 
fact allow access to such information. 


D. The District’s Drug-Testing Program Is 
Unreasonable 


The District contends that its drug-testing program 
serves a "special need" beyond the normal need for law en- 
forcement: namely, to reduce the risk of drug-related ath- 
letic injuries. Assuming that is true,’ the District’s special 
need does not necessarily mean that the program is constitu- 
tional. Whether it is constitutional depends on whether the 
District’s interest in testing without suspicion outweighs the 
students’ privacy expectations. Skinner; Von Raab. The 
District agrees that this is the proper test. Pet. Br. at 32. 
So does the Solicitor General. Br. for the United States at 
12-16 and n.2. For reasons that follow, the Court should 
conclude that, in this case, the students’ privacy interests 
outweigh the District’s interest in suspicionless drug testing 
and, therefore, that the testing program is unconstitutional.’ 


'? Although the District asserts in its brief that test results will not be 
disclosed to law enforcement authorities, the written description of the 
policy does not contain the same assurance. (J.A. 7-9). 


'* The various amici supporting the District have offered several off- 
record reports of drug problems nationally and in other schoo! districts. 
Even if this evidence is properly subject to judicial notice, it is not rele- 
vant to the question at hand: whether Vernonia’s drug-testing program 
which, as explained infra, is much more intrusive than other programs, 
is a reasonable and hence constitutional response to its drug "problem." 

(continued...) 


25 


1. The District’s Program Is A Substantial 
Invasion Of Privacy 


The compelled production and testing of urine is an 
extreme invasion of privacy, no less so for minors than 
adults, and no less so for athletes than nonathletes. The 
District’s drug-testing program heightens the intrusion by re- 
quiring students to excrete on demand and under observation 
by school officials, not independent monitors, and by requir- 
ing the students to disclose to the officials their prescription 
medications. 


(a) 
Drug-testing by urinalysis intrudes deeply on settled ex- 
pectations of privacy. The Court made that clear in Skinner: 


There are few activities in our society more 
personal or private than the passing of urine. 
Most people describe it in euphemisms if they 
talk about it at all. It is a function traditionally 
performed without public observation; indeed, 
its performance in public is generally prohib- 
ited by law as well as social custom. 


489 U.S. at 617, quoting National Treasury Employees 
Union v. Von Raab, 816 F.2d 170, 175 (Sth Cir. 1987). See 
also Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 680 (Scalia, J., dissenting)("I 
think it obvious that [urine testing] is a type of search par- 


'* (...continued) 

Although drugs are a national concern, the scope of the problem varies 
substantially from school district to school district, as the amici’s own 
evidence proves. Accordingly, this Court need not decide whether a 
drug-testing program of the type at issue here would be constitutional in 
a different school district with a different drug record. The Court 
should thus decline the amici’s invitation to make a one-size-fits-all rule 
that does not account for differences in drug programs and drug 
problems. 


26 


ticularly destructive of privacy and offensive to personal 
dignity"). 

Oregon takes the same view. In Sterling v. Cupp, 44 
607 P.2d 206, 208 (Or.App. 1980), aff'd as modified, 625 
P.2d 123 (Or. 1981), Judge Gillette, now a Justice on the 
Oregon Supreme Court, wrote: "(t]he final bastion of priva- 
cy is to be found in the area of human procreation’ and ex- 
cretion, and the nudity which may accompany them. If a 
person is entitled to any shred of privacy, then it is to pri- 
vacy as to these matters."’* 


As intrusive as drug-testing is for adults, it is just as in- 
trusive, if not more so, for middle school students. Our cul- 
ture instills early in children a keen sense of privacy in ex- 
cretory functions. By first grade, they expect, and are ex- 
pected, to urinate in seclusion, using segregated bathrooms, 
the same as adults. Adolescents are often extremely self- 
conscious about their developing bodies and its functions, 
especially when they reach puberty. 


The Court has said that "[e]ven a limited search of the 
outer clothing . . . constitutes a severe, though brief intru- 
sion upon cherished personal security, and it surely must be 
an annoying, frightening, and perhaps humiliating experi- 
ence." Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. at 24-25. Drug testing by 
urinalysis must be all that and more, for both adults and 
minors. 


'S Drug testing by urinalysis is so intrusive that at least sixteen states and 
five cities have enacted laws to regulate it. See K. Zeese, DRUG TEST- 
ING LEGAL MANUAL §1.05[3] (rel. #2, Nov. 1994). Three states require 
probable cause before an employer can compel an employee to take the 
test. Jd. at 1-42. Four states and two cities require, among other things, 
that the employer have some reason to suspect the employee is using 
drugs or is drug-impaired. /d. at 1-43 to -44. 


27 


(b) 


The privacy intrusion does not end when the urine sam- 
ple is collected. Indeed, the most significant privacy interest 
affected by urinalysis may be the information contained in 
the urine. As noted in Skinner, "chemical analysis of urine, 
like that of blood, can reveal a host of private medical facts 
about [a person], including whether she is an epileptic, preg- 
nant, or diabetic." 489 U.S. at 617. Over time, technologi- 
cal advances in urinalysis are sure to make the test even 
more revealing and, hence, even more intrusive. 


The District, however, does not limit itself to the infor- 
mation to be gleaned from the urine sample. It also requires 
students to disclose any prescription medications they may 
be taking. (J.A. 8). By this simple expedient, the District 
learns, even without urinalysis, information that is generally 
held in strict confidence and that is completely unrelated to 
the one secret the District says it is trying to discover: 
whether the student is taking illicit drugs. For example, if a 
student reports that he is taking AZT, the school thus will 
have learned that he is infected with the AIDS virus. Simi- 
larly, if the student discloses that she is taking birth control 
pills, school officials will then know that she is sexually ac- 
tive and probably heterosexual. This is information which 
the school has no right to know’® and, moreover, is infor- 
mation that serves no purpose in preventing drug-related 
athletic injuries. The drug-screening program for Customs 
agents, upheld in Von Raab, likewise requires the disclosure 
of licit drug use, but only after the urine sample tests posi- 
tive for illicit drugs and, even then, the information 


'* It is unlawful to require a student to submit to a psychiatric or physio- 
logical examination for the purpose of determining, among other things, 
the student’s "sex behavior and attitudes." 20 U.S.C. §123h(b\3). 


28 


is disclosed only to a licensed physician, not to the Customs 
Service. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 672, n.2."” 


(c) 

The District’s test procedures are much more intrusive 
than the procedures upheld in Skinner and Von Raab. In the 
first place, the District’s program requires students to pro- 
duce urine on demand and under observation. Each week 
the school draws the names of the students to be tested. 
Those students are taken from class that same day, escorted 
to the locker room, handed a specimen bottle, and instructed 
to fill it while the monitor waits. A student who cannot uri- 
nate immediately is allowed to return to class, but must 
come back later in the day to try again under the same 
stressful conditions as before. (J.A. 32).'* By comparison, 
the Custom Service’s drug test, at issue in Von Raab, pro- 
vide for five days advance notice of the time and place for 
collecting the urine sample. This provision was important, 
the Court said, in reducing the intrusiveness of the Service’s 
program. 489 U.S. at 672, n.2. 


Male students in Vernonia suffer the added indignity of 


' The drug-testing program for railroad workers, upheld in Skinner, re- 
quires employees to disclose, at the time they produce blood and urine 
samples, "whether they have taken any medications during the preceding 
30 days." 489 U.S. at 626, n.7. It is not clear from the opinion whether 
they are required to disclose which medications they have taken. In any 
event, this information is disclosed to the medical personal retained to 
conduct the test, who then forward it to the FRA’s laboratories. The in- 
formation is apparently not shared with the worker’s employer. 


‘* In Schaill v. Tippecanoe County School Corp., 679 F.Supp. 833 (N.D. 
Ind. 1988), aff'd, 864 F.2d 1309 (7th Cir. 1988), which involved a drug- 
testing program for high school athletes and cheerleaders, there was evi- 
dence that some students suffer such stress while standing at the urinal 
that they are unable to void their bladder for up to two or three hours. 
679 F.Supp. at 843. 


29 


being observed while they urinate. The test monitor accom- 
panies the student to the urinal and stands a short distance 
behind, watching and listening at least some of the time. To 
be observed while urinating is, of course, an extreme 
invasion of privacy, which is why the Court found it sig- 
nificant, in both Skinner and Von Raab, that the drug-testing 
protocol did not require the employee to be observed while 
producing the urine sample. Skinner, 489 U.S. at 626; Von 
Raab, 489 U.S. at 672 n.2. Indeed, the Von Raab test 
allowed the employee to produce the sample in the privacy 
of a bathroom stall.'? In our society, it is degrading to be 
observed while urinating, even from behind.”° 


It is even more degrading when the observer is someone 
in a position of authority to the person forced to urinate, 
which is the case in Vernonia. The monitors there are 
teachers, administrators, and coaches. By comparison, the 
Custom Service authorizes an "independent contractor" to 
collect the urine sample. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 661. The 
FRA requires the sample to be collected in an "independent 
medical facility," Skinner, 489 U.S. at 609, by personnel 
"unrelated to the railroad employer." Jd. at 626-27. Even 
the Institute for a Drug-Free Workplace, one of the Nation’s 
foremost proponents of drug testing and an amicus curiae in 
support of the District, agrees that the collection of urine 


'? In Schaill v. Tippecanoe County School Corp, which upheld a drug- 
testing program for high school athletes, the court placed great im- 
portance on the fact that the program allowed only aural, not visual, 
monitoring of the urine sample being produced. 864 F.2d at 1318. 


*° In George Orwell’s famous novel, /984, he describes a “negative 
utopia” in which the citizenry have lost all privacy. The government -- 
"Big Brother" -- watches everyone through "telescreens" mounted on the 
walls. The screens are everywhere, including the water closet: "There 
was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens were 
watched continuously." Eric Blair ak.a. George Orwell, 1/984 89 (New 
American Library 1981). 


30 


samples should be "conducted by independent trained pro- 
fessionals at an independent site" in order to limit the in- 
trusion on privacy. Br. of Inst. for a Drug-Free Workplace 
at 12. 


(d) 

The District’s drug-testing program is all the more in- 
trusive because it regulates conduct that the District has no 
right to regulate and, moreover, has expressed no interest in 
regulating -- namely, off-campus, after-hours drug use that 
does not result in drug-impairment during class or a District- 
sponsored athletic event. Drug use is regrettable, of course, 
no matter where or when it occurs, but this conduct does 
not threaten school discipline or athletic safety, the District’s 
stated concerns, and thus does not justify its program of 
round-the-clock surveillance. The District has little or no 
interest in student conduct outside of school, where parents 
and other authorities are in charge, if it does not affect stu- 
dent conduct inside. Compare Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 674 
(because of its "almost unique mission," the Customs Serv- 
ice has a "compelling interest in ensuring that [agents cov- 
ered by its drug test] do not use drugs even off duty"). 


(e) 

The District argues that its drug-testing program is not a 
substantial invasion of privacy because: (1) students have a 
substantially diminished expectation of privacy in their 
urine; (2) athletes in particular have far fewer privacy inter- 
ests; (3) the program is nonpunitive and confidential; (4) the 
collection procedures are minimally intrusive; and (5) par- 
ticipation in school sports is voluntary. None of these ar- 
guments, addressed in turn below, withstands scrutiny. 


(1) The District argues that minors surrender their pri- 
vacy expectations when they pass through the schoolhouse 
gate, because the "process of educating young people is in- 
herently invasive." Pet. Br. at 39. "A teacher,” the District 


31 


says, "simply cannot do his or her job without constantly 
and pervasively intruding into privacy interests [of stu- 
dents]." Jd. at 40. Therefore, the District argues, students 
must have a substantially diminished expectation of privacy. 
This Court rejected a similar contention in 7.L.0. In that 
case, the State of New Jersey argued that, "because of the 
pervasive supervision to which children in the schools are 
necessarily subject, a child has virtually no legitimate expec- 
tation of privacy in articles of personal property ‘unneces- 
sarily’ carried into school." 469 U.S. at 338. This argu- 
ment, the Court said, was based in part on the "seriously 
flawed" premise that student privacy is fundamentally in- 
compatible with maintaining a sound educational environ- 
ment. Jd. The Court also said: "Although we may take 
notice of the difficulty of maintaining discipline in the pub- 
lic schools today, the situation is not so dire that students in 
the schools may claim no legitimate expectations of priva- 
cy." Id. The Court went on to hold that, because students 
have legitimate expectations of privacy, school officials can- 
not search students without some suspicion of wrongdoing. 
Id. at 341-42. 


To be sure, students in school have less expectation of 
privacy than adults in other settings. That, of course, was 
part of the reason that 7.1.0. authorized school officials to 
search students with less suspicion than probable cause.”’ 
But even if a student’s privacy expectations are not on par 
with an adult’s, they are still substantial. "A search of a 
child’s person . . . no less than a similar search carried out 
on an adult, is undoubtedly a severe violation of subjective 


*! Oregon has not followed 7.L.O. in construing the state constitution. 
In State ex rel. Juvenile Dep 't v. DuBois, 821 P.2d 1124, 1126-27 (Or. 
App. 1991), the court held that Article I, section 9, unlike the Fourth 
Amendment, does not permit school officials to search an individual stu- 
dent without a warrant or probable cause, unless “exigent circumstances" 
or some other historical exception applies. 


32 


expectations of privacy." Jd. at 338 (emphasis added). 
Thus, the District greatly overstates its case when it suggests 
that school-age minors have substantially diminished expec- 
tations of privacy. 


It also overgeneralizes. Students may have a dimin- 
ished expectation of privacy in some things, but not others. 
For example, the District has put its students on notice that 
their lockers belong to the school and thus are subject to 
routine inspections. (Pl. Ex. 2 at 21).” But nothing in the 
students’ school experience gives them reason to expect that 
their urine is open to inspection as well. To the contrary, 
they have a real and legitimate expectation that this most 
private of human activities is off limits to others even while 
they are in school. They are not routinely observed while 
urinating there, and school officials do not ordinarily have 
access to their urine for analysis. 


Even if students’ privacy expectations are diminished 
inside the schoolhouse, they remain intact outside. The Dis- 
trict does not contend otherwise. Nevertheless, its drug- 
testing program intrudes on students’ activities off-campus 
and after school hours. As noted above, the test does not - 
discriminate between drug-impairment in class or during 
school sports and drug-impairment at other times or places, 
including the student’s home. Drug use anytime anywhere 
will produce a positive test result and trigger the prescribed 
penalties. Thus, the drug test reaches beyond the time (the 
schoolday) and the place (the schoolhouse and yard) where 


* The handbook also provides that a "[s]earch of the student’s person or 
possessions will be limited to the situation where there is reason to be- 
lieve that a student is hiding evidence of an illegal act or a school viola- 
tion." (Pl. Ex. 2 at 14). This provision, if nothing else, gives students 
an expectation of freedom from suspicionless searches while on school 
grounds. 


33 


the District now argues that students have a diminished ex- 
pectation of privacy.” 


(2) The District argues that athletes in particular have a 
reduced expectation of privacy in either their urine or the 
act of urinating, because, the District says, school sports are 
so highly regulated. In fact, the District’s athletic regula- 
tions are trifling. To play sports students must have a phys- 
ical examination, keep up their grades, and obtain health in- 
surance or sign an insurance waiver. (R. 61-62; Pl. Ex. 5 at 
63).* That’s it. These minimally intrusive rules do not 
compare to the pervasive federal and state regulations gov- 
erning railroad employees, which led the Skinner Court to 
conclude that they lose some expectation of privacy in their 
urine when they report to work. 489 U.S. at 627-28. As 
the court of appeals correctly noted below, the District’s 
rules "are not the sort of extensive government regulation 
that has been found to diminish the expectation of privacy 
of workers in high risk industries or high security areas of 
the government." 23 F.3d at 1525 (Pet. App. 53a-54a)(cita- 
tions omitted). "High school athletes," the court continued, 
"do not go through extensive background checks in order to 
join their teams." Jd. The District is unable to point to 
anything in its athletic rules that would prepare students for 
the District’s demand to excrete under supervision so the 


* The time it takes for drugs to become undetectable in urine varies 
with the individual, but can last as long as 22 days. Von Raab, 489 
U.S. at 676. Since the District begins testing at the start of each school 
quarter, it is possible for a student to test positive based on drug use 
during vacation. 


** Athletes are also required to observe training rules set by the coach, 
which the District suggests are rigorous and intrusive. But there is no 
evidence that the coaches have in fact set amy training rules, let alone 
rigorous or intrusive ones. Even while alluding to these unspecified 
rules, the District does not suggest that any of them concern athletes’ ex- 
cretory functions. 


34 


fluid can be examined for the secrets within. 


Continuing its athletes-have-fewer-rights argument, the 
District states that the mandatory, pre-season physical exam- 
ination "includes urinalysis." Pet. Br. at 41. The word "in- 
cludes" should not mislead the Court, as it did the Solicitor 
General, see Br. of United States at 24, to assume that uri- 
nalysis is a required part of the examination. It is not. 
James testified that he gave a urine sample during his exam 
(J.A. 17), but no one testified that he had to or that anyone 
else did. The district superintendent testified that athletes 
must have a physical exam, but he did not know what the 
exam entailed. (R. 62-63). In any event, James produced 
his urine sample unobserved in the privacy of a bathroom 
stall and gave it to his physician, with whom he has a confi- 
dential relationship. (J.A. 17-18). Whatever tests were con- 
ducted on the specimen -- and nothing in this record identi- 
fies them -- the results could not be disclosed, to school of- 
ficials or anyone else, without the consent of James or his 
parents. Far from proving that James has no expectation of 
privacy in his urine, the circumstances of his pre-season ex- 
amination prove that he does. The District notes that drug 
testing for steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs 
has become more common in collegiate, Olympic, and pro- 
fessional athletics, where the Fourth Amendment generally 
does not apply. But cf. University of Colorado v. Derdyn, 
863 P.2d 929 (Colo. 1993), cert. denied, __ U.S. __ (1994) 
(upholding a Fourth Amendment challenge to a drug-testing 
program for university athletes). This proves nothing except 
that, if James ever succeeds to that high level of athletic 
competition, he may expect, then, to give up some privacy; 
it does not prove that he has given it up now. 


(3) The District argues that its drug-testing program is 
"minimally intrusive" because it is "non-punitive" and "con- 
fidential." In fact it is neither. Students who flunk the test 
are forced to quit sports or to submit to drug counseling and 


35 


weekly urinalysis. Those who flunk a second or third time 
are not even given that Hobson’s choice -- instead, they are 
automatically kicked out of the sports program for two or 
more seasons. Most students would consider that punish- 
ment. Indeed, suspension is the prescribed punishment for 
students who demonstrate poor sportsmanship, misuse the 
school’s athletic equipment, or otherwise breach the its rules 
for athletes. (Pl. Ex. 5 at 63). What is punishment in the 
one context is also punishment in the other.” 


As the District itself concedes, "community life [in Ver- 
nonia] centers around the schools, with interscholastic athlet- 
ics playing a dominant role." Pet. Br. at 3. Therefore, to 
be denied the right to participate in school sports is, in ef- 
fect, to be excluded in part from the community. That can- 
not be viewed as anything but punishment. What is more, it 
is public punishment. It is true that the District does not 
publish the test results. But in a small town such as Ver- 
nonia, where community life revolves around the schools 
and school sports, everyone will know when a student tests 
positive, because it will be obvious that the student, once on 
the team, no longer is. The "secret" will inevitably get out, 
starting with the student’s teammates and spreading from 
there. 


The fact that the District does not report test results to 
the police for law enforcement purposes -- if it is a fact, see 
note 13, supra -- does not support its contention that the pri- 
vacy expectations of athletes should be discounted in the 
weighing of individual and governmental interests. To do 
so would overinflate the government’s side of the balance, 


** The fact that the District calls each positive test an "offense" and that 
the length of the suspension increases with the number of offensives, 
(J.A. 9), further undermines the District’s contention that the drug- 
testing program is nonpunitive. 


36 


as the Colorado Supreme Court explained while striking 
down a random drug-testing program for university athletes: 


It is true that an intrusion by the government 
outside the context of criminal law enforcement 
is generally less of an intrusion than one for 
the purposes of law enforcement. However, as 
a matter of law, we already take this fact into 
account when we analyze this case according to 
the standards of Skinner and Von Raab, rather 
than according to the standards of the typical 
cases in the area of criminal procedure .... 
In other words, were we to attribute less 
weight to the students’ privacy interests be- 
cause this is not a criminal case, and also start 
with the premise that Skinner and Von Raab 
control, we would be, in effect, giving double 
weight in our analysis to the fact that we are 
not dealing with an issue in criminal procedure 


University of Colorado v. Derdyn, 863 P.2d at 942. 


(4) The District contends that its drug-testing program 
is minimally intrusive because the conditions under which 
athletes are tested are essentially the same as using a public 
restroom or locker room. Pet. Br. at 42. But, of course, 
there are substantial differences. A person urinating in a 
public restroom is not forced to do so, is not subject to visu- 
al and aural monitoring and, most importantly, does not sur- 
render the urine for analysis by government officials. In 
public facilities, individuals blend into the crowd; they are 
not singled out for observation. Indeed, it is considered 
taboo even to appear to be observing others in a public rest- 
room. People avert their eyes from one another; they attend 
to their own needs and then leave. For most schoolchildren, 
there is a world of difference between using a public facility 


37 


and being ordered to fill a specimen bottle while a teacher 
watches and listens.” 


(5) Finally, the District contends that its drug-testing 
program is minimally intrusive because it applies only to 
students who "voluntarily" engage in school sports and thus 
can be avoided by students who object to it. Pet. Br. at 42- 
43. To be sure, the program is less intrusive than it would 
be if it applied to all students and thus was unavoidable. 
But even as applied to athletes only, the intrusion is still ex- 
treme, considering what students must give up to escape 
testing: participation in school sports. That is a very high 
price to pay for asserting a constitutional right. As the Dis- 
trict superintendent testified, playing school sports is an "im- 
portant part of the school experience." (Pl. Ex. 5 at 7; see 
also J.A. 20). The court below made the same observation: 
"Participation in athletics is obviously highly desirable and 
encouraged, as this record shows. The fact is that parents 
wish to have their children obtain the physical and mental 
benefits of organized sports. That, too, is part of the educa- 
tional process; part of what tax dollars pay for." 23 F.3d at 
1525 (Pet. App. 55a). 


The District cites United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 
U.S. 543, for the proposition that a search is unintrusive as 
a matter of law if it can be evaded, somehow, anyhow. But 
that is not, in fact, the holding of that case. Martinez- 
Fuerte allowed immigration officials to briefly detain motor- 
ists at fixed checkpoints near the border to inquire whether 
they were in this country legally. The Court described this 
as minimally intrusive compared to a full-scale search of the 
person. /d. at 558. It also noted that motorists who object 
to even that much intrusion can learn in advance where the 


?° Adults, too, use public restrooms, but the District does not contend 
that adults have thereby lost all expectation of privacy in their urine or 
the process of excreting it. 


38 


checkpoints are and take other roads to avoid them. Jd. at 
559. This was not, of course, the decisive factor in the 
Court’s ruling. Nevertheless, the District makes much of 
the fact that its students, like the motorists in Martinez- 
Fuerte, can avoid the drug test by not going out for school 
sports. What the District overlooks, of course, is that stu- 
dents in Vernonia, unlike the motorists in Martinez-Fuerte, 
cannot avoid the test and still get where they were going. 
There are no "other roads" for students who want to partici- 
pate in organized athletics. The District’s sports program is, 
so to speak, the only game in town, a point the District con- 
cedes at page 3 of its brief: "Because of its size and loca- 
tion, the town has few recreational opportunities or organ- 
ized entertainment programs for elementary and high school 
students." 


In sum, the fact that the District’s drug test can be 
avoided -- because it applies only to students who play 
sports and playing sports is "voluntary" -- does not signifi- 
cantly diminish the privacy intrusion.”’ 


2. The District’s Interest In Drug Testing 
Is Not Compelling 


The privacy interests affected by the District’s drug- 
testing program are significant, as explained in the preceding 
section. By comparison, the District’s interest in maintain- 
ing the program is slight. 


*” Just as students do not have to play school sports, people who work 
for the Customs Service do not Aave to work there; they can seek em- 
ployment elsewhere and, therefore, their employment is "voluntary," too, 
under the District’s analysis. Even so, Customs agents do not surrender 
their privacy interests when they hire on. If they did, Von Raab would 
have been a much easier case to decide. 


39 


(a) 

The District says that its interest in drug testing, to be 
balanced against the students’ interest in privacy, is preserv- 
ing the safety of its athletes. But that, of course, is incor- 
rect. It is not athletic safety that should be weighed in the 
balance, for the District is free to pursue that goal by tradi- 
tional methods, including education and counseling, and per- 
haps even drug testing on suspicion of drug use. Rather, the 
interest to be entered on the District’s side of the balance is 
the "cost" of pursuing that goal without suspicion/ess drug 
testing. 


The surest way to measure this cost is to compare the 
number of drug-related athletic injuries before the drug- 
testing program and the number of such injuries after, since 
the test was in effect for several years before the trial of this 
case. A substantial drop-off after the test might indicate 
that it is an efficient means to its stated end and thus would 
be costly to discontinue. The record, however, does not in- 
dicate a drop-off. Although there is no evidence of a drug- 
related athletic injury affer testing began, neither is there 
evidence of any such injuries before it began. The District 
suspects that one wrestler was injured while on drugs, but 
that suspicion was never confirmed, as noted earlier. Meas- 
ured against its goal of reducing injuries from drugs, the 
District’s drug-testing program has little apparent value, and 
so the District’s interest in continuing the program is slight. 


(b) 

Even if the drug-testing program were an efficient 
means to its stated end -- safer sports -- the end itself "suf- 
fer[s] by comparison” to the ends of the drug-testing pro- 
grams upheld in Skinner and Von Raab, as the court below 
correctly noted. 23 F.3d at 1526 (Pet. App. 56a). The goal 
of the Skinner program, which this Court found barely suffi- 
cient to justify urine testing, as opposed to less intrusive 


40 


blood and breath testing, 489 U.S. at 625-27, was to prevent 
train wrecks and their attendant loss of life and property 
damage. In Von Raab, the goals were preserving the integ- 
rity of the Nation’s borders and preventing the misuse of 
deadly weapons. Accordingly, the Court could say in Skin- 
ner and Von Raab that the employees covered by the drug 
tests there hold "safety-" or "security-sensitive" positions and 
"discharge duties fraught with such risks of injuries to others 
that even a momentary lapse of attention can have disastrous 
consequences." Skinner, 489 U.S. at 628; quoted with ap- 
proval in Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 670. These precedents 
make clear that our precious Fourth Amendment freedoms 
do not give way except to the most compelling safety and 
security concerns. 


That point is bolstered by Von Raab’s conclusion that 
drug testing may be unconstitutional for Custom Service 
employees who are not engaged in front-line drug interdic- 
tion and do not carry firearms. No doubt some of the 
employees in this group -- which includes messengers -- op- 
erate motor vehicles, either on- or off-duty, which is un- 
questionably a more dangerous activity than middle- and 
high-school athletics. Even so, these employees could not 
be compelled to submit to a urine test under the Service’s 
screening program without some proof that they were likely 
to gain access to "sensitive information" and thus pose a 
threat to national security. Jd. at 677-78. 


The District’s concern for the safety of student athletes, 
albeit well-intentioned, simply does not rise to the level of 
the safety concerns that were found sufficiently compelling 
in Skinner and Von Raab to justify so serious an invasion of 
privacy as the compelled production and testing of urine. 
There certainly is no risk of harm on the order of a train 
wreck or gun battle if a student athlete competes while 
drug-impaired. Indeed, the District’s experience shows that 
there is little risk of any injury, let alone a serious one; as 


4] 


noted earlier, the District cannot prove a single drug-related 
athletic injury in the history of its sports program. Even if 
there were some drug-related injuries that escaped detection, 
they could not have been very serious. The District’s athlet- 
ic director testified that the typical injury in the girl’s sports 
program (which includes volleybal!, cross country, basket- 
ball, track, and golf) was a "muscle-type" injury, such as a 
"pulled muscle" from "improper warmup” or a "torn liga- 
ment or cartilage." (J.A. 43-44). The boy’s sports program 
includes the same sports (excepting volleyball) plus football 
and wrestling. The District offered no evidence that the 
typical injury for boys is more serious than the typical in- 
jury for girls, so the Court should assume that it is not more 
serious. No injury should ever be taken lightly, of course, 
but the government’. interest in preventing pulled muscles 
and torn ligaments is not equal to its interest in preventing 
loss of life or breaches of national security. 


The District argues, correctly, that just because there 
have not been any serious, drug-related injuries does not 
mean that there could not be any. The issue, however, is 
not whether such an injury could happen, but the likelihood 
that it will without drug testing. Nearly everything is possi- 
ble, but not everything is probable, and some things are very 
improbable, if experience is any guide. The District’s sports 
program has no history of drug-related injuries, even before 
its drug test. On this record, therefore, the probability of 
future injuries if testing stops must be slight, if calculable at 
all. Fourth Amendment rights should not be lost to mere 
speculation about potential harm.”* 


** The Skinner Court demanded more than speculation. As noted above, 
the drug-testing program at issue there was supported by unchallenged 
studies showing both a high incidence of drug use among railroad work- 
ers -- one of eight drank on the job and eighteen percent reported for 
work either "very drunk" or at least "a little drunk," 489 U.S. at 607 n.1 

(continued...) 


42 


Recognizing the holes in the record, the District notes 
that illicit drugs can be harmful to minors aside from their 
potential for causing sports injuries. Drugs, the District 
says, can interfere with memory, sensation, and perception, 
and can "lead people to take risks, to be careless and impul- 
sive and to disregard instructions," Pet. Br. at 30 and 31, 
n.2, depending, of course, on the type of drug and when and 
how it is used. But this, of course, is true for both young 
and old drug users and for both athletes and nonathletes. If 
that potential, generalized harm were sufficient to justify 
random drug testing, then everyone would be subject to 
urine testing regardless of age or occupation, and Skinner 
and Von Raab would just be so much spilt ink. Von Raab 
makes clear, however, that not everyone is subject to test- 
ing: customs agents, for example, are immune if they are 
not directly involved in drug interdiction, do not carry fire- 
arms, and do not have access to sensitive information. That 
holding cannot be reconciled with the District’s argument 
that the physiological and psychological effects of illicit 
drugs are sufficient alone to permit drug testing for any po- 
tential user. 


(c) 

The District’s interest in its drug testing program is di- 
minished substantially by its failure to prove a high inci- 
dence of drug use within its sports program. Some groups 
targeted for drug testing are engaged in such ultra-hazardous 
activities that even a single, drug-impaired individual can 
cause catastrophe -- airline pilots, railroad engineers, and 
nuclear reactor operators come quickly to mind. According- 
ly, the government may be justified in testing these groups 


28 (continued) 

-- as well as a clear connection to railroad safety -- drug-impaired work- 
ers caused at /east 34 fatalities and $28 million in property damage in 
just eight years. /d. at 608. 


43 


even without evidence that many, if any, group members ac- 
tually use drug. The Court made this precise point in Von 
Raab in response to the contention that the Custom Service 
drug test was unjustified without proof of frequent drug use 
by customs agents: "The mere circumstance that all but a 
few of the employees tested are entirely innocent of wrong- 
doing does not impugn the program’s validity," given the 
"substantial" harm the program seeks to guard against. 489 
U.S. at 674-75. But for groups engaged in less hazardous 
activities, where the potential harm from a drug-impaired in- 
dividual is relatively minor -- pulled muscles and torn liga- 
ments, not plane crashes, train wrecks, or reactor meltdowns 
-- the lack of evidence of frequent drug use within the 
group substantially reduces the government's interest in sub- 
jecting all group members to the indignity of drug testing. 


(d) 

The District’s interest in dragnet drug testing, slight to 
begin with, is diminished further by the limited utility of its 
testing program. The test does not cure drug use, nor does 
it prevent athletes from competing while on drugs. The 
only way to prevent that is to test each student in advance 
of each athletic event, as the District’s own expert agreed. 
(Def. Ex. 106 at 81). See also Brooks v. East Chambers 
Consol. Indep. School Dist., 730 F.Supp. 759, 765 (S.D.Tex. 
1989), aff'd without published op., 930 F.2d 915 (Sth Cir. 
1991). Drug testing is simply a means of detecting those 
who use drugs. As such, it offers some deterrence to drug 
use, including use in athletic competition. But there are al- 
ready several substantial deterrents. First and foremost is 
the usual fear of getting caught, which is possibie, of 
course, without random drug testing. Another existing deter- 
rent is that students who volunteer to play sports want to 
play well and thus will avoid using drugs in competition for 
fear of impairing their performance. They might take drugs 
outside of competition but, in that event, there is no risk of 


44 


a drug-related athletic injury which, again, is the District’s 
announced concern. Finally, there is concern for personal 
safety. As the District itself observes, playing sports on 
drugs can increase the risk of injury. That fact is surely not 
lost on most athletes and, therefore, most will avoid drugs in 
competition for fear of getting hurt. "It is, of course, the 
fear of the accident, not the fear of a postaccident revela- 
tion, that deters." Skinner, 489 U.S. at 651 (Marshall, J., 
dissenting). All things considered, the District’s drug-testing 
program provides little added deterrence to the use of illicit 
drugs in school sports. 


What little deterrence it does add is compromised sub- 
stantially by the limitations of the District’s drug test. It 
covers only a few drugs -- marijuana, amphetamines, co- 
caine, and occasionally LSD -- conspicuously omitting alco- 
hol, the one drug that everyone agrees is most readily avail- 
able to and most often abused by both minors and adults, as 
well as steroids, the drug that is most commonly used by 
athletes seeking to enhance their performance. Thus, if 
there are athletes who want to compete under the influence 
of drugs -- and the District has not proved there are any -- 
the drug test will not deter them; they will simply switch to 
alcohol or drugs not covered by the test.” 


(e) 
Even if the District’s drug-testing program were an ef- 
ficient means to a compelling end, the availability of a less 


° Yet another limitation of the test is that it merely indicates whether a 
student has taken one of the targeted drugs at some time in the recent 
past. It does not indicate how much the student took or when, or wheth- 
er it was enough to cause any impairment, let alone substantial impair- 
ment, at any given point in time. The test is not like a blood alcohol 
test, which determines not only whether a person has alcohol in his 
blood, but also how much alcohol is there -- whether, in particular, there 
is enough to put the person over the “legal limit," at which point sub- 
stantial impairment can be presumed or proven. 


45 


intrusive means to the same end -- namely, drug testing on 
suspicion of drug use -- substantially diminishes the Dis- 
trict’s interest in the program. The District argues that 
suspicion-based testing, which it has not tried (J.A. 35), is 
unworkable because, it says, school officials cannot formu- 
late, through observation alone, a reasonable suspicion that a 
student is drug-impaired. But the whole premise of its 
drug-testing program is that they can do that. As explained 
earlier, the District adopted the program after it concluded 
that it had a drug problem. The basis for that conclusion 
was an apparent rise in the number of unruly students. 
These students, or most of them, the District says, were un- 
ruly because of drugs. Obviously, then, the District can tell 
without testing who is on drugs, or at least it thinks it can: 
It is the unruly students. Either the District is wrong -- not 
all unruly students are on drugs -- in \vhich case the founda- 
tion for its drug-testing program collapses: there is no drug 
problem. Or it’s right -- all unruly students are on drugs -- 
in which case the foundation still collapses because, in that 
case, the District would not need to test anyone to determine 
who is on drugs, it would only need to observe who is mis- 
behaving. At most, the District would have an interest in 
testing the students who misbehave and thus give reason to 
be suspected of using drugs. But it would have no rational 
interest in testing the students, like James, who are well- 
behaved. 


The District can’t have it both ways. It can’t argue, on 
the one hand, that "[t]Jeachers and coaches cannot reliably 
detect drug intoxication by observation," Pet. Br. at 37, and 
then argue on the other hand that, based on observation 
alone, school officials know, or at least reasonably suspect, 
that a large part of the student body uses illicit drugs and, 
moreover, that particular students use them -- namely, the 
Big Elks, the Drug Cartellians, and "leading student ath- 
letes." Pet. Br. at 6. The court of appeals was unimpressed 


46 


with the District’s we-can’t-tell-without-testing argument, 
noting that "the testimony showed" that "teachers and ad- 
ministrators could detect behavior and physical problems 
that rather clearly appeared to be drug related." 23 F.3d at 
1522 (Pet. App. 35a)(emphasis added). 


In Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 625, the Court held 
that the police could not stop motorists without suspicion of 
wrongdoing to check for unlicensed drivers and unsafe vehi- 
cles. The Court noted that these "roving spot checks" serve 
an important end -- enforcing the motor vehicle code -- but 
concluded nevertheless that they are not "a sufficiently pro- 
ductive mechanism to justify the intrusion upon Fourth 
Amendment interests such stops entail," "[g]iven the alterna- 
tive mechanisms available." Jd. at 659. The "foremost" of 
the alternatives, the Court said, "is acting upon observed 
violations." Jd. Likewise, the "foremost" method for en- 
forcing student conduct codes is acting on observed viola- 
tions. The availability of that alternative enforcement mech- 
anism diminishes the District’s interest in random, suspi- 
cionless drug testing.*° 


*° In Michigan Dep't of State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444 (1990), which 
upheld sobriety roadblocks, the Court explained that Delaware v. Prouse 
was not intended to approve “searching examination of the ‘effective- 
ness’" of particular searches and seizures. Sitz, 496 U.S. at 454. Never- 
theless, the Court went on to examine the results of the roadblock and 
concluded that it was at least as effective as the border checkpoint ap- 
proved in United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543. Sitz, 496 
U.S. at 455. Furthermore, in its summation, the Sitz Court said that "the 
extent to which [sobriety roadblocks] can reasonably be said to advance 
[the State’s interest in preventing drunk driving]" was part of the basis 
for its decision to approve such roadblocks. /d. Read together, Prouse 
and Sitz hold that the effectiveness of a search in achieving its stated 
goal is not dispositive, but is at least a factor to consider, in determining 
whether the search is reasonable under the Fourth Amendment. The 
District agrees. See Pet. Br. at 15-16 (citing "effectiveness" as one fac- 
tor to balance in evaluating a search). 


47 


(f) 


The District’s brief refers occasionally to a second po- 
tential justification for its drug-testing program: maintaining 
order in the classroom. But that goal, on this record, is as 
defective constitutionally as the stated goal of athletic safety. 
The government has no less interest in maintaining order 
and productivity in its workplace than in its schools, espe- 
cially for important agencies like the Customs Service. And 
yet that interest alone proved insufficient to subject all Cus- 
toms employees to drug testing. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 
677-78.*! 


In any event, if the District’s hidden agenda is to re- 
duce disruptions in the classroom, it is difficult to see the 
logic of its drug-testing program. Teachers don’t need drug 
tests to find out which students are being disruptive. If dis- 
ruptive behavior is not obvious, then it’s not disruptive be- 
havior. Therefore, to deter disruptions, school officials can 
and should punish the perpetrators. It makes little sense, 
however, to respond to students who disrupt class with a 
drug test for only those students who go out for sports. Not 
all disruptive students play sports, so the test won’t deter 
them from further misbehavior. And not all athletes who 
misbehave in class take drugs, so the test won’t deter them 
either. Finally, not all athletes who take drugs misbehave in 
class, so subjecting them to the test won’t reduce classroom 
disruptions. In short, the District’s drug-testing program is 
not rationally related to its after-the-fact statement of pur- 
pose. As the court of appeals observed, "If the goal was to 
reduce drug use in the student body in general [as opposed 


*' The District claims that athletes are "role models" and “leaders” for 
the rest of the student body. Pet. Br. at 30. But this is another over- 
statement. Two-thirds of its high school students and three-fourths of its 
junior high students are athletes. /d. at 3. Not everyone can be a role 
model. And there can’t be more students leading than being led. 


48 


to avoiding athletic injuries], testing athletes seems to be a 
considerably more roundabout way of reaching that goal." 
23 F.3d at 1522 (Pet. App. 35a). 


3. The Students’ Interest In Privacy Out- 
weighs The District’s Interest In Testing 


The District’s drug-testing program is a extreme inva- 
sion of privacy. It compels students to engage in one of the 
most private human activities -- the excretion of urine -- on 
demand and under the watchful eyes of an adult authority 
figure, and then to surrender the urine to the government for 
chemical analysis. It also forces students to disclose their 
prescription medications, thus enabling school officials to 
discover, even without testing, the students’ most private 
health secrets. 


Balanced against these substantial privacy intrusions is 
the District’s interest in reducing the risk of drug-related 
athletic injuries. On this record, that risk is slight, given 
that the District experienced no drug-related injuries in its 
sports program before the drug test began. Furthermore, the 
typical athletic injury -- often a pulled muscle, sometimes a 
torn ligament -- is a relatively minor harm, compared to the 
"disastrous consequences" that the drug test in Skinner was 
designed to prevent, 489 U.S. at 1419, or the "extraordinary 
safety and national security hazards" that the Von Raab test 
was intended to avert. 489 U.S. at 674. This combination 
of slight risk and minor harm produces a less-than- 
compelling argument for the District’s drug-testing program, 
which is weakened further by the limitations of the test and 
the availability of less intrusive alternatives to the same 
goal. Accordingly, the Court should hold that the District’s 
program violates the Fourth Amendment. To hold otherwise 
would mean that the Amendment has become frail protec- 
tion indeed against government invasions of privacy. 


49 


CONCLUSION 
The judgment below should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Thomas M. Christ j 
(Counsel of Record) 

John A. Wittmayer 

Volunteer Attorneys 

ACLU Foundation of Oregon, Inc. 

101 S.W. Main, Suite 2000 

Portland, Oregon 97204 

(503) 221-1011 


Steven R. Shapiro 

American Civil Liberties Union 
Foundation 

132 West 43 Street 

New York, New York 10036 

(212) 944-9800 


Dated: February 16, 1995 


50 


