* " | 
Supreme Court, U.S. 


0 FILED 
me, O6G50 AR 2 0 1995 


M 
IN THE OFFICE OF THE CLERK 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


VERNONIA SCHOOL DISTRICT 47], 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


WAYNE and Jupy ACTON, 
guardians ad litem for JAMES ACTON, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONER 
VERNONIA SCHOOL DISTRICT 47J 


TIMOTHY R. VOLPERT * 

JOHN A. MATTERAZZO 
CLAUDIA LARKINS 

DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE 
2300 First Interstate Tower 
1300 Southwest Fifth Avenue 
Portland, OR 97201 

(503) 241-2300 


* Counsel of Record for 
Petitioner Vernonia 
School District 47J 


WILSON - Eres PRINTING Co., INC. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


eh ee ie 
7 2 
© 
| 


STATEMENT PURSUANT TO RULE 29.1 


Petitioner is not a corporation and has no parent com- 
panies, subsidiaries or affiliates. 


(i) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


STATEMENT PURSUANT TO RULE 29.1 ................ 


TABLE OF ANTHORITIES .002.2.222..2.--cscscsececscceeeceeee 


I, 


III. 


IX. 


VIII. 


THIS COURT SHOULD ACCEPT THE CON- 
CURRENT FINDINGS. ...2.2..2..........-.-cecsecoceeeecoees 


. THE ACTONS MISSTATE OR MISCHARAC- 


TERIZE SOME FACTS. .00000200.......-..cscceceeseseseseeeees 


THIS CASE SHOULD NOT BE REMANDED 
TO THE COURT OF APPEALS 


SEARCHES IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SET- 
TING SHOULD BE EVALUATED UNDER 
NEW JERSEY v. T.L.O. shesphanitbatitittstineagneeenas 


THE VERNONIA ATHLETES WERE SUB- 
JECT TO A SIGNIFICANT RISK OF SERI- 
IIIT, scrsiptnncssesienssntensenscssenecttennstanencesesseseesee 


THE STUDENT BODY WAS DISORDERLY 
LARGELY BECAUSE OF DRUG USE ............ 


. DRUG INTOXICATION CANNOT BE RELI- 


ABLY DETECTED BY OBSERVATION AND 
THEREFORE DRUG TESTING IS_ RE- 
SUITE sitbistnssnstssrentnsesnessncnientnersunstecessaseusesssecetecenseneese 


EEE 


THE POLICY RESULTED IN A MINIMAL 
PRIVACY INTRUSION sie 


A. Student Athletes’ Expectations of Privacy 
Are Minimal as to Physical Conditions Which 
Could Endanger Them While Participating 
EEE 


Page 
i 


XI. 


XII. 
XIII. 


XIV. 


CONCLUSION 


iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


B. Student Athletes Have a Minimal Expecta- 
tion of Privacy Because They Volunteered 
for Sports Knowing that They Must Submit 
OD Fe TE ecnntenticteticntitiednnienntieitntindin 


C. The District Was Diligent and Successful 
in Its Efforts to Minimize the Privacy In- 


testing is minimal and is not an affront to 
reasonable expectations of privacy ........... 

D. Student Athletes Voluntarily Accept Condi- 
ditions at Least as Intrusive as the Policy.... 

1. The Policy does not require students to 
“excrete on demand” 


2. The Policy is a minimal intrusion on stu- 
dent privacy even though it might detect 
drug use that does not take place during 
school ........ ml = 

8. There is no evidence that private medical 
information will be inappropriately gath- 
ered or disseminated by the District ........ 

4. The Policy is non-punitive 


THE POLICY PROVIDED A NECESSARY 
DETERRENT . 


‘THE ACTONS CONCEDE THAT THE POL- 


ICY WAS COMPLETELY RANDOM AND 
VESTED NO DISCRETION IN SCHOOL OF- 
FICIALS 


THE POLICY WAS EFFECTIVE 


THE DIFFICULTY OF DETECTING DRUG 
USE BY OBSERVATION DOES NOT UNDER- 
MINE THE EXISTENCE OF A DRUG PROB- 
LEM IN THE DISTRICT 


THE DISTRICT’S INTERESTS IN ADDRESS- 
ING THE DRUG PROBLEM ARE SUFFI- 
CIENT TO ALLOW DRUG TESTING ............. 


Page 


11 


12 


12 


13 


13 


14 


15 
15 


17 


18 
18 


19 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Page 
Bethel School Dist. No. 408 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675 
(1986) 14 
Donovan v. Dewey, 452 U.S. 594 (1981) ~.............. 11 
Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 482 U.S. 656 (1987).. 1 
Michigan Dep’t of State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444 
(1989) 17 
National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, 
489 U.S. 656 (1989) ..... passim 
New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 825 (1985) ............ passim 
New York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691 (1987) .............. 11, 16 
Skinner v. Railway Labor Exec. Ass’n, 489 U.S. 
602 (1989) passim 
State ex rel. Juvenile Dep’t v. DuBois, 821 P.2d 
1124 (Or. App. 1991) 4 
United States v. Biswell, 406 U.S. $311 (1972) ......... 11 
United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543 
(1976) 9 
Rule 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a) 1 
Constitutions 
Neen acEEe passim 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONER 
VERNONIA SCHOOL DISTRICT 473 


I. THIS COURT SHOULD ACCEPT THE CONCUR- 
RENT FINDINGS 


The Actons challenge the district court’s findings of fact 
on sufficiency and hearsay grounds and urge this Court to 
reject the findings. However, findings of fact “shall not 
be set aside unless clearly erroneous.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 
52(a). When, as here, a court of appeals finds no clear 
error in a district court’s findings, 23 F.3d 1514, 1519 
(Pet. App. A at 20a), the findings of the two courts are 
concurrent. Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 482 U.S. 
656, 665 (1987). “This Court cannot undertake to re- 
view concurrent findings of fact by two courts below in the 
absence of a very obvious and exceptional showing of 
error.” Id.* 


The Actons essentially argue that the only evidence 
the District could rely upon in deciding it had a drug 
problem was direct observation of drug use. They also 
suggest that the District’s conclusion that a serious drug 
problem existed was based on “unconfirmed, second hand 
reports of off-campus drug use, almost all of it hearsay 
or hearsay within hearsay.” (Resp. Br. at 3). The court 
of appeals rejected an assignment of error to that effect. 
23 F.3d at 1519 (Pet. App. A at 20a). In addition, there 
is adequate evidence of a drug problem irrespective of the 
so-called “hearsay,” including: (1) direct observations of 
“actions of athletes and others that were so far out of 
the norm that drug use was a logical inference,” id. (Pet. 
App. A at 19a); (2) direct observations of students using 
and glorifying drugs; (3) testimony that athletes wrote 
class assignments admitting and glorifying drug use; and (4) 
actual arrests of athletes for drug use. (J.A. 46-47, 49- 


1The Actons note that the court of appeals made some addi- 
tional comments on the facts after finding no clear error. A court 
of appeals cannot undermine the legal effect of its finding of no 
clear factual error simply by recharacterizing the facts in its 
opinion. 


2 


50, 63-64). While none of the Actons’ witnesses (not 
even James Acton) denied that a serious drug problem 
existed in the District, the Actons single out and criticize 
each fact relied upon by the District as if each must be suf- 
ficient by itself to establish a drug problem. The deter- 
mination of a drug problem, however, was based not on 
any one fact, but on the numerous facts and circum- 
stances shown at trial. 


More direct evidence of a drug problem exists here 
than in Skinner v. Railway Labor Exec. Ass'n, 489 U.S. 
602 (1989) or National Treasury Employees Union v. 
Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656 (1989). In Skinner, the Court 
relied on findings of drug use by railroad employees na- 
tionally, without specific proof that each railroad whose 
employees would be tested had a problem. 489 U.S. at 
607. In Von Raab, the Court relied entirely on possibili- 
ties, without evidence of any actual problem in the Cus- 
toms Service. 489 U.S. at 683 (Scalia, J., dissenting). By 
contrast, the District established a serious drug problem 
in the very saine locale where testing occurred. (Pet. Br. 
at 4-7; Def. Ex. 105). Such proof is more than the Court 
required in either Skinner or Von Raab. 


II. THE ACTONS MISSTATE OR MISCHARACTER- 
IZE SOME FACTS 


The Actons’ brief contains several mischaracterizations 
of the record evidence. The Actons suggest that the smell 
of marijuana in the wrestler’s hotel room was the sole 
basis for the coach’s concern that the injury was drug re- 
lated. The coach also considered that the injury resulted 
from the wrestler’s failure to execute a protective move 


2 The district court admitted and the court of appeals also con: 
sidered evidence based on the reports of others, which the Actons 
claim both courts should have rejected. For example, Principal 
Aultman testified that students admitted using drugs to him and 
that the football coach toid him that athletes had admitted drug use. 
(J.A. 22-24). As the court of appeals noted, Vernonia teachers and 
administrators “were told of incidents by others who were con- 
cerned and had no reason to lie.” 23 F.8d at 1519 (Pet. App. 
19a-20a). 


7 


3 


he had practiced “probably a thousand times” and that he 
“didn’t react like he had reacted a hundred times in the 
past.” (J.A. 55-56). 


The Actons claim only one witness testified to the 
need for mass expulsions and that his conclusion was 
“hyperbole.” That witness, Principal Aultman, testified 
that he discussed mass expulsions with his staff, but they 
rejected that alternative because expelling students does 
not solve the problem (J.A. 26-27). No basis exists in 
the record for concluding that Mr. Aultman’s statement 
was hyperbole. 


The Actons suggest the District rushed into the testing 
program, “impatient for immediate results.” (Resp. Br. 
at 1). In fact, the District’s efforts to combat drug use 
prior to implementing the Policy—including classes, 
speakers and the like—spanned several years. (J.A. 25- 
26, 49, 63). 


The Actons say that athletes were not required to give 
a urine sample as part of the pre-season physical examina- 
tion. (Resp. Br. at 35). The evidence demonstrates that 
a physical exam was required, that James Acton took 
such an exam and that he provided a urine sample as 
part of the required physical. (J.A. 17; R. 61-62). Unless 
James Acton offered to give a sample, the only reasonable 
inference is that giving a urine sample was part of the 
required physical. 


Finally, contrary to the Actons’ assertion, the evidence 
shows that at the same time school officials noticed a 
drastic increase in drug use by students, including ath- 
letes, the frequency and severity of athletic injuries also 
increased. (J.A. 39). After the Policy was implemented, 
classroom decorum improved drastically and athletic in- 
juries decreased. (J.A. 43, 50). 


4 


Ill. THIS CASE SHOULD NOT BE REMANDED TO 
THE COURT OF APPEALS 


The Actons’ complaint alleged violations of both the 
federal and state constitutions. (J.A. 5-6). The court of 
appeals noted that the Oregon courts have never decided 
a random drug testing case, leaving the court of appeals 
“without a compass that clearly points us in the right 
direction unless we use a federal compass.” 23 F.3d at 
1518 (Pet. App. 16a). Consequently, it “decide[d] the 
case based on federal law, confident . . . that Oregon 
would do no less.” 23 F.3d at 1519 (Pet. App. A at 
17a-18a). If this Court holds the Policy does not vio- 
late the Fourth Amendment, it should reverse rather than 
remand. The court of appeals was required to rely on the 
federal constitution when it decided this case. Because 
Oregon still has not decided a random drug testing search 
case, the court of appeals would be required to do the 
same thing today. 


IV. SEARCHES IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SETTING 
SHOULD BE EVALUATED UNDER NEW JERSEY 
v. T.L.O. 


Although this case involves a public school search, the 
Actons virtually ignore New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 
325 (1985), the case that governs such searches.’ In- 
stead, the Actons attempt to draw unfavorable distinctions 
between this case and Skinner and Von Raab. Those 
cases do concern the same type of search involved here, 
suspicionless drug testing by urinalysis, and thus provide 
significant guidance on many aspects of this case.* But 


*The Actons do argue that the Oregon courts have rejected 
T.L.O. (Resp. Br. at 32, n.21). In the case they cite, however, the 
court did not reach the issue of whether to foliow T.L.0. State ex 
rel. Juvenile Dep’t v. DuBois, 821 P.2d 1124 (Or. App. 1991). 


4 Skinner and Von Raab resolved several issues regarding urinal- 
ysis drug testing. The Court acknowledged the impracticability, if 
not impossibility, of detecting drug intoxication by observation, 
Skinner, 489 U.S. at 628-629, and established that urinalysis drug 
testing, properly designed to minimize privacy intrusions, is a 
reasonable means for detecting and deterring drug intoxication. 
Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 676. The Court also established that while 


5 


“what is reasonable [for Fourth Amendment purposes] 
depends on the context within which a search takes place,” 
T.L.O., 469 U.S. at 337, and because the context here is 
a public school, T.L.O. cannot be ignored. 


The school setting demands “some easing of the re- 
strictions to which searches by public authorities are or- 
dinarily subject” and maintenance of order in schools re- 
quires “a certain flexibility in school disciplinary proce- 
dures.” 469 U.S. at 340. The essence of 7.L.O. is that 
“the balance between the schoolchild’s legitimate expecta- 
tions of privacy and the school’s equally legitimate need 
to maintain an environment in which learning can take 
place,” 469 U.S. at 340, tilts in favor of maintaining 
discipline and order. The interests of students may be 
invaded only to the extent “necessary to achieve the legiti- 
mate end of preserving order in the schools.” Jd. Just 
as Skinner allowed the Government to take “all neces- 
sary and reasonable regulatory steps to prevent or deter 
[performance of sensitive tasks while drug impaired]”, 
489 U.S. at 633, educators may take all reasonable steps 
to preserve order and protect their student athletes. 


Drug use by students in the District created two sig- 
nificant problems: (1) athletes were endangering their 
safety and the safety of others on the playing field; and 
(2) the student body was in “a state of rebellion.” 796 
F.Supp. 1354, 1357 (Pet. App. B at 85a-86a). The Dis- 
trict was entitled to take reasonable measures necessary 
to regain discipline and order in the school and, due to 
the government’s “heightened obligation to safeguard stu- 
dents whom it compels to attend school,” to protect the 
safety of its athletes. 7.L.0., 469 U.S. at 353 (Black- 
mun, J., concurring). This Court need not decide 


urinalysis, in the abstract, “intrudes upon expectations of privacy 
that society has long recognized as reasonable,” Skinner, 489 U.S. 
at 617, such an intrusion can be minimal as to those who “reason- 
ably should expect effective inquiry into their fitness and probity.” 
Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 672. Finally, deterrence is a valid goal of 
a drug testing program and a low incidence of positive tests 
establishes its success, rather than denying the existence of a 
problem. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 672-673, n.3. 


6 


whether, under Skinner and Von Raab, preventing a 
broken collar bone or a fatal arrythmia on the football 
field is more or less “compelling” than preventing a bullet 
wound at the border. The issue here is whether the Policy 
was a reasonable and necessary way for the District to 
address the problem of student drug use. 


Vv. THE VERNONIA ATHLETES WERE SUBJECT TO 
A SIGNIFICANT RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY 


The first premise of the Actons’ argument that the risk 
of injury is slight is that the District’s athletes were not 
taking drugs. The concurrent findings conclude that the 
District had a drug problem involving athletes (Pet. Br. 
at 29, n.23), and many facts in the record support those 
findings. (Pet. Br. at 6-7). There is also evidence of at 
least one serious drug related sports injury. (J.A. 54- 
56). The small number of positive tests “does not im- 
pugn the program’s validity” because “when the goal of 
the Policy is deterrence,” a low detection rate “is more 
logically viewed as a hallmark of success.” Von Raab, 
489 US. at 674, 675, n.3. 


Playing sports creates risks of injuries including 
broken bones, spinal injuries, brain damage and even 
death. (J.A. 70-72).° It is uncontested that athletes 
playing sports on drugs pose a “substantially greater 
risk” to themselves and other athletes. (J.A. 68-69; 
Resp. Br. at 45). The Actons nevertheless claim that 
Vernonia athletes are subject only to risk of injuries 
said to be “typical” in non-contact sports, i.e., pulled 
muscles and torn ligaments. The risks associated with 
playing sports while on drugs are significant even in “non- 
contact” sports because potential sports injuries are not 
limited to trauma. Cocaine use creates a “substantial 
risk for cardiac arrest” or a “fatal arrhythmia.” (J.A. 72). 
Cocaine and amphetamines have an unpredictable effect 
on the heart which can cause death even for someone en- 


5 Even in the District’s golf program, a student was struck by a 
ball and another was hit by a club. (J.A. 48). 


F 


gaged in volleyball or track. (Def. Ex. 106 at 28); See 
also, Br. of Nat. Leagues of Cities, et al., at 11-12. | 


The Actons say the negative effects of drug use the 
District describes are experienced by all drug users and 
if \“generalized harm were sufficient to justify random 
drug testing, then everyone would be subject to urine 
testing.” (Resp. Br. at 43). The negative effects the 
Actons describe, while perhaps common to all drug users, 
pose enhanced risks to athletes. Public schools bear a 
heightened responsibility for educating and protecting 
their students, especially when they have reason to be- 
lieve student athletes are using illegal drugs. 


VI. THE STUDENT BODY WAS DISORDERLY 
LARGELY BECAUSE OF DRUG USE 


The Actons do not refute the concurrent findings of un- 
usually severe classroom disorder and discipline prob- 
lems which made it difficult for the teachers to educate. 
796 F.Supp. at 1357 (Pet. App. B at 85a-86a). The 
Actons simply argue that drug use did not cause the 
problem and accuse the District of concluding “that every 
unruly student is unruly because of drugs.” (Resp. Br. 
at 4). When students, including athletes, suddenly and 
uncharacteristically begin to act defiantly and belliger- 
ently, boast in the halls and classrooms about drug use, 
confess their drug use to teachers, act unusually in class 
and on the playing field, and are even arrested for drug 
use, it is reasonable to conclude that the behavior prob- 
lems in general were drug related. Contrary to the 
Actons’ assertion, what the teachers and administrators 
in Vernonia witnessed was not just students “generally 
act[ing] like juveniles.” (Resp. Br. at 2). 


The Actons attack the goal of maintaining order in 
the classroom because, “the government has no less in- 
terest in maintaining order and productivity in its work- 
place than in its schools.” (Resp. Br. at 48). Establish- 
ing discipline and maintaining order are essential to effec- 
tive education. Schools are populated by children and 


8 


“children at certain ages are inclined to test the outer 
boundaries of acceptable conduct and to imitate the mis- 
behavior of a peer if that misbehavior is not dealt with 
quickly.” 7.L.O., 469 U.S. at 352 (Blackmun, J., con- 
curring). Schools therefore have an interest in maintain- 
ing order which surpasses virtually any employer of adults. 


While an employer can simply fire disorderly em- 
ployees, society expects teachers and administrators to 
do all they can to keep students in school. Suspension 
and expulsion, while available as a last resort, obviously 
hinder or terminate education and are frequently consid- 
ered a sign of failure by the school. Thus, teachers and 
administrators have the unique and frequently contradic- 
tory goals of keeping students in school—even those who 
are troubled—and maintaining sufficient order to educate. 


The Actons criticize the Policy for responding to class- 
room disorder by testing only athletes. (Resp. Br. at 48). 
Athletes in Vernonia were widely admired and were 
among the leaders of those using and glorifying drugs in 
the schools. (J.A. 20, 37). Juvenile drug use is driven 
by “peer pressure.” (Def. Ex. 106 at 42-43, 45-46). The 
District therefore had good reason to believe that, in ad- 
dition to achieving the primary goal of protecting ath- 
letes by deterring them from using drugs, the Policy would 
restore order and discipline by deterring drug use in the 
student population generally. Moreover, the District was 
advised by counsel that testing all extracurricular partici- 
pants could jeopardize the validity of drug testing. (J.A. 
30). | 


VIL DRUG INTOXICATION CANNOT BE RELIABLY 
DETECTED BY OBSERVATION AND THEREFORE 
DRUG TESTING IS REQUIRED 


The detection of drug intoxication by observation of 
behavior is wholly unreliable. (J.A. 67-68). “The only 
standard [for determining drug impairment] is the drug 
test.” (J.A. 67). This Court recognized that fact in 
Skinner and relied upon it to conclude that drug testing 


9 


is a reasonable and necessary means of detecting and de- 
terring drug intoxication. 489 U.S. at 628-629. “[S]ince 
the gravamen of the evil is performing certain functions 
while concealing the substance in the body, it may be 
necessary . . . to examine the body or its fluids to ac- 
complish the regulatory purpose.” 489 U.S. at 633. 


VIII. REASONABLE SUSPICION DOES NOT WORK 


The inherent unreliability of detecting drug use by 
observation makes it uniquely difficult to obtain reason- 
able suspicion of drug intoxication. Reasonable suspicion 
requires “sufficient probability.” 7.L.0., 469 U.S. at 346, 
quoting Hill v. California, 401 U.S. 797, 804 (1971). 
In the case of drug intoxication, observation simply can- 
not meet that standard. 


Requiring teachers and administrators to develop rea- 
sonable suspicion of drug intoxication based on inher- 
ently unreliable observation would profoundly undermine 
drug use detection and deterrence in schools.° Some 
teachers and administrators would inevitably choose to 
abandon detection efforts altogether, rather than face 
the minuscule odds that their hunches about intoxication 
would be correct. Others would have to single out 
and accuse individual students. That would be far more 
embarrassing to students, disruptive of the school en- 
vironment and destructive of the teacher-student rela- 
tionship than random testing, especially since accusa- 
tions based on observation will frequently be false. 
That method of detection would create a far greater 
“subjective” intrusion on privacy than the Policy. United 
States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 558 (1976), 
quoting United States v. Ortiz, 422 U.S. 891, 894-895 


® Drug education, of course, should continue, but it is far less 
effective. As Dr. Dupont explained, “just doing counseling, just 
doing education [sic] absent some test-based intervention will 
definitely not work to stop the drug use, or to defer [sic] it as 
preventative technique.” (Def. Ex. 106 at 60). 


10 


(1975). “A teacher’s focus is, and should be, on teach- 
ing and helping students, rather than on developing evi- 
dence against a particular troublemaker.” 7.L.O., 469 
U.S. at 353 (Blackmun, J., concurring). 


IX. THE POLICY RESULTED IN A MINIMAL PRI- 
VACY INTRUSION 


A. Student Athletes’ Expectations of Privacy Are Min- 
imal as to Physical Conditions Which Could En- 
danger Them While Participating in Sports 


The Actons admit that students generally “have less 
expectation[s] of privacy than adults in other settings.” 
(Resp. Br. at 32). The Actons argue, however, that stu- 
dent athletes are not subject to regulations comparable 
to those governing railroad employees. They character- 
ize the District’s athletic regulations as “trifling.” (Resp. 
Br. at 34)." But the Actons lose sight of two things. 
First, they ignore the pervasive regulation inherent in 
just being a student. “Of necessity, teachers have a de- 
gree of . . . authority over their students that is un- 
paralleled except perhaps in the relationship between 
parent and child.” 7.L.0., 469 U.S. at 348 (Powell, J., 
concurring). When the numerous rules imposed on ath- 
letes are considered in addition to the regulation inherent 
in being a student, it is readily apparent that student 
athletes are pervasively regulated. 


The Actons also lose sight of the reason privacy ex- 
pectations of those subject to pervasive regulation are 
minimal: such individuals “reasonably should expect ef- 
fective inquiry into their fitness and probity.” Von Raab, 
489 U.S. at 672. Schools are uniquely responsible for the 


T Regulations requiring a physical exam, adequate insurance 
coverage or an insurance waiver, a minimum grade point average, 
school attendance on game days, travel to and from away games 
with the team and compliance with “any other rules of conduct 
established by the coach and athletic director, including rules re- 
lated to dress, training hours and related matters” are hardly 
“trifling.” (R. 61-62; Pl. Ex. 2 at 30). 


T1 


health and safety of athletes, even more so when on 
notice of a serious drug problem involving student 
athletes. The only “effective inquiry” into the existence 
of drug intoxication is a drug test. Students who want 
to play sports in a school district with a serious drug 
problem should not be surprised when urinalysis drug 
testing is implemented to assure their fitness. 


The Actons argue that the District cannot point to any- 
thing in its athletic rules that would prepare students for 
drug testing (Resp. Br. at 34-35). The Policy is part 
of the student handbook, to which alli students have 
access, and is one of the “athletic rules.” (Pl. Ex. 2 at 
31). The Policy states clearly who will be tested, under 
what circumstances and why. (J.A. 7). Advance knowl- 
edge of the Policy clearly minimizes a student athlete’s 
subjective expectations of privacy. See, e.g., United States 
v. Biswell, 406 311, 316 (1972) and Donovan v. Dewey, 
452 U.S. 594, 600 (1981). 


B. Student Athletes Have a Minimal Expectation of 
Privacy Because They Volunteered for Sports 
Knowing that They Must Submit to Drug Testing 


The Actons admit that the Policy is less intrusive be- 
cause it applies only to a voluntary activity. (Resp. Br. 
at 34-35). But they claim the intrusion “is still extreme” 
because the voluntary activity is school sports. In several 
suspicionless search cases finding a lesser expectation of 
privacy in part because of voluntary choice, the activity 
to be forfeited to avoid the search was of greater value 
than the privilege of playing interscholastic sports. See, 
e.g., Skinner, 489 U.S. 602; Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656; 
New York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691 (1987); Donovan, 
452 U.S. 594; Biswell, 406 U.S. 311. 


12 


C. The District Was Diligent and Successful in Its 
Efforts to Minimize the Privacy Intrusion 


1. Observation of student athletes during testing 
is minimal and is not an affront to reasonable 
expectations of privacy 


The Actons argue that visual observation during drug 
testing is particularly intrusive. (Resp. Br. at 29-30). 
There is no visual observation of females. With males, 
the monitors, when they pay attention,® see exactly what 
those standing in any line to use a public urinal see: the 
fully clothed back of an individual standing at a urinal. 
They do not observe the students’ genitals or the act of 
urination itself. (J.A. 28, 42; R. 142). Typically, in both 
public and public school restrooms, males urinate while 
others wait in line immediately behind them—much closer 
than the 12 to 15 feet Vernonia monitors stand away from 
students. (R. 39-40, 138). Likewise, in public and pub- 
lic school restrooms for women, it is not unusual for 
others standing outside enclosed stalls to hear the sounds 
of urination. That is all the female monitors hear in this 
case. 


It is true that those urinating in public restrooms us- 
ually are not monitored. But, students being monitored 
by teachers or coaches should not typically experience the 
level of embarrassment or intimidation an adult might 
feel being monitored by an employer. Monitoring is per- 
vasive in most schools. Teachers monitor students in class- 
rooms and halls, while they take tests and even as they 
dress and shower in locker rooms. One of the monitors 
testified that he goes through the boys’ communal shower 
rooms “all the time and the kids are in the shower.” (J.A. 
28). In fact, “anybody walking through [certain doors in 
the dressing room] can see undress.” He also said one 
toilet stall in that locker room has no door. Id. 


® One monitor testified that “most of the time” he finds some- 
thing to work on while samples are being given because visual 
observation is “not a necessary thing that I have to do.” (J.A. 31). 


13 


The Actons point to this Court’s observation in Skinner 
and Von Raab that the privacy intrusion in the adult em- 
ployment setting is lessened if the sample is given in an 
independent lab or clinic. But that is not so obvious 
when, as here, the setting is the familiar environment of 
the school locker room. Br. of Nat. League of Cities at 
23 (citing authorities). Moreover, sending students to a 
medical facility to provide the sample (a five-minute pro- 
cedure when performed in the locker room) would be 
disruptive of classroom education. (J.A. 31). 


D. Student Athletes Voluntarily Accept Conditions at 
Least as Intrusive as the Policy 


The Actons claim that children reasonably expect, and 
are expected, to urinate in seclusion. (Resp. Br. at 27). 
That simply does not comport with the realities of the 
public school environment. This Court may judicially 
notice that the average public school restroom rarely pro- 
vides “seclusion.” There is little seclusion for anyone 
using either a urinal or toilet in bathrooms in the Dis- 
trict’s schools. 


Students who choose to play interscholastic sports must 
necessarily overcome any self-consciousness about their 
bodies. In most public schools across the country, in- 
cluding the District, probing and intrusive pre-season phys- 
ical exams are required, and urinating, disrobing and 
showering in communal areas are daily facts of life. 


1. The Policy does not require students to “excrete 
on demand.” 


The Actons assert that athletes are required to “excrete 
on demand.” (Resp. Br. at 26). If they mean that stu- 
dents who wish to play interscholastic sports must provide 
a urine sample, it is true. In that sense, the employees 
in Skinner and Von Raab also were required to “excrete 
on demand.” If, however, the Actons mean that some 
sort of physical or mental intimidation is part of the 
sample giving process, the record does not support 


14 


their assertion. Contrary to the Actons’ claim that athletes 
are routinely taken from class to provide the sample 
(Resp. Br. at 29), athletes are allowed to provide the 
sample at a convenient time, whether during class, “at 
noon, after school, before school [or during] breaks.” 
(J.A. 31). If a student cannot urinate at the time, they 
“go back to class and come to [the monitor] when they 
can.” (J.A. 32). 


2. The Policy is a minimal intrusion on student 
privacy even though it might detect drug use 
that does not take place during school 


The Actons argue that the Policy is overly intrusive 
because it amounts to “round-the-clock surveillance” and 
might detect the student athlete’s use of illegal drugs out- 
side of class. (Resp. Br. at 31). The Actons acknowledge 
that this Court rejected such an argument in Von Raab 
due to the Customs Service’s mission which requires “en- 
suring that [covered employees] do not use drugs off 
duty.” Id. Public schools have a similar unique mission: 
teaching students, inculcating values essential to citizen- 
ship, including respect for authority and for the law, 
Bethel School Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 681 
(1986), and assuring their safety. Drug use hinders learn- 
ing by affecting motivation, concentration, understanding 
and even cognitive thought processes. (J.A. 73; R. 41- 
42). It also makes playing sports more dangerous. More- 
over, drug use outside of school can result in impairment 
during school or athletic events. For all of these reasons, 
public schools have a compelling interest in deterring the 
use of illegal drugs by students at any time. 


At the very least, schools should be allowed to prevent 
athletes from using illegal drugs during a sports season. 
It would be anomalous indeed if a coach could tell an 
athlete what to eat, when to go to bed, when and how 
to exercise, what protective clothing to wear, when to ap- 
pear for practices and games and what grade point aver- 
age to maintain, but could not forbid use of illegal drugs 
during the sports season. 


15 
3. There is no evidence that private medical infor- 


mation will be inappropriately gathered or dis- 
seminated by the District 


While urinalysis can reveal private medical facts about 
a person, urinalysis performed under the Policy does not 
because it tests only for specified illegal drugs. (Pl. Ex. 
5 at 17; Def. Ex. 109). There was no evidence that 
the District ever tested for legal drugs or to determine 
other physical facts about athletes. In fact, the consent 
form authorizes use of the specimen only “to test for 
drugs and/or alcohol use.” (J.A. 10-11; Def. Ex. 109). 


The policy requires students to verify use of prescrip- 
tion medications in order to explain positive test results. 
The testing procedure upheld in Skinner likewise required 
tested employees to disclose medications taken during the 
preceding 30 days. 489 U.S. at 626, n.7.° Because 
“there is no indication that the Government does not 
treat this information as confidential, or that it uses the 
information for any other purposes,” this Court did not 
“view this procedure as a significant invasion of privacy.” 
Id., citing Whalen v. Roe, 429 U.S. 589, 602 (1977). 
The same is true here. 


4. The Policy is non-punitive 


The Actons claim the Policy is punitive because there 
are sanctions for positive test results. Principal Aultman 
explained best what the District means by non-punitive: 


We wanted a policy that was not punitive. We're 
not—we did not want to go out and get kids. These 
are not bad kids that we’re talking about that were 
on drugs and that were abusing. These are good 


®The Actons say it is not clear from Skinner that employees 
were required to indicate which medications they were taking. 
The record in Skinner shows that they were. The Field Manual 
governing the tests required the employee to fill out a form stating 
what “prescribed or over the counter” medicine he or she had 
taken as well as the date and time of the last dose. Field Manual, 
B-15, B-21 cited generally at, 489 U.S. at 626, n.7. 


16 


kids that were out of control with what was being 
taken. Our concern is with them too. So we did 
not want a policy, a policy that was punitive and 
was kick them out, get them out of here and be 
done with it, because we would not have had to do 
this program if we just wanted to expel kids. 


So we wanted a prevention program and inter- 
vention program built into our drug testing system 
where there was buy-back, where we could get help 
if needed. We really wanted to do it from a non- 
punitive stance. 


(J.A. 27-28). The Policy cannot be used to suspend or 
expel students. The most extreme sanction under the 
Policy is suspension from interscholastic sports. Students 
testing positive for drug use suffer no academic or crimi- 
nal penalty.” Moreover, unlike the drug testing programs 
in Skinner and Von Raab, the Policy encourages par- 
ticipation in drug assistance programs, 


As prestigious as school sports are in Vernonia, the 
loss of that privilege is far less significant than termina- 
tion from employment, the sanction imposed in Von Raab. 
489 U.S. at 663. If the Government can condition em- 
ployment on refraining from illegal drug use, surely the 
District can condition Participation in sports on the same. 


©The Actons note the Policy does not expressly prevent the 
District from divulging a positive sample result to law enforcement 
authorities. This Court rejected a comparable argument in Skinner 


and no one “seriously contend[ed] that this provision, or any 
other part of the administrative scheme, was designed as a ‘pre- 
text’ to enable law enforcement officers to gather evidence of penal 
law violations.” 489 U.S. at 621, n.5 quoting New York v. Burger, 
482 U.S. at 716-717, n.27. Similarly, the record here does not re- 


(J.A. 10-11). The Actons have never claimed that the Policy was 
pretextual. 


17 


The Actons complain that other students might assume 
that one who is suspended from the sports program is a 
drug user. Surely schools are not required to abandon 
drug testing because a student may have trouble keeping 
his or her illegal drug use a secret. 


X. THE POLICY PROVIDED A NECESSARY DETER- 
RENT 


The Actons do not refute the significant deterrent effect 
of drug testing recognized in Skinner. 489 US. at 630. 
Instead, they assert that drug testing is an unnecessary 
deterrent. They claim that the fear of getting caught is a 
sufficient deterrent. Yet even the threat of termination 
for drug use “cannot serve as an effective deterrent unless 
violators know that they are likely to be discovered.” Jd. 
However, the possibility that drug testing will occur at 
a time which cannot be predicted with certainty will “sig- 
nificantly increase the deterrent effect” of the Policy. See, 
id. 


The desires to play well and to avoid injury also fail to 
deter drug use. Students using illegal drugs do not recog- 
nize that drug use might hurt their performance or lead 
to injury. They are usually in denial, so “they think they 
can control it.” (Def. Ex. 106 at 60). In fact, drug users 
feel invincible and are less aware of pain. Instead of 
avoiding drugs to play better, many student athletes use 
diugs in hopes of playing better. (J.A. 84); See also, Br. 
of Nat. League of Cities, et al. at 17-19. A far more 
effective deterrent to drug use by student athletes is the 
risk of being unable to participate in sports at all. (Def. 
Ex. 106 at 61-62). 


The Actons note that the Policy does not test for 
alcohol and steroids. The District need not show that 
the Policy was either the broadest deterrent possible or 
the least restrictive alternative. The choice between rea- 
sonable methods of search is left to the local government 
involved. Michigan Dep’t of State Police y. Sitz, 496 
U.S. 444, 453-454 (1989). 


18 


The Actons argue that the Policy does not prevent ath- 
letes from playing in games while intoxicated by drugs. 
That is based on the faulty premise that it is only im- 
portant to deter drug intoxication during games. It is 
equally important to deter drug intoxication during daily 
practices, 


The Actons criticize the Policy for failing to show 
whether the level of illegal drugs in an athlete’s system 
would cause “substantial impairment.” Given the goal 
of protecting athletes from drug use through deterrence, 
it should not matter what level of an illegal drug is in a 
Student’s system unless one assumes that some level is 
acceptable. In any case, “a positive urine test is per se 
evidence of impairment at the time the test was taken.” 
(Def. Exh. 106 at 55). 


XI. THE ACTONS CONCEDE THAT THE POLICY 
WAS COMPLETELY RANDOM AND VESTED NO 
DISCRETION IN SCHOOL OFFICIALS 


The district court found that the Policy adequately lim- 
ited discretion and the court of appeals agreed that it 
“vests no discretion in any district officials.” 23 F.3d 
at 1522 (Pet. App. A at 36a-37a); 796 F. Supp. at 1364 
(Pet. App. B at 122a). The Actons do not contest these 
findings. As in Von Raab, these controls on government 
discretion narrowly and specifically define the permissible 
limits of the intrusion and thus protect personal privacy 
as would a warrant. 489 U.S. at 667. 


XII. THE POLICY WAS EFFECTIVE 


The court of appeals held that the Policy was effective: 


The Policy contributed to reaching the desired goal. 
Every teacher who testified had noticed an improve- 


23 F.3d at 1522 (Pet. App. 34a). Moreover, the ath- 
letic director testified that athletic injuries decreased after 
the Policy was implemented. (J.A. 43), 


19 


The Actons find it unlikely that athletes who were tak- 
ing drugs before the Policy was implemented quit im- 
mediately when testing started. ( Resp. Br. at 7). Such 
behavior changes are not at all surprising. Potential 
loss of the privilege to play sports is a very powerful de- 
terrent. (Def. Ex. 106 at 61-62); see also Br. of Nat. 
League of Cities, et al. at 14. 


XIII. THE DIFFICULTY OF DETECTING DRUG USE BY 
OBSERVATION DOES NOT UNDERMINE THE EX. 
ISTENCE OF A DRUG PROBLEM IN THE DIS- 
TRICT 


The Actons argue that if it is difficult to determine 
by observation whether a particular person is under the 
influence of drugs at a particular time, then the District 
could not conclude it had a serious drug problem in- 
volving athletes. It is possible, however, to deter- 
mine the existence of a general drug problem—based on 
classroom essays and student conversations boasting of 
drug use, confessions of use by athletes, arrests of ath- 
letes for drug possession, unusual behavior on the playing 
field and rude, hostile and belligerent behavior in the class- 
room—without being able to develop a legally sufficient 
reasonable suspicion that the behavior of a particular 
adolescent at a particular time is attributable to drug use. 
For example, this Court noted in Skinner that the “rail- 
roads were able to detect a relatively small number of 
Rule G violations, owing, primarily, to their practice of 
relying on observation by supervisors and co-workers to 
enforce the rule.” Yet “at the same time, industry par- 
ticipants . . . confirmed that alcohol and drug use [did] 
occur on the railroads with unacceptable frequency.” 489 
U.S. at 607-608. 


XIV. THE DISTRICT’S INTERESTS IN ADDRESSING 
THE DRUG PROBLEM ARE SUFFICIENT TO AL- 
LOW DRUG TESTING 


The Actons distance themselves somewhat from the 
court of appeals’ holding requiring the risk of some dra- 
matic event resulting in immediate physical injury as a 


20 


prerequisite to drug testing. 23 F.3d at 1526 (Pet. App. 
58a). Instead, they admit that individuals engaged in 
“less hazardous activities” may qualify for drug testing 
if there is evidence of frequent drug use within the group 
and if the potential harm is substantial. (Resp. Br. 44). 
The District established both of these. 


In any case, one thing is certain: schools are in no 
better position to detect drug intoxication by observation 
or to deter drug use than the FRA or the Customs Serv- 
ice. Those who have access to drug testing will be able 
to detect and deter such use. Absent great luck, those 
who do not have access to drug testing will not. Our 
nation’s schools should have access to the most effective 
tools available to address Student drug use. Otherwise, 
“an important governmental interest” furthered by drug 
testing “would be placed in jeopardy by a requirement 
of individualized suspicion.” Skinner, 489 U.S. at 624. 


CONCLUSION 


The District respectfully requests that the judgment of 
the court of appeals be reversed and the judgment of the 
district court in favor of the District be reinstated. 


Respectfully submitted, 


TIMOTHY R. VOLPERT * 

JOHN A, MATTERAZzO 
CLAUDIA LARKINS 

DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE 
2300 First Interstate Tower 
1300 Southwest Fifth Avenue 
Portland, OR 97201 

(508) 241-2300 

* Counsel of Record for 


Petitioner Vernonia 
Dated: March 20, 1995 School District 47] 


