Pe a ae 
| JAN 12 1995 
DeKs Qf The GLEKK 


No. 94-590 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


VERNONIA SCHOOL DISTRICT 47J, 
Petitioner, 
VS. 


WAYNE and Jupy ACTON, 
guardians ad litem for JAMES ACTON, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


JOINT APPENDIX 


TIMOTHY R. VOLPERT * THOMAS M. CHRIST * 

DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE ACLU FOUNDATION OF OREGON, INC. 
2300 First Interstate Tower One Main Place, Suite 2000 

1300 Southwest 5th Avenue 101 Southwest Main Street 


Portland, OR 97201 Portland, Oregon 97204 
(503) 241-2300 (503) 221-1011 

Counsel for Petitioner Counsel for Respondents 
* Counsel of Record 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED SEPTEMBER 30, 1994 
CERTIORARI GRANTED NOVEMBER 238, 1994 


U4 


$s 
: 


me lhe 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Relevant Docket Entries in Wayne and Judy Acton, 
guardians ad litem for James Acton vs. Vernonia 
School District 47J, United States District Court for 
the District of Oregon, Case No. 91-1154-MA and all 

appellate proceedings therein 


Complaint filed by Wayne and Judy Acton, guardians 
ad Litem for James Acton (November 4, 1991) 


Defendant’s Answer (November 22, 1991) 


Order of the United States District Court for the Dis- 
trict of Oregon, denying Plaintiffs’ claims for injunc- 
tive and declaratory relief (May 7, 1992) 


Judgment of the United States District Court for the 
District of Oregon, dismissing action (May 7, 1992).. 


Partial transcript of Direct-, Cross- and Redirect- 
Examination of James Acton 


Partial transcript of Direct- and Cross-Examination of 
Ralph Aultman, Principal of Washington Grade 
School and Former Assistant Superintendent of 
Vernonia School District and Former Principal of 
Vernonia High School 


Partial transcript of Cross-Examination of Ellis 
Mason, Superintendent of Vernonia School District.. 


Partial transcript of Direct- and Cross-Examination of 
Marcia King, Vernonia School District Teacher and 
FS ERE ornate eee a 


Partial transcript of Direct- and Cross-Examination of 
Kathleen Sevig, Vernonia High School Teacher........ 


Partial transcript of Direct- and Cross-Examination of 
Ronald Svenson, Vernonia High School Teacher, 
Wrestling Coach and Former Vernonia High School 
Football Coach 


Partial Transcript of Defendant’s Trial Exhibit 106— 
Perpetuation Deposition of Robert L. DuPont, M.D., 
Expert Witness for Defendant 


TABLE OF CONTENTS—-Continued 
Page 
Excerpts of Plaintiffs’ Trial Exhibit 4—Defendant’s 
Response to Plaintiffs’ Interrogatories to Defendant... 79 


Partial Transcript of Plaintiffs’ Trial Exhibit 5—Depo- 
sition of Ellis Mason, Superintendent of Vernonia 
School District ....... peocscceecnasinnssonsgeenaniiddiliaidiamnnannnnnn 81 


The following may be found in the Petition for Writ 
of Certiorari where indicated and are omitted from the 
Joint Appendix pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 26.1: 


Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Ninth Circuit issued May 5, 1994... Pet. App. A at la 


Opinion of the United States District for the District of 
Oregon issued May 7, 1992... Pet. App. B at 76a 


Order of the United States District Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit denying Defendant's Petition 
for Rehearing and Rejecting Suggestion for Rehear- 
ing En Bane filed July 8, 1994... Pet. App. C at 143a 


ne an eel 


Date 


CHRONOLOGICAL LISTING OF 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


Description 


A. United States District Court for the District of Oregon 


11/04/91 


11/18/91 


11/22/91 
01/08/92 


03/02/92 


04/28/92 


04/29/92 


05/07/92 


06/02/92 


(Case No, 91-1154-MA) 


Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief 
and Plaintiffs’ Motion for Appointment of Guard- 
ians Ad Litem filed. 


United States District Court for the District of 
Oregon grants Plaintiffs’ Motion for Appointment 
of Guardians Ad Litem. 


Defendant’s Answer filed. 


Plaintiffs file Motion for Judgment on the 
Pleadings. 


United States District Court for the District of 
Oregon denies Plaintiffs’ Motion for Judgment on 
the Pleadings. 


Pretrial conference held and United States Dis- 
trict Court for the District of Oregon issues 
Order receiving Plaintiffs’ Trial Exhibits 1 
through 5 and Defendant’s Trial Exhibits 101, 
108, 105 through 107 and 109, and rejecting De- 
fendant’s Trial Exhibits 102 and 108. 


Trial commences in the United States District 
Court for the District of Oregon before the Hon- 
orable Judge Maicom F. Marsh. 


United States District Court for the District of 
Oregon issues Opinion, enters Order denying 
Plaintiffs’ claims for declaratory and injunctive 
relief, and enters Judgment dismissing action. 


Plaintiffs file Notice of Appeal to the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. 


2 


Date | 


"Description 


B. United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


09/22/92 
10/19/92 


11/04/92 
11/03/93 


05/05/94 


05/19/94 


07/08/94 


(Case No. 92-85520) 
Plaintiffs file opening Brief. 
Defendant files Brief in Opposition. 


Plaintiffs file Reply to Brief in Opposition. 
Argued and Submitted to the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, before the 
Honorable Judges Stehen R. Reinhardt, Melvin 
Brunetti and Ferdinand F. Fernandez. 


United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit issues Opinion and enters Judgment re- 
versing and remanding Opinion and Order of 
United States District Court for the District of 
Oregon. 


Defendant files Petition for Rehearing with Sug- 
gestion for Rehearing En Banc. 


United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit files Order denying Defendant’s Petition 
for Rehearing and Rejecting Suggestion for Re- 
hearing En Banc. 


C. The Supreme Court of the United States 


09/30/94 
10/31/94 


11/18/94 


11/28/94 


(Case No. 94-590) 

Defendant files Petition for Writ of Certiorari. 
Plaintiffs file Brief in Opposition to Writ of 
Certiorari. 

Defendant files Reply to Brief in Opposition to 
Writ of Certiorari. 

The Supreme Court of the United States grants 
Certiorari. 


ee 


A A CRTC Ae ee et 


3 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


Civil No. 91-1154MA 


Wayne and Jupy ACTON, 
guardians ad litem for JAMES ACTON, 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


VERNONIA SCHOOL District 47/3, 
Defendant. 


COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY 
AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 


(Deprivation of Civil Rights) 


Plaintiffs allege: 
PARTIES 


1. 


Defendant Vernonia School District 47J (the district) 
is a public school district, located in this judicial district, 
organized under Oregon law and acting under color of 
that state’s law at all times mentioned below. 


2. 


James Acton (James) is a minor and a citizen of 
Oregon. 
3. 
Plaintiffs are citizens of Oregon and James’s guardians 
ad litem. 


4 


JURISDICTION 


4. 


This case arises under 42 U.S.C. 1983 and 1988. This 
court has jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. 1331 and 1343. 


ALLEGATIONS COMMON TO ALL CLAIMS 
5. 


James is enrolled in a school operated by the district. 


6. 


The district has adopted a “Student Athlete Drug Pol- 
icy,” which prohibits a student from participating in any 
district-sponsored athletic program unless the student, 
through the student’s “parent and/or guardian,” consents 
to be tested for illegal drug use at the outset of the pro- 
gram, and also consents to random, suspicionless drug 
testing during the course of the program. (A copy of the 
policy is appended to this complaint as Exhibit A.) 


7. 


James wants to participate in district-sponsored ath- 
letic programs. 
8. 


James does not take drugs and the district has no rea- 
son to suspect that he does. 


9. 


James declines to consent to drug testing on the 
ground it violates his constitutional rights. Relying on the 
policy described above, the district refuses to let James 
participate in district-sponsored athletic programs. 


—s 


5 


FIRST CLAIM 
10. 


The district's refusal to let James participate in district- 
sponsored athletic programs violates the Fourth and Four- 
teenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. 


SECOND CLAIM 
1}. 


The district’s refusal to let James participate in district- 
sponsored athletic programs violates Article I, Section 9, 
of the Oregon Constitution. 


THIRD CLAIM 
12. 


The district’s refusal to let James participate in district- 
sponsored athletic programs is unlawful because the dis- 
trict lacks statutory authority to adopt or enforce its drug 
testing policy. 

FOURTH CLAIM 


13. 


Plaintiffs are entitled to recover reasonable attorney 
fees under 42 U.S.C. 1988 if they prevail on their first 


claim. 
DEMAND FOR JUDGMENT 


14. 
Plaintiffs demand that the court: 


(a) Declare that the district’s drug-testing policy is un- 
lawful; 


(b) Enjoin the district from enforcing the policy 
against James and from interfering with his participation 
in district-sponsored athletic programs; 


6 


(c) Award costs to plaintiffs; 
(d) Award attorney fees to plaintiffs; and 
(e) Award any additional relief the court deems 
proper. 
Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ Thomas M. Christ 
THOMAS M. CHRIST 
OSB No. 83406 
ACLU Foundation of Oregon, Inc. 
Attorney for Plaintiffs 


7 


EXHIBIT A 
Code: JFCI 
Adopted: 9/14/89 
Revised: 8/9/90 
Orig. Code: 


STUDENT ATHLETE DRUG POLICY 
DEFINITIONS: 


Drug: 


Any substance considered illegal or controlled by the 
Food and Drug Administration. 


Student Athlete: 


Any student participating in athletic practices and/or 
contests under the control and jurisdiction of the 
Vernonia School District. 


Sport Season: 


Fall, Winter, and Spring seasons begin on the first 
day of practice allowed by the Oregon School ac- 
tivity Association and end the day prior to the be- 
ginning date of practice of the next season. 


POLICY STATEMENT: 


In order to provide for the health and safety of the in- 
dividual athlete and other athletes, as well as providing 
a legitimate reason for students to say “no” to drug use 
and providing an opportunity for those taking drugs to 
receive help in locating programs which can provide as- 
sistance, the District is conducting a mandatory drug 
testing program for student athletes. The program is not 
punitive. It is designed to create a safe, drug free, envi- 
ronment for student athletes and assist them in getting 
help when needed. 


PROCEDURES: 


Consent: 


The parent and/or guardian and the student athlete 
is required to sign a written consent for drug testing 
prior to participating in the athletic program. Any 
time an athlete refuses to be tested, he/she will be 
suspended from the team for the remainder of the 
season. 


Medication: 


Student athletes who have been or who are or have 
been taking prescription medication must provide 
verification (either by a copy of the prescription or 
by doctor’s authorization) prior to being tested. Stu- 
dent’s who refuse to provide verification and test 
positive will be subject to the actions specified below 
for “positive tests.” 


Student Selection: 


All student athletes may be tested at the beginning 
of each season. Random testing will be conducted 
during the sports season. Students selected for ran- 
dom testing will be selected by having their names 
drawn from a “pool” of student athletes. 


“Positive” Test: 


If the student’s test indicates positive results, a sec- 
ond test may be administered as soon as possible 
to confirm the results. Parents will be notified after 
the second positive test. If the second test is negative, 
no further action will be taken. If the second test is 
positive, the following action will be taken: 


First Offense 


. Notify parent or guardian. 


A due process hearing will be conducted by the prin- 
cipal with the parent/guardian and the student. 


3. Student will be given the option of: 

a. Participating in assistance programs and taking a 
weekly drug test for six weeks or, 

b. Be suspended from participating in athletics for 
the remainder of the current season and the next 
athletic season. The student will be retested be- 
fore beginning the next season for which he/she is 
eligible. 

Second Offense 

1. Notify parent or guardian. 

2. A due process hearing will be conducted by the prin- 
cipal with the parent/guardian and the student. 

3. The student is suspended from participating in ath- 
letics for the remainder of the current season and the 
next athletic season for which he/she is eligible. 

Third Offense 

1. Notify parent or guardian. 

2. A due process hearing will be conducted by the prin- 
cipal with the parent/guardian and the student. 

3. The student is suspended from participating in ath- 


letics for the remainder of the current season and the 
next two athletic seasons for which he/she is eligible. 


VOLUNTEER DRUG TESTING 


POLICY STATEMENT: 


In order to provide for the health and safety of the in- 
dividual student and other students, as well as providing 
a legitimate reason for students to say “no” to drug use 


10 


and providing an opportunity for those taking drugs to 
receive help in locating programs which can provide as- 
sistance, the District is conducting a voluntary drug test- 
ing program for students. The program is not punitive. It 
is designed to create a safe, drug free, environment for 
students and assist them in getting help when needed. 


PROCEDURES: 


Consent: 


The parent and/or guardian and the student is re- 
quired to sign a written consent for drug testing prior 
to being tested. 


Medication: 


Students who are or have been taking prescription 
medication must provide vertification (either by a 
copy of the prescription or by doctor’s authorization ) 
prior to being tested. Student’s who refuse to pro- 
vide vertification and test positive will be subject to 
the actions specified below for “positive tests.” 


“Positive” Test: 


If the student’s test indicates positive results, the 
parents will be notified and no other action will be 
taken. 


GENERAL AUTHORIZATION FORM 


I understand fully that my performance as a participant 
and the reputation of my school are dependent, in part, 
on my conduct as an individual. I hereby agree to accept 
and abide by the standards, rules, and regulations set 
forth by Vernonia School District Board and the sponsors 
for the activity in which I participate. 


I also authorize the Vernonia School District to con- 
duct a test on a urine specimen which I provide to test 


11 


for drugs and/or alcohol use. I also authorize the release 
of information concerning the results of such a test to 
the Vernonia School District and to the parents and/or 
guardians of the student. 


This shall be deemed a consent pursuant to the Family 
Education Right to Privacy Act for the release of the 
above information to the parties numed above. 


Student Signature 


Parent or Guardian Signature 


Address 


Date 


END OF POLICY 


12 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


No. 91-1154MA 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


ANSWER 


Defendant, for answer to plaintiffs’ Complaint, states 
as follows: 


1. Defendant admits paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of 
plaintiffs’ Complaint. 


2. Answering paragraph 6, defendant admits that it 
has adopted a student athlete drug policy, which policy is 
attached as Exhibit A to plaintiff's Complaint. Defendant 
denies each and every remaining allegation of paragraph 
6 of plaintiffs’ Complaint. 


3. Answering paragraphs 7, 8, and 9 of plaintiffs’ 
Complaint, defendant states that it is without sufficient 
knowledge to form a response to plaintiffs’ allegations 
concerning the desires, activities and motivations of James 
Acton and for that reason denies the allegations of para- 
graphs 7, 8, and 9 of plaintiffs’ Complaint. Defendant 
admits in further response to paragraph 9 that it declines 
to permit James Acton to participate in the district spon- 
sored athletic programs without his having complied with 
the policy. 

4. Defendant denies each and every remaining allega- 
tion of plaintiffs’ Complaint except as specifically ad- 
mitted above. 


13 


FIRST AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE 


5. Defendent’s student athlete drug policy is rationally 
related to legitimate district interests including, inter alia, 
the health, safety, well-being and education of the stu- 
dents under its care. 


SECOND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 


6. Defendant’s actions were in good faith and based 
upon a reasonable belief of the lawfulness of the conduct 
alleged. 


Wherefore, having fully answered plaintiffs’ Complaint, 
defendant prays for judgment in its favor dismissing 
plaintiffs’ claims, and prays for its costs and disburse- 
ments herein together with its reasonable attorneys’ fees 
pursuant to 42 USC § 1988. 


RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED this 21st day of No- 
vember, 1991. 
LANE POWELL SPEARS LUBERSKY 


By /s/ Paula A. Barran 
PAULA A. BARRAN 
OSB #80397 
Davip G. HosENPUD 
OSB #83241 
Attorneys for Defendant 


(Affidavit of Mailing Omitted in Printing) 


————— ee 


14 
[Filed May 7, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


ORDER 
MARSH, Judge. 


In accordance with my opinion issued on this date, 
plaintiffs’ claims for injunctive and declaratory relief are 
denied. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 
DATED this 7 day of May, 1992. 


's/ Malcolm F. Marsh 
MALCOLM F. MARSH 
United States District Judge 


15 
[Filed May 7, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


JUDGMENT 
MARSH, Judge. 


Based on the record, this action is dismissed. 
DATED this 7 day of May, 1992. 
/s/ Malcolm F. Marsh 


MALCOLM F. MarsuH 
United States District Judge 


16 


iN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


( Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF DIRECT-, 
CROSS AND REDIRECT-EXAMINATION 
OF JAMES ACTON 


+ ’ . * 
[12] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
+ . + + 


BY MR. CHRIST: 


Q. James, how old are you? 

A. 12. 

Q. And what is ,our birth date? 
A. June 1Sth. 

Q. Do you go to school? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Where do you go to school? 
A. Washington Grade School 
Q. Do you like sports, James? 
A. Yes. 

Q. Which sports do you like? 
A. 


Basketball and track and I don’t know about 
football. I was going to go out for it. 


Q. Did you go out for football last fall? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you go to any practices? 

A. Practice, but after that, no. 

Q. What happened after that? 

A. I took home that sheet that we had to sign and 


we decided not to sign it over the weekend. 


17 


QO. Who's “we”? 
{13} A. Me, my dad and my mom. 


Q. You didn’t want to sign it either, did you? 

A. No. 

Q. Why didn’t you want to take the drug test? 

A. Because I feel that they have no reason to think 
I was taking drugs. 

Q. Do you still want to play sports if they'll let you 
play without taking the test? 

A. Yes. 


MR. CHRIST: That's all I have, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Cross. 


MR. POWELL: I have a couple of quick questions, 
Your Honor. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. POWELL: 


Q. James, before you went out for football did you 
have a physical exam? 
A. Yes. 


Q. And as part of that physical did you give a urine 
sample? 
[14] A. Yes. 


MR. POWELL: We have nothing further, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: Redirect? 
REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. CHRIST: 


Q. James, where was that exam? 
A. At the Vernonia Health Clinic. 
Q. And tell the judge how you gave the urine sample. 


18 


A. They had to close the door in there and peed in 
a cup and they handed it through a wall. | 


Q. Was anyone in the room with you? 

A. No. 

Q. No one was watching? 

A. No. 

Q. Was ar one standing outside listening? 
A. No. 


MR. CHRIST: Nothing further, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: All right. Thank you. You may step 


down, James. 
* * * . 


19 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


Case No. 91-1154-MA 
THE HONORABLE MALCOM F. MARSH 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF DIRECT- AND 
CROSS-EXAMINATION OF RALPH AULTMAN, 
Principal of Washington Grade School and 
Former Assistant Superintendent of Vernonia School District 
and Former Principal of Vernonia High School 


* * * * 
[18] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
+ * * * 


Q. Mr. Aultman, can you generally describe the 
Vernonia community? 

A. Yes. Beings I was raised there and came back 
about 13 years later, Vernonia is a community about 
1700 people in the city limits, about 1300 other people 
on the outside of the city limits. Primary industry is 
logging. We do have some people that work out in the 
valley and in the technological field Wah Chang, Nike, 
Tektronix. Low social economic factor in Vernonia, we 
have about 25, 30 percent of our kids who are on 
privalegde lunches. 

The community is very solid from the standpoint that 
when the mill shut down in ’59 they thought the city 
would fold, but it did not. It stayed together. So Vernonia 
is a typical small town, a lot of pride in its existence 
and it’s like a lot of other small communities that aren’t. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, what role does interscholastic ath- 
letics play in the Vernonia community? 


20 


A. It plays a very, very big part. You know, you 
look around and you see about four or [19] five kids 
here from Vernonia and all of them are interested in sports 
and they all play sports because in Vernonia there’s not 
much else to do. We don’t have any fest food franchises, 
there are no teen centers, the entire factor of the com- 
municy centers around the school, and therefore, the outlet 
for our young people is athletics. 

It’s a big thing. Everyone wants to play sports. It’s 
an opportunity for competition and it—give you an ex- 
ample. In ’83 we had a budget crunch. They were 
cutting teachers, we lost our forestry program. They 
were also going to cut athletics. Well, the people tried 
to keep the program, the academic programs there too, 
but many people went out and chopped wood and sold 
wood to finance the athletic program because it’s all their 
kids had. A booster club was formed to try to get money 
to kept the athletic programs going because they realized 
it’s a very important part of our community. 

Q. And what role did the athletes themselves play 
in the community? 

A. Well, if you’re an athlete you’re looked up to in 
our Vernonia system. Everyone wanis to play if they can. 
And we deem it very important to [20] try and get as 
many people involved as possible. And it’s just important, 
you know, to wear that lettermen’s jacket in a small com- 
munity. I still have mine from 1962. 

Q. And can you estimate the level of participation 
in interscholastic athletics? 

A. In high school we'll run 60 percent to * * * 65 
percent of our students. At the elementary level you’re 
running with the whole program I'd say pretty close to 
75 percent of your students, so you're getting large num- 
bers of kids. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, in your 12 years in the school 
district have you had the opportunity to observe the 
patterns of drug and alcohol abuse in the district? 


21 


A. Yes, Ihave. Alcohol has been around high schools 
for a long, long time. Between 1980 and about 1986, 
"87 there was the typical—I was raised in Vernonia High 
School, a typical small high school with some minor prob- 
lems, disciplinary referrals would amount to about 40 to 
50 a year, no real strong discipline problems. We would 
have visitors come to our school and compliment how well 
our kids were doing and how well behaved they were in 
sitting in the classrooms and studying. And it [21] almost 
was like a few kids moved in the community and it seemed 
like in a period of the year I was gone and the next two 
years, the ’87, 88 and ’88 to ’89 school year there was 
a real upswing in drug use by our students in the Vernonia 
High School. 

I can equate this to seeing and having teachers come to 
me and having students being talked—talking in their 
classroom about drug use, about abuse, about parties. 
Kids were blatantly oftentimes talking about that they 
used drugs and there was nothing school officials could do. 
And what was really concerning us was a lot of these, it 
was the first. Back at the beginning when I was there in 
’84 and ’85 they had a fringe group that used drugs. Very, 
very small. And they weren’t really looked up to very 
much. They were kind of looked down upon. But in ’86 
and '87, ’88, ’89 were that shift that I saw many of our 
students, including our athletes, were starting to get in- 
volved in drug usage and it was mushrooming. 

I had a coach come to me in 1988 and said, “I’m con- 
cerned about our football players because I’m hearing 
reports even from some of them that there’s a possibility 
of amphetamines being used before they play football.” 
That’s shocking. [22] And that coupled with the amount 
of suspensions, in 1988-89 there were between 100 to 
110 referrals that we had that year. There were kids 
acting out, they were shouting in the halls, they were 
banging heads together, they were writing essays in 
classes and coming to us that really scared our staff 
because we had prided ourselves on really helping our 


22 


kids. We’re concerned and we care about them. We were 
scared. We were really concerned about these kids. 

I had parents call me concerned about the drug use. I 
had—the school board was concerned. The community 
was concerned that when we approached the city council 
for two weeks they brought in a policeman from Portland 
that they hired for two weeks to try to patrol our areas 
across from the school to try and keep kids from using 
drugs. That lasted about two weeks, then he had to go. 
But we were facing some epidemic proportions of drug 
usage. 

I feel and I think the evidence was there, that the com- 
munity was saying it, there were students that were telling 
us, the staff was telling us and as the principal where we 
pride ourselves on a school that didn’t have this. I was 
[23] very scared. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, what were those areas where the 
police officers patrolled? 

A. Well, across the street there was a place called 
Mario’s Coke Shack, right across from the high school. 
Also there was a mini-mart over there, then down the 
road there’s a bridge that the kids could go under. And 
this person the city council hired patrolled those areas to 
try to stop kids from using drugs. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, what were the drugs in your opinion 
that were being used prevalently during that period? 

MR. CHRIST: Objection, Judge. I don’t think he’s 
competent to testify— 

THE COURT: If he knows. I want it from his own 
personal observations. 

THE WITNESS: Go ahead. 

MR. MULLMAN: Your Honor— 

THE COURT: If you’re going from your own knowl- 
edge, then I'll allow you to testify, if you have knowledge 
yourself of what drugs were being used. 

THE WITNESS: Yeah, I do. 

THE COURT: All right. Go ahead. 

[24] THE WITNESS: The students were in my office 
and they have told me and—marijuana because they had 


23 


pipes and I confiscated them from students and they 
admitted it. Alcohol, and there was a report of the— 
that I have from the coach and the students on the 
amphetamines. 

THE COURT: All right. These will be—I under- 
stand. These are hearsay reports. I want you to go into 
this a little more on how he gets these reports and why 
he gets them. 

Q. (BY MR. POWELL) Mr. Aultman, can you 
describe how the reports of amphetamine use came to your 
attention? 

A. Four football players talked to the football coach 
and admitted that they have used drugs, and ampheta- 
mines were those drugs, and the coach told me the kids 
never come forward and said, you know, they did. And 
marijuana, I did have that down to where I have the 
pipe and kids admitted it. 

MR. CHRIST: Your Honor, I would move— 

THE COURT: I realize that you’re having continu- 
ing objection to this. I’m watching it very closely. 
Whether or not I consider this is an issue I'll confront. 

What I have to look at is the perception [25] of what 
is going on. Now, I’m not going to rely on hearsay. What 
I want the questioning to address is whether or not there 
is a system set up within the school whereby reporting 
is to be made to the principal and that these reports 
came through that system. That’s what I want to. 

MR. CHRIST: _ I just want to preserve— 

THE COURT: You have it preserved. 

MR. CHRIST: Thank you, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Yes. 

Q. (BY MR. POWELL) Mr. Aultman, in the 
Vernonia School District was there a system for reporting 
drug incidents or suspected behaviors? 

A. Yes, there was. Because I was going to try and 
address this issue—well, I will try. Yes, we have—we 
train our staff in impact training to look for these be- 
haviors that oftentimes were indicative of drug and alcohol 
use so we could work through the training sessions that 


24 


our staff had had to try and help students identify, deal 
with parents on drug and alcohol problems and the staff 
would write out these various incidences, they would 
write out what happened and they would tell me about it. 

So there was a system set up to—to— [26] to report 
any type of observable behavior. And we trained all of our 
entire staff during those years to be on the alert and 
look for this and how we could stop it because we didn’t 
sit still and idly watch this go on. We tried many things. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, did you make any other attempts 
to determine or figure out how prevalent the drug use was 
in the district? 

A. Other than some surveys done by some staff mem- 
bers, which they related back to me their results, and 
just from some of the kids, especially in the ’88-89 school 
year admitting that there was nothing we could do to 
stop them. That’s— 

Q. And were they admitting drug use? 

A. Yes. Openly. 

Q. And in your opinion as part of this increase in 
illegal drug use, were the interscholastic athletes also a 
part of that increase? 

A. Well, that was the thing that really concerned 
us. Like I said, 60 percent of the kids participate in 
sports and when we started the—when the drug usage 
really started and began, during the years of ’87 to ’89 
it escalated to where we had a large number of athletes 
who were [27] using and openly admitting to many types 
to people, including the coach and a couple to myself 
that they used drugs, but they basically said there’s noth- 
ing you can do about it. We did try and do things but 
that’s not a question. 

Q. So at this point was the district concerned about 
the use among athletes? 

A. Oh, yes. Yes. Definitely. Because when that 
student had told the coach about using amphetamines, I 
immediately thought in my head what if this kid gets 
hurt and they take him to the hospital and it is true 


25 


that he’s on amphetamines and we've been told and 
warned, are we liable? I was—that really concerned me 
when I heard of the amphetamine. Because like I said, 
we've had a lot of training. 

I've gone through this drug thing, you know, about 
marijuana, amphetamines, the entire works, and so we 
were very concerned about the safety and health and 
welfare of our students, yes. And the athletes, like I said, 
60 percent participate. That’s a large number. And we 
saw more and more of those students actively promoting 
and actively demonstrating to us that they were out of 
control. 

[28] Q. What efforts did the district make to provide 
education or motivation to the students to stop the drug 
problem? 

A. We believe in education, number one. We not only 
taught units on drug and alcohol in our classrooms, we 
brought in guest speakers over a two-year period. [ 
spent over—between four to $5,000 in bringing in speak- 
ers to talk to our young people about the effects of drugs, 
Dutch Savage Associates, Theresa Lush, we brought in 
Javonne Wilson, or Javonne White, a comedian who did 
a video called “Waking Up To Drugs.” Cost us over 
eight or $900, to bring this man up from L.A. to try and 
help us. 

Brought in drug dogs to try to sniff lockers. We—we 
set up with our staff and brought experts out to work 
with every staff member on how to identify and how to 
deal with the drug-related problem. How we could help 
our young people, because that was the bottom line. We 
just saw some kids being very much at risk. And every- 
thing we tried did not seem to work. 

It continued. We would have kids get suspended. Like 
I say, referrals were very, very high. There was two or 
three expulsions. We’d try [29] everything in our power 
from punitive discipline to having our staff work with 
kids, to bringing in drug dogs and authorities and speak- 
ers and like I said, we spent a lot of money trying every 
resource at our command to stop the problem. 


26 


Q. Can you recall any specific reactions to some of 
those speakers or some of those programs? 

A. Theresa Lush, a psychologist came in and talked 
about her son who was addicted, how she tried to get 
him cleaned up but then he went back. And all of our 
student body—we worked the system around so every 
kid could hear every speaker whenever we had it. During 
one year we spent a whole month on drug awareness to 
our kids. And we spent the last big week by bringing in 
as many—there was things going on all during the month. 
And we brought in all these speakers. One of them, like 
I said, was Theresa Lush. Her son Bill couldn't get off 
drugs. So she told how she had to let him go. There 
wasn't hardly a dry eye in our students. It affected them. 

Dutch Savage talked about how he had used and abused 
drugs and how his mind was scrambled. And he had ar 
assembly in front of all the students and went to all the 
individual class rooms. [30] Javonne White, like I said, 
talked to the entire group and then split out. 

We had a Seahawk player, I can’t remember his name 
right now, one of the well-known guys, but we had a 
Seahawk player come in and speak. 

We ran the gauntlet of trying to educate. And after 
Dutch Savage got through I heard kids saying, “Well, 
Dutch Savage, he was addicted. Look now, he’s out sell- 
ing the program. He came out of it and we can too.” 
That was the mentality that we got from some of our 
kids after our speakers. 

And the major thing was it wasn’t going to happen to 
them. They could not see that. 

Q. How did you decide to explore drug testing by 
urinalysis? 

A. Well, in °89, the spring, our school, because of 
the behavior of our students, the referrals, the suspensions, 
the parent conferences, all the things that were happening, 
the staff got together and we were trying to help our 
young people. It was going to boil down to some tremen- 
dous alternative or massive expulsion. We were going to 


27 


have to expel a large number of students. And our staff 
did not like that idea. 

If you expel students basically they're [31] out on 
the streets and nothing happens. They’re back in six 
months after the semester, and you really don’t solve 
anything. That’s when in the spring it came to our atten- 
tion through The Oregonian, a supplement in the Sunday 
edition called Parade, there was an article entitled “The 
Town Sends A Note To Drugs.” It’s about a three-page 
article, about a town, a community in Texas called 
Hawkins who had instituted a mandatory drug testing pro- 
gram for extra curricular activities. 

I had previously been approached in 1988 by a presi- 
dent of the Booster Club advocating drug testing. This 
is even before the Hawkins story broke. Because there 
were some things happening in the federal courts that 
were relevant to things about drug testing. This Booster 
Club person wanted to know if we could do it. I said no, 
I would not do it until I knew there was no other alterna- 
tive and I had the community support. I was not going 
to step out. 

* * * * 
[36] Q. Okay. Mr. Aultman, in designing the policy 
what was your purpose? 

A. That’s where the rationale came in. The purpose 
is threefold. One, safety. That scared me as a principal 
when I heard of a possibility of students playing with 
amphetamines because that’s where Len Bias, all the 
things we’d read about this really, really concerned us. 

We wanted a policy that was not punitive. We’re not— 
we did not want to go out and get kids. These are not bad 
kids that we’re talking about that were on drugs and that 
were abusing. These are good kids that were out of 
control with what was being taken. Our concern is with 
them too. So we did not want a policy, a policy that 
was punitive and was kick them out, get them out of 
here and be done with it, because we would not have 
had to do this program if we just wanted to expel kids. 


28 


So we wanted a prevention program and [37] inter- 
vention program built into our drug testing system where 
there was buy-back, where we could get help if needed. 
We really wanted to do it from a non-punitive stance. 


* * * * 


[41] Q. Are the boys clothed during this procedure? 

A. Yes, they’re totally clothed. 

Q. What can you see of the student during this 
process. 

A. Nothing. 

Q. Are the student’s genitals exposed at any point 
during this procedure? 

A. Never, ever. And the shower rooms here, I go 
through here all the time and the kids are in the shower. 
But here on our drug testing, no. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, is that shower area a communal 
shower? 

A. Yes, it’s open right here. Communal. Anybody 
walking through this door or coming through this door 
here can see undress. 

Q. And this locker room is where—is that where 
grade school boys dress down for athletics? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And, Mr. Aultman, is the toilet enclosed by a 
stall? 

A. The stall is right—there’s a wall comes out here, 
but this is open. I should not have that in there because 
it’s an open area. 

[42] Q. So there’s no door on the stall surrounding 
the toilet? 

A. No. No. 

MR. POWELL: I like to have this diagram marked 
as Defendant’s Exhibit 110. 


[Defendant’s Exhibit 110 is a diagram of the grade 
school boy’s locker room] 


THE COURT: _It will be marked as 110. 
MR. POWELL: Your Honor, I’d like to offer that 
into evidence. 


29 


MR. CHRIST: No Objection, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: It will be received. 


(Defendant’s Exhibit 110 received. ) 


Q. (BY MR. POWELL) Mr. Aultman, who has 
access to the results of the drug test? 

A. Superintendent, principal and vice principal of the 
high school. And the athletic director of the high school 
and grade school. 

Q. Mr. Aultman, can you describe briefly where are 
the girls samples collected? 

A. In the girls’ locker room. At the elementary school 
Mrs. Peterson, our athletic director, does the paperwork 
right there while the student is going to the restroom and 
in there the doors are closed. Students do go into a 
closed door. Because on the girls in our school there are 
doors at the elementary level. At the boys just on [43] 
the one there is not. 

Q. So the girls give a sample within an enclosed 
stall? 


A. Yes. 
* « * * 
[45] CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. CHRIST: 


Q. Mr. Aultman, are you aware that there’s been a 
nationwide and statewide decline in drug use by high 
school students in the last few years? 

A. I think that’s on an average and yes, I’m aware 
of that. 

Q. Okay. So you have no reason to conclude that the 
drug policy rather than just the general trend is respon- 
sible for the decline in apparent drug use, isn’t that cor- 
rect? 

A. I have a different opinion on that. I was there. 
I saw the differences and I believe there was a difference. 

Q. Your policy as originally enacted wasn’t limited 
to sports, was it? 


30 


A. In our beginning when we looked at Hawkins and 
talked of Hawkins, the model was much like theirs, which 
was other areas, but then we [46] decided that that was 
not going to be the right way to go. 

Q. My question was the policy was originally en- 


acted beyond sports? 
A. Correct. 
Q. To all extracurricular? 
A. Correct. 


Q. What are some of your extracurricular activities 
other than? 

A. We have band, we have drama. Those are two. 
Leadership class officers, class officers. 

Q. Did you have any injuries in the course of those 
activities? 

MR. POWELL: Id like to make an objection, Your 
Honor. What’s at issue is the present policy to test 
interscholastic athletes. 

THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead. 

Q. (BY MR. CHRIST) At some point in time you 
changed the policy to limit it to just sports; is that cor- 
rect? 

A. Right. 

Q. Okay. Why? 

A. Because after the research we’re talking about ad- 
vanced previously we determined that it was not legal if 
we carried any farther with those [47] areas because of 
what we had seen, so we knew that in the federal courts 
in Indiana it had been upheld for the athletics. 

Q. So the justification for the current policy is the 
concern for its legality? Is that correct? 

A. Well, only from the standpoint that we had to 
have that we felt to get by with our drug problem we had 
in our school, sir. 

Q. How are students selected for testing? 

A. The very first of the season they're all tested. 
Okay, like in the fall sports season, all the students are 
tested. Thereafter, they are randomly picked. Ten per- 
cent of the total number that are out for sports are drawn 


31 


at random, and we decided to have the students buy in 
by having them be the ones that would be tested. They 
can’t see who they’re picking as they pick it out but we— 


How many students then do you select? 

Example, if you have 30 people out we would 
usually do about three. 

[48] Q. Do you do the testing at the same time? 

A. As soon thereafter as possible that day, yes. 

Q. So you would draw a student from the classroom 
to go test them? 

A. Sometimes in the classroom it can be, if that’s 
when they can go. It takes about five minutes, but we do 
it also sometimes at noon, after school, before school, 
breaks, yes, sir. 


Q. How often do you drawn names? 

A. Every week. 

Q. Do you draw during the school day? 
A. Yes. 

Q. 

A. 


Q. You take the students to the locker room? 

A. Yes. 

Q. One-by-one? 

A. Yes. On the random. 

Q. On the Random? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And you're present while the student gives the 
urine test for the boys? 


A. Yes, I’m in the room. 

Q. Are you watching them while they urinate? 

A. It varies. Most of the time if I find something to 
work on, because the proximity, the way the urinals are, 
there’s no—there’s no water to be tampered with, so I 
may or may not. It’s not a necessary thing that I have to 
do. I don’t train myself to watch the kids. 

[49] Q. You're close enough to watch? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. And you're listening as well? 

A. From where I am on the bench I really couldn’t 
hear. I don’t recollect ever trying to hear them do they. 


32 


You're close enough to hear? 

Yes. 

Have you caught anyone cheating? 

I have not caught anyone cheating, no. 

But you're there to prevent cheating, correct? 

True. 

. To that extent you're listening and watching the 
students doing it? 

A. Ican see what the students are doing, yes? 

Q. What if the students can’t urinate at that precise 
moment? 

A. We let them go back to class and come to us when 
they can. 

Q. I think you referred to the policy as non-punitive. 
What exactly do you mean by that? 

A. When we first got Hawkins’s program on the first 
offense that there was a positive test, [50] they suspended 
a kid for the remainder of that athletic season and did 
not allow them to participate. 

We built into our policy that on the second—after 
their first test was positive we tested nearly for a second 
time immediately. If it was a double positive to bring the 
parents in, notify them we have a double positive and 
then there’s two alternatives for the student. We tell the 
sudent, “Look, there’s twice positive. You know, we're 
going to offer you these services which we have people 
with programs to help, intervention,” and if they agree 
to that and if they'll be tested weekly to show they’re 
trying to quit the drug, we will let them continue to 
participate. 

No other program that I know of and have read about 
allows the students that opportunity to stay involved and 
that’s what I mean by non-punitive. We're not threatening 
we’re going to exclude you totally from the program or 
suspend you or any of that type of thing. And nothing 
happens to the students if they are positive, as far as 
academics and being excluded from school. 

Q. For a first offense—and that’s the [51] word you 
used, correct, the first time you flunk the test? 

A. Yes. 


OPOPOPO 


33 


Q. You give them a choice, they can either get kicked 
off the team or they can be forced to go to counseling 
or undertaking further testing. That’s the choice, isn’t it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And they can’t say “I don’t want to be here?” 

A. If they say they don’t want to do it, then they’re 
excluded. 

Q. Okay. And you don’t consider that punishment? 

A. I believe extracurricular activity is not required, 
so no, I don’t consider it— 

Q. Don’t you think that students who are kicked off 
the team or are made to go to counseling and made to 
take urine testing would consider themselves punished? 

A. I can’t answer that. 

Q. Okay. For a second offense, you don’t get any 
option, do you? 

A. You still have the option that you can still do 
that, and within a couple seasons you [52] can—within 
the—depends when the season occurs, okay? It’s the 
third offense that the student is totally off for the year. 
The second offense is very similar to the first offense, I 
believe. Because we're trying to give them some time. 

THE WITNESS: Could I have some more water, 
please? 

MR. CHRIST: While you’re up could the witness be 
handed Defendant’s Exhibit 104, please. 

THE CLERK: (Handing) 


[Defendant’s Exhibit 104 is the Vernonia School 
District’s Student Athlete Drug Policy] 


Q. (BY MR. CHRIST) Would you look at the top 
of the second page of that exhibit— 

A. Uh-huh. 

Q. —Where it says “Second Offense.” Does that re- 
fresh your recollection about whether a student is auto- 
matically kicked off a team for a second time? 

A. I need a clarification. You're saying that on the 
second offense of this policy that the student is excluded 
from all athletics for the year. Is that what you're saying, 
sir? 


34 


Q. Listen to my question. For a second offense a 
student is suspended for participating in athletics for the 
remainder of the current season in [53] the next athletic 
season? 

A. True. 

Q. There's no option to say, “I'll continue in a pro- 
gram and go to counseling,” is there? You don't get the 
choices you get for the first offense, do you? 

A. Yes, you do. It’s just not spelled out there. 

Q. It’s not spelled out in the policy? 

A. Right. Exactly. We have a policy here the stu- 
dent’s suspended from participating in athletics for the 
remainder of the current season and the next season for 
which year he or she is cligible. 

Q. So are you suggesting the policy is inaccurate? 

A. No, it’s not inaccurate. The policy just does not 
refer back to the participation in the assistance program 
of the weekly drug test, but is understood that it is only 
on the third offense that there's a total removal for the 
entire year. 

Q. Okay. Is that punishment? 

A. Again, that’s—that’s an opinion. To me there's 
been an opportunity. It would depend on the person. 
[54] Q. You mentioned use of drug dogs. 

A. Uh-huh. 

Q. And what did you do with the dogs? 

A. This is an attempt many schools are trying to— 
at that time Vernonia is not the only school that is going 
through this, the throes of drug problems. There are 
other school districts, Scappoose and others in Columbia 
County, and there was a use of a drug dog unit in Colum- 
bia County which is accessible to the school. 

There were several parents, like I said, who were con- 
cerned about the problem of drugs in school. That was 
one of the things they advised us to do to, use a drug dog 
to see if there were drugs in school. 

Q. They went around with dogs— 

A. Yes, and sniffed lockers. 

Q. Did you find any drugs that way? 

A. Yes. But unfortunately we messed it up. 


35 


Q. How'd you mess it up? 

A. The dogs stopped at a locker. We got the student 
out of class to open the locker for us and we searched 
through it. This was right before lunch. Fourth period. 
In the locker was a transistor radio. I picked the radio 
up, not [55] thinking to go through that device. I could 
not find any drugs. So we shut it back up and told the 
kid we apologized to him, that it was something wrong 
with the dog. 

I had some—two students immediately come up to me 
when the bell rang for lunch. They said, “Mr. Aultman, 
check the locker, it’s in where the batteries are normally 
kept. That’s where the marijuana is stashed.” I immedi- 
ately went to the locker and the transistor radio was gone. 
Any other drugs found through use of dogs? 

No. 

How many times did the dog come to the school? 

One. 

Why didn’t you continue that program? 

We felt it wasn’t effective. It wasn’t effective. 

After trying it one day? 

Yes. 

Have you tried voluntary drug ‘esting? 

No, we haven't because in the school that we have, 

Churchhill and other schools we studied at this time found 
to be very ineffective in our [56] opinion. 

Q. But you didn’t try it? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you try drug testing only those students that 
you suspected of taking drugs? 

A. You run a real fine line of reasonable suspicion, 
probable cause, and we—we really felt that by trying to 
design a policy that combined all of our kids and, like 
I said, no, we did not. 

Q. You have a general search and seizure policy at 
the school. Don’t you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And that’s expressed in the student handbook, 
isn’t it? 

A. Yes. 


>O>PO>PO>O>O 


36 


Q. Okay. And that permits you to test only on the 
basis—or to search a student’s person only on the basis 
of reasonable suspicion; is that correct? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. So your mandatory drug testing policy is incon- 
sistent with that policy, isn’t it? 

A. That has not been decided in Oregon yet. That’s 
what we’re here for today. 

Q. I don’t want to know about the legality [57] of 
the policy, I just want to know that it’s inconsistent with 
your general search and seizure policy, isn’t it? 

A. In my opinion, no. 

Q. Well, you have no reason to suspect James of 
taking drugs, do you? 

A. No. No, I do not. 

Q. Nevertheless you insist that he take tests if he 
want to play sports? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Have you ever seen any students taking drugs? 
Ever caught anyone in the act? 

A. No. 

Q. So your knowledge about any drug use is based 
on hearsay reports from others, isn’t it? 

A. And what I know about kids, yes, it is, and my 
own knowledge. I perceive the training of drug charac- 
teristics. I draw conclusions based on my knowledge and 
training. 

Q. I think you mentioned four wrestlers who went to 
the coast and said—admitted they'd taken drugs? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Were they wrestlers or football players? 

A. They did both. 


[58] Q. And then they passed it on to you, that 
information? 
A. Yes, the coach did. 


Q. And that’s the basis for your conclusion that 
you've got a drug problem? 


A. No. The behavior—no, I—I can’t agree with that. 


37 


Q. I think you said that athletes are generally looked 
up to in the community? 
Yes, they are. 
All of them? 
To my knowledge. 
70 percent of students participate? 
60 percent. 
At the grade school level? 
Oh, at the grade school. 70 percent, yes. 
MR. CHRIST: That’s all I have Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Redirect. 
MR. POWELL: Nothing Your Honor. 


(Recess) 


gr Or orop 


* * * * 


38 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF CROSS-EXAMINATION 
OF ELLIS MASON, 
Superintendent of Vernonia School District 


* * * * 


[64] Q. Since you implemented the drug testing policy 
how many students have flunked the test? 

MR. POWELL: Objection. Outside the scope. 

THE COURT: Overruled. I'm going to allow the 
question. Go ahead. 

Q. (BY MR. CHRIST) How many students have 
flunked? 

A. Two or three, I believe. 

Q. And that’s in what, three years, policy's been in 
force? 

A. That’s correct. 

MR. CHRIST: Nothing else. Thank you. 

THE COURT: Redirect. 

MR. POWELL: (Shakes head) 

THE COURT: Thank you. You may step down. 


* * * * 


39 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF DIRECT- 
AND CROSS EXAMINATION OF MARCIA KING, 
Vernonia School District Teacher and Athletic Director 


* . . c 
[66] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
* * * * 


Q. You indicated you grew up in Vernonia? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. And your current position with the district? 

A. I'm a teacher and athletic director and leadership 
of student council advisor. 

Q. And over your 18 years in the district did you 
have the opportunity to observe the frequency of injury 
to extracurricular athletes? 

A. Yes, I have. Both as a coach and as athletic 
director. 

Q. Did you notice any trends in the late 1980's, let’s 
say 1985, 1989 as far as injuries in the district? 

A. Yes. There—the frequency and also the severity 
of type of injury seemed to be one of esculating. 

Q. And over your 18 years in the district did you 
have the opportunity to observe any increase in students’ 
use of illegal drugs or alcohol? 

A. Yes. Some of that was hearsay. By [67] listening 
to students’ conversations and also my observation of stu- 
dents, small groups of students across the street at the 
high school at a small restaurant, La Mario Coke Shop 
which is directly across the street from the school office, 
observation of them passing joints back and forth among 


40 


themselves during the noon hour and sometimes before 
school. 

Q. Did you have the opportunity to observe over 
those 18 years whether there was any noticeable trend in 
the use of illegal drugs? 

A. Again, observation and—of students’ behaviors, 
training and stuff, again this is my opinion and in the 
school, within the classroom, within the halls, during 
sporting events and the blatancy on which students would 
talk about their drug use and in the classroom, in the hall, 
there was a hostility, a power struggle among students 
and teachers. 

In the classroom it was very difficult to teach because 
we dealt with this anger and this hostility. This is in- 
dicative of drug use. Also other things too can play a 
role, but primarily the drug use appeared to be the fore- 
runner because of the students’ conversations. 

[68] Q. Are you familiar with the term “ The Big 
Elk”? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Can you tell the Court abovt where that term 
came from and what it denotes? 

A. I'm not really sure where it came from, but it was 
a group of students, athletes and actually that’s about all 
I know about it. 

Q. Were they—from your observation were they in- 
volved in use of illegal drugs? 

A. Yes. 

Q. This again is in the time frame of the late 1980's? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you ever personally observe students under the 
influence? 

A. Yes, I did. I had a student arrive in my classroom 
after a lunch break and I had to escort him to the office. 
He was clearly obviously inebriated and was sent home 
from school. 

Q. Back to the Big Elk. Were there some unusual 
behaviors of those individual students who were student 
athletes who were identified as members of the Big Elk? 


al 


A. There was a thing with each other in the [69] 
hallway and there were the loud bugling, the loud con- 
versations, down the hall. It was more or less a signaling 
to each other and a camaraderie. 

Q. Was that different than it had been, say, in the 
early 1980's, had you seen that type of behavior before? 

A. No, I hadn't. 

Q. What’s a disciplinary referral? 

A. A disciplinary referral is a form which the teacher 
fills out which states the behavior of a student or unac- 
ceptable behavior of a student in a classroom and a hall, 
even on the school premises, and describes that behavior. 
And then it is then also referred to students who sign a 
rebuttal or a comment in regard to the discipline and 
then it’s sent on to the office. 

Q. Is this a standard practice within the district? 

A. Yes, it is. 

Q. Did you notice any change from the early 1980's 
to late 1980’s and the number of disciplinary referrals? 

A. I can speak for myself, yes. In my own classroom 
I used to pride myself on the fact that I could handle 
my own discipline, and in 1985 a group [70] of students 
entered my classroom and I had a number of these stu- 
dents that were in the—this little group, this Big Elk 
group, and it came to a point where I had to send re- 
ferrals to the office and my referrals alone increased in 
number on a weekly, sometimes on a daily basis for a 
period of time until some of those students were released 
from class. 

Q. Now, since adoption of the drug policy have you 
noticed any change in the number of disciplinary referrals 
from your classroom only? 

A. Yes. Terribly. Again back down to my own prob- 
lems of having to refer to the office. 

Q. Is there in fact a decrease? 

A. Decrease? Considerably, yes. In fact, almost zero. 

Q. From your observation was drug and alcohol use 
prevalent among students participating in interscholastic 
athletics in the late 1980’s? 


42 


A. Again, observation and the hearsay of students 
who were talking about the use of amphetamines, even 
dict pills if they could get them from their mothers’ 
cabinets, conversations within my classroom. 

Q. And you dealt primarily with the female [71] 
athletes? 


A. Yes. 
Q. And were the female athletes also talking about 


drug use as well as the male athletes? 
A. Yes, they were. 
* * * + 


[75] Q. All right. Would you tell us how a student 
comes in to be tested? 

A. I bring them into my office area here, set them 
down at a chair next to me at the desk, go through the 
process of paperwork. They do—they then enter into this 
restroom area, which is right beside my shoulder. The-e 
is a toilet area and a shower area here. 

Q. That restroom has a door on it? 

A. Yes, it does. A closed door. It does have a 
grate—an air type grate there to that. 

Q. So the female student enters into the restroom 
and produces the urine sample? 

A. Right, and brings it back out to me and I finish 
up the process and then they leave. 

Q. Is the female student clothed? 

A. Yes, they are. 

Q. Do you directly observe the urination? 

A. No, I don’t. 

Q. You're outside the door so you could hear the 
natural sound of urination? 

A. Yes. 

MR. MULLMAN: Thank you. Would you mark 
that Exhibit 111. 


[Defendant’s Exhibit 111 is a diagram of the high 
school girl’s locker room] 


[76] THECLERK: 111? 
MR. MULLMAN: Your Honor, we would offer 111. 


43 


MR. CHRIST: No objection, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Received. 


(Defendant's Exhibit 111 received. ) 


Q. (BY MR. MULLMAN) The locker room has 
communal shower? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That is a communal dress area as well? 

A. Yes, it is. 

Q. Is this the area that’s normally used by female 
students interscholastic athletes in dressing down for 
their activities? 

A. Yes, it is. 

Q. Since the adoption of the drug policy have you 
noted any trends in the frequency of injuries to inter- 
scholastic female athletes? 

A. I have not divided it between female or male 
athletes, but as athletic director there has been a decrease 
in the number of accidents that come through my office, 
yes. 
Q. And those accident reports normally come to your 
Office; is that correct? 

A. In formal conditions, yes. Sometimes [77] bypass 
to the main office, but I am aware of accidents. 

MR.MULLMAN: Your witness. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. CHRIST: 


Q. What girls sports are offered by the district? 

A. In the fall we have volleyball and cross country. 
I’m speaking for the high school level. And in the winter 
sports we have girls’ basketball and in the spring sports 
we have track or golf. 

Q. Have you had any injuries in the golf program? 

A. Not recently, no. But in the past years we have 
during the late eighties. 

Q. What kind of injuries? 

A. Hit with a golf ball. And also one person was ac- 
cidentally struck with a club. 


44 


Q. What kind of injuries do you have in the track 
program? 

A. Muscle-type injuries, pulled muscles, improper 
warm-up. But you also have the potential for javelin or 
discus-type injuries. 

[78] Q. I don’t want to know about the potential, I 
want to know what injuries— 

A. What we normally—primarily muscular injuries. 

Q. And this is the same type of injuries in the cross 
country program, I take it? 

A. Yes. 

Q._ And in basketball? 

A. Muscular, but we also have knee injuries, we have 
shoulder injuries. 


Q. Okay. You just finished the basketball season, did 
you? 

A. Yes, we did. 

Q. Did you have any injuries during that season? 

A. Yes, we did. 

Q. What kind? 

A. Knee, ankle. 

Q. What knee injuries? 


A Types of torn ligaments or cartilage where they 
need surgery. 

Q. During the testing did I understand you to say 
there’s a grate on the door to the restroom? 
A. Yes, there is. 


* * * * 


[80] Q. Have you ever seen students take drugs and 
then play sports? 

A. No. Not immediately play the sport, no. 

Q. Have you ever seen a student take drugs? 

A. Yes, I have. 

Q. How many times? 

A. There were numerous times with observation from 
the school office to the restaurant across the street of the 
smoking of marijuana. 


* * * * 


45 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF DIRECT- 
AND CROSS-EXAMINATION OF KATHLEEN SEVIG, 
Vernonia High School Teacher 


* * * * 


[85] DIRECT EXAMINATION 


* * * * 


Q. How are you currently employed? 
[86] A. I’m a language arts teacher at Vernonia High 
School. 

Q. How long have you been so employed? 

A. 13 years. 

Q. And what are your current classes that you teach? 

A. I teach English, World Literature, survey of lit and 
comp, which are required courses for all students. I teach 
Speech and I’m a drama director. 

Q. Are you involved in any way with scholastic ath- 
letes at Vernonia? 

A. Only in the sense that I teach student athletes. 

Q. You have a child that’s involved? 

A. My son is a junior in high school in Vernonia and 
he is involved in student athletics. 

Q. But you are not a coach or anything like that? 

A. Iam nota coach. 

Q. Over the years at the district did you observe any 
trends in students using alcohol and illegal drugs? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And over that 13 years would you tell the court 
what you did, in fact, observe? 


46 


[87] A. When I first came to Vernonia in I believe 
1979, the first year that I taught I followed a teacher 
who had been there for 30 years and I had a few dis- 
cipline problems just because students were testing me. 
But after that for the next ten years I prided myself on 
and I’ve always provided myself, I’ve taught for 23 years, 
on my ability to handle the discipline in my classroom. 

One of the goals of my teaching is to establish a posi- 
tive climate of trust between myself and my students, and 
I have been able to do that. However, in the late eighties 
I would say beginning the years *85 thorugh °89 I noticed 
a tremendous difference in the kind of behavior problems 
I was having to deal with. Completely different than I had 
dealt with the previous years. 

Q. What kind of behavior problems were those? 

A. I could characterize them as students who were 
much more hostile, who wanted to dominate the class- 
room, whose behavior was very erratic and I think the 
other word I would use is very, very gross and inap- 
propriate. Much different than I had in the previous 16 
years. Something that I noticed considerably and was un- 
able to deal with myself as [88] I have been able to deal 
in the past. 

Q. And in that period ’85 on did you notice there 
was a significant increase in drug talk? 

A. If I could, I could give a specific example. I am 
trained in writing using the Oregon writing project model 
and that model is based on using personal experience as 
a beginning point for writing. And my students using 
that model, often I’ve had students write about things 
which are—well, they all write about things that are 
incredibly dear and important to them, and I’ve had to 
deal with things like sexual abuse and drug abuse in the 
home. 

During those three years I began getting essays from 
students with the theme of—I remember one essay in 
particular, the name of it was “Party Till We Puke,” and 
it was written by a student who wrote an essay about 
the goings on of he and his friends, their drug use, their 


47 


parties and he glorified it in the essay. And that was 
only one example that I particularly remember, but I 
got several essays on that theme and— 

Q. “That theme” being drug use? 

A. Drug use. Drug use, yes. Talking about drug 
use. And these were essays that they handed [89] in to 
me that they knew I was going to read and that I was 
going to grade. 

Q. And did you notice any behavioral changes in that 
late eighties period? 

A. I noticed tremendous behavioral changes. 

Q. What kind of things did you see? 

A. As I said before, I noticed behaviors that were 
extremely erratic and gross. I had a fifth period class 
and— 

Q. Fiith period after lunch? 

A. Yes. Directly after lunch. And students would 
come back from that class and it was extremely difficult 
for me to control that class in those particular years. 

I remember one instance I think there were 23 or 24 
students in the room and a student sat at the back sing- 
ing “Jesus Loves Me” at the top of his voice. 

Q. That was rather unusual? 

A. I’ve never experienced anything like that. 

Q. Did you go talk to the student? 

A. I talked to the student. It was kind of wild, his 
behavior, kind of dancing around in the back of the room, 
and I said—tried to talk to [90] him and he said, “well, 
I’m just high on life,” and tried to calm him down. There 
was no way. So I wrote a disciplinary referral and—to 
the office and he was taken from my class, but I don’t 
remember if he was suspended for two days. I can’t re- 
member. But I did get him back in class after that. 

Q. Did you notice any other types of odd behavior 
of students in class, for instance, writing inappropriate 
language? 

A. Yes. There was a lot of talk, as I said, about the 
“Party Till You Puke” thing, the drugs. They didn’t mean 
to overhear it, but it just went on and I did hear it. 


48 


There was more use of profanity. I remember one 
specific incident, and this was in a fifth period class also, 
where a student came into the classroom, a class of boys 
and girls, and marched into the classroom and sat down 
at his desk and looked over at a girl next to him and 
at the top of his lungs basicaliy in front of all my stu- 
dents shouted, “suck my dick.” And this kind of behavior 
has never happened to me before in my teaching. And 
these kinds of comments— 

Q. And did you talk to that particular [91] student 
about the comment? 

A. Absolutely. I told him to pick up his books and 
I called the office and there was a disciplinary referral. 
I believe he was suspended from my class for three days. 
But he also came back to my class. 

Q. Have you ever heard a term “drug cartel” referred 
to in the school? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Can you tell the court what that referred to? 

A. There’s a group of students who bragged about 
their drug use in their essays and I had all these students 
in my class. They were student athletes, who talked about 
how cruel it was to use drugs and alcohol, who in a 
sense intimidated other students. They would walk down 
the hall and I would stand right outside my classroom 
and they would shout and bang their heads into the 
lockers as hard as they could, they would butt heads with 
each other. They would be real loud. 

Sometimes in the classroom I would have—trying to 
calm them down. There was such a hostile atmosphere 
toward me that I just had a really difficult time. It 
bothered me terribly [92] because I thought what a dif- 
ference for 15 years I was in control of my classroom, 
I did not have these kinds of problems. Why is this hap- 
pening? Why can’t I deal with it? And I had to resort 
increasingly to having them removed from my classroom 
because I couldn’t deal with them in the classroom. 


44 


Q. Did you personally participate in any educational 
efforts to remove drug education prior to the time the 
district adopted the drug policy? | 

A. Yes. I'm a drama teacher and during—I think 
it was—I’m unclear of the years here. I think it was 
either '87-88 or "88-89. I’m sorry, I can’t remember the 
exact date. 

Q. That's all right. 

A. But it was during the time that we had the drug 
prevention month. And I had a drama class and there 
was a play called “The Ati” that Hillsboro High School 
had put on and it portrayed the lives of 11 or 12 teenage 
addicts and what happened to them. And the drama class 
discussed it and said they would really like to put on this 
performance as part of the drug education awareness. 

And so we practiced it and we performed [93] it five 
or six times for the high school in small groups and we 
also performed it at the 7th and 8th grade level. 

Q. And why did you select that particular day? 

A. It was a joint decision by me and my students. 
They had heard of the play. I had one student who was 
student director and we discussed it and they felt that 
they wanted to have some kind of involvement on their 
level of bringing the consequences of the drug use to their 
peers. 

There were other speakers coming in from the outside 
and they wanted to participate on a personal level in let- 
ting their friends and their peers know what drug use 
could do. 

Q. And from your personal observation were these 
efforts effective in curbing the drug abuse in the school? 

A. The discipline problems that I was having in my 
classroom didn’t change after that month. There was no 
change. I remember we had a series of four days and 
there was something that hit the students every day, and 
the Friday after those—that was over, five, I don’t know 
the exact number, four or five student athletes skipped 
school and [94] went to a parent’s house and used drugs 


50 


and alcohol and they were—the police raided thy!. That 
was during school. So that happened immediately after 
this whole months of education. 

Q. Is it fair to say it didn’t appear effective in your 
opinion? 

A. I didn’t see that it was effective. 

Q. Let’s turn to the current school year, 1991-92. 
Have you noticed any difference in the disciplinary re- 
ferrals from your class to the principal? 

A. I’ve had no disciplinary referrals at all. 

Q. After the adoption of the policy did you notice 
any difference in disciplinary referrals between that and 
the current year? 

A. Yes, I did. Last year I think I had two disci- 
plinary referrals and the first year that the drug testing 
was in effect, I can’t remember exactly, but I would say 
no. Maybe one to three, something like that. 

Q. Has the excessive drug talk stopped in your class? 

A. T’ve not heard any drug talk in my class this year. 
Maybe a bit at the beginning of last [95] year. Nothing 
this year. 

Q. How about the classrooms, any difference between 
when the policy was adopted in this behavior? 

A. I don’t detect the hostility. I’m able to establish 
a rapport with my students, have the kind of class at- 
mosphere where they respect each other and me, and I’m 
able to teach them the kind of environment that I was 
able to teach in, as I said, those first 15 or so years be- 
fore this late eighties and I thought everything—I could 
not understand what was happening. I—I didn’t—I didn’t 
change my teaching style. It was so severe in the year 
of ’88-89 that I was seriously considering not remaining 
in teaching because I felt that I could not reach my 
students. 

I could add that my teaching had been successful. I 
was a master teacher. I received merit pay several times 


51 


from the district. But I felt that I could not continue 


because I could not reach a great many of my students. 
MR. MULLMAN: Nothing further. 


* * * . 
[97] CROSS-EXAMINATION 
* * * * 


Q. So again you could be seeing the benefit now of 
all the work you did back then? 

A. I can’t—I suppose that’s possible. 

Q. Really you have no reason—I mean, you can’t 
say for certain what is the cause of the current situation? 

A. My observation was that the behavior problems 
that I had were severe during those two years and after 
they did not change after the education, they changed 
drastically after drug testing was implemented. 

Q. You talked about some essays that the students 
wrote that talked about drug use apparently. 

A. Yes. ; 

Q. Do you have any—you don’t know for sure 
whether any of those essays are true, do you? 

THE COURT: Any of those what? 

MR. CHRIST: If those essays were true. 

THE COURT: Oh, oh, okay. 

THE WITNESS: Only in that the students told me 
they were true. 

Q. (BY MR. CHRIST) These students, was there 
only one? 
[98] A. No. 

Q. How many students are you talking about? 

A. Probably I would guess—this is an estimated 
guess: Eight or nine. 

Q. Hoy many students have you taught since 1989? 
Just an estimate. 

A. Probably have about 90 students per year. 

Q. The drug cartel, how many students were involved 
in that as far as you could tell? 

A. I would identify the leaders of that group, the 
role models, probably seven to ten. 


52 


Q. Did you ever actually ever see any of them taking 
drugs or just talking about it? 

A. I never observed them taking drugs. 

MR. CHRIST: That's it, Your Honor. 

MR. MULLMAN: Nothing further, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: You may step down. 


* * * * 


353 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF DIRECT- 
AND CROSS-EXAMINATION OF RONALD SVENSON, 
Vernonia High School Teacher, Wrestling Coach 
and Former Vernonia High School Football Coach 


* . . + 
[104] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
* . * « 


Q. Now over your 11 years with the district as a 
coach and as a teacher, have vou had the opportunity 
to observe any patterns of students use of illegal drugs 
and alcohol? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Would you tell us what you’ve observed? 

A. When I came to Vernonia in 1981 I was really 
impressed with the spirit, the lack of drug use, having 
moved from an area that was—drug use was rampant 
in Southern Oregon. The—over that began to erode. 
Beginning in about ’85 you would hear isolated rumors 
about kids on the teams doing drugs. 

It—when I was an assistant coach the head coach was 
called in and I believe it was in the football season of 
85 and apprised of the fact that parents called and said 
that some of their sons had—that other kids on the team 
had done drugs on a road trip. That was the first time 
that [105] we had really been confronted. 

After that we began to see—maybe opened our eyes 
and so we began to look, and we began to see behaviors 
that as we became better trained and read materials, you 


54 


know, appeared to us to be not a normal behavior to the 
head coach and I at that time. 

Q. This is the football coach? 

A. Yes. 

Q. How did these things come to your attention? 

A. As I said, the first instance was kids on the team 
had told their parents that some kids were doing drugs 
on a road trip at a restaurant when we were eating. After 
that we—you know, we heard things that kids wouid 
come and tell us that this is what they heard, you hear 
kids talking. In particlular, after seasons were over when 
kids felt you no longer had the—the authority to remove 
them from the team, “oh, yeah, man, we were so blasted, 
you know,” that was °86, °87. 

We had a couple instances, basketball team where 
kids were drinking on a bus coming back from a trip. 
They were disciplined. That was in what, I believe *86. 
We had another instance in [106] track where students 
were—stole some beer at a Mini-Mart or something on a 
road trip. Were removed from the track team because 
of it. That—I believe that was in the spring of ’87. 

We— it began to grow. Began to see more—more 
athletes across the street from the school in the little 
restaurant being involved in this thing, in this group. 
And then you’d hear them talk about it. You know, we 
had team dinners at our house and you couldn’t believe 
the same kids, you know, would come to your house and 
then be polite and then you'd see them four days later 
in school and their behavior would be radically different. 

So it was kind of like an escalating thing. It just con- 
tinued to seem to grow and you could almost weekly 
see more kids getting into this pool, so to speak. 

* * * *K 
[110] Q. (By MR. MULLMAN) In 1989 did your 
wrestling team have an opportunity to travel to Madras, 
Oregon? 
A. Yes, we did. 
Q. What was the purpose of that trip? 


55 


A. To participate in a district 1A wrestling tourna- 
ment that qualifies wreslers to go to the state tournament. 
Q. Did any of your wrestlers get injured in that trip? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Tell us a little bit about the injury. 

A. Well, we had a boy wrestling in the district finals 
who had qualified the year before to go to state. Only 
the top two kids in each weight class qualified to go to 
to the state tournament. He was a very good wrestler, 
a tough athlete. Had been extremely competitive. He 
shot [1 11] a take-down in the first 15 seconds of the 
district finals. Went—instead of a normal reaction, went 
to his hands and knees and stayed on his hands and knees. 
His opponent cross-faced him, went to what we call a 
two-on-one arm bind, the kid didn’t react, he didn’t do 
anything. He just stayed in that position. The kid ham- 
mered across him and pulled his elbow up in this (dem- 
onstrating) manner. It’s a move that we’ve practiced 
probably close to a thousand times over the years that 
that boy participated. 

He was severely injured. Had to go—he didn’t get to 
go to the state tournament because of that. He had to 
go to the doctor. He had several kinds of injuries in the 
sternum area with collar bones connected to the sternum, 
several months before he could function normally with 
his arms. 

Q. And was there any reason to suspect that students 
who were participating were under the influence of some 
type of drug? 

A. That night I took him—when we took him back 
to the motel, iced him up, okay, the next morning I got 
up, went down to his room to see how he was doing. It 
was 11 o’clock when we got back from the motel. When 
I walked into the room the [112] smell of marijuana en- 
closed you and I—there were no doubt somebody in the 
room was smoking marijuana. And I went to get my as- 
—~ coach to verify the existence. 

ere was—and I—by the time we got back, the room 
had been sprayed with what had to be a mixture of every 


56 


aftershave lotion and hair spray and deodorant that those 
kids could find. There were four kids to a room. 

As I looked back on the injury later that afternoon on 
the way home, it’s a long bus ride, I thought the kid 
didn’t react like he had reacted a hundred times in the 
past. There was no way of particularly proving at that 
point in time whether he was under the influence. Cer- 
tainly a strong suspicion. 

Q. And have you ever observed any football game 
films where you got that same kind of strong suspicion 
that something was wrong? 

A. Yes. You practice certain situations over and 
over in football to prevent injuries, to the kids to react 
to make—you know, win ball games, to protect them- 
selves. That’s my first rule when I coach football was 
to teach the kids to protect themselves. And during this 
period of time [113] there would be situations where I 
was looking at the film and the kid would get an ankle 
rolled on, you know, opposing player would come up to 
block him and get to his ankles and the kid would get 
a sprained ankle. 

And I'd watch it and I'd think why didn’t he react? 
I mean, it’s just like, you know, you watch, you say to 
yourself we've drilled on that particular thing a hundred 
times a week and the kid wouldn’t react. And not always 
were they injured, but it was a situation where they just 
didn’t react in the manner that they would normally react, 
just as athletes—as people walking down the street would 
react. 

Q. Did the wrestler ultimately tell you that he had 
been under the influence? 

MR. CHRIST: Your Honor, hearsay. 

THE COURT: Sustained. 

Q. (BY MR. MULLMAN) In response to your ob- 
servations of these films and your perception of the wres- 
tling, did you decide to do anything about what you 
perceived as a problem in Vernonia? 

A. Not just as a result of that. They were the— 
let’s say the culmination, the point at which I said we’re 


57 


losing these kids, we had to do [114] something, we 
have to try something different than we've been trying. 

Could I go back to an experience that I had earlier in 
coaching? 

Q. Sure. 

A. _ Okay. In November of 1977 I was teaching at— 
coaching at Glendale High School, and on the girls’ volley- 
ball team had a girl that was extremely popular in school 
and was rather heavyset. We had our awards banquet 
on a Tuesday night. She got the award as the most 
inspirational volleyball player. 

She went to a party, a going-away party for a girl 
that was moving the next day. Drank about one and a 
half beers and died of a heart attack in the middle of 
the Party. The evidence about her death is that she had 
been using speed, diet pills that she had—that she had 
gotten from an aunt, unbeknownst even to the aunt she 
was taking them. The alcohol and the amphetamine 
reacted, she died, you know, 30 kids standing around. 

The second hardest thing I ever had to do in teaching 
was to sit in first period the next day when most of those 
kids were there in the class. I [1 15] have no training to 
deal with that situation as far as how you handle grief 
But it alarmed me and, you know, I just read on my own 
then about the reactions of different drugs ever since the 
girl died. And when—when these things began to occur 


do to drive home the fact that these dru 
no gs are dangerous. 
You know, it’s not the kids that are the enemy, it’s the 


A. Probably occasionally—by that I mean once eve 
three or four months in 1987. More often than ra 


in the spring of ’88. By the—by February of ’89 once 
every two weeks or so. And he was extremely reluctant 


58 


to talk about drug testing. We saw the article from Haw- 
kins, Texas, and so we discussed that also. 


* * * * 


[118] Q. (BY MR. MULLMAN) I don't care what 
other people told you. I’m asking you what did you de- 
cide to do in particular? 

A. I decided to do what I could to institute a manda- 
tory drug testing policy at Vernonia—at the Vernonia 
school district. 

Q. What did you do? 

A. I talked to Mr. Aultman. As he stated, we had 
had a discussion at the faculty meeting over the issue. 
I said I will be more than happy to do the legwork to 
find out if there are any cases that have been upheld so 
that we can do this. He gave me information to spend 
a hundred dollars or so on phone calls to track down 
information. 

I called Time Magazine in New York City to get the 
phone—the names from Hawkins Texas because The 
Oregonian hadn't kept a copy. Time Magazine, as I 
understand at that time it was an insert. I called the 
superintendent of Hawkins School District, talked with 
Mike on the phone, felt uncomfortable at some points. 
I felt that education had failed, everything I'd done in 
my life that I believed in didn’t work— 

Q. Did you get a copy of the Hawkins policy? 

A. Yes. I talked to him—I asked him at the time, 
I said did you—has this gone to court, because it seemed 
rather broad. They tested everyone— 

Q. The entire student body? 

A. Everybody that was in any form of extracurricu- 
lar activity, including leadership and so on. My concern 
wasn’t that somebody in leadership was going to get 
hurt or, you know, have these health problems, my con- 
cern was kids on the football and wrestling teams weren't 
reacting and, you know, they were getting hurt. 

I—I asked him if there were any cases that had been 
taken to court because theirs had not been. He said 


59 


yes, there was a case in Indiana that had just been set- 
tled in late 1988, Tippecanoe County in Indiana. And 
I said—asked him if he could provide me with materials. 
He said he would [120] try to do that. He then sent me 
a copy of their program from Hawkins. 

Q. Did you also get materials from the Tippecanoe— 

A. Yes, a few months later. 

Q. And using those materials, what did you do? 

A. I worked in conjunction with Mr. Krost (PH), 
who was our athletic director at that time, and Mr. Ault- 
man. Through the community we came up with the 
policy that we now have. 

Once we received the Tippecanoe information, the 
court in Indiana had made it abundantly apparent that 
there was no constitutional basis to be testing kids from 
leadership or from the band, that it wouldn't fly, you 
know, our goal was to protect our athletes. That’s— 
that’s where our major concern was. Therefore, the case 
in Indiana seemed to fit better than the program at Haw- 
kins, so we made some changes in what we had proposed. 


bad * * & 


[128] Q. (BY MR. MULLMAN) Mr. Svenson, we 
had just completed, I think, at the break discussing the 
diagram of the locker room. What I would like you to 
do now, is turn to the Big Elk. There was some testimony 
about that. 

Did you during the 1988 school year have occasion to 
have members of the Big Elk in your particular class- 
room? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And there’s been some testimony that there were 
eight or nine, perhaps as many as ten [129] members of 
that. Is that your recollection? 

A. The Big Elk was—it wasn’t like a club of dues 
and stuff, it was—nobody demonstrated a call, you 
know, the mating call. 


60 


Q. I don’t believe you need to do that. 

A. There were probably ten or so kids that were the 
core of what became a group of approximately 30 to 35 
kids that were—would walk down the hall and greet each 
other with this obnoxious greeting. 

Q. And these individuals, were some of those individ- 
uals in the Big Elk students athletes? 

A. I can only think of one that wasn’t. 

Q. And what type of behavior did you observe of 
these students? 

A. In my classroom? 

Q. Yes. 

A. I had these students in sixth period U.S. History 
class. These are—they’re sitting in the classroom now 
and would be talking about let’s say the Holocaust, as an 
example, because I remember this incident specifically. 
And these two kids started (demonstrating) laughing. 
Just burst out laughing. 

I thought maybe—I thought maybe had [130] done 
something, so I stopped and said, “what's so funny?” 
“Nothing.” So I go on and that pattern was—that pat- 
tern was repeated two or three times that day. I took the 
kids out. You know, I tried in all my teaching career of 
23 years to not have to send kids to the office. So, you 
know, I took them out on the porch behind my class- 
room and just talked to them and said, “this is not ap- 
propriate. You can’t just burst out laughing at a—you 
know, these kinds of issues.” 

Then we come back in the class. Other kids in the 
group would then—as we're trying to discuss this or 
whatever would start just almost yelling at these kids, 
you know, about different—different things. 

This giggling between these two kids went on—off and 
on for two or three months. It was—the—then, you 
know, there were a couple of other kids that would come 
into class four days out of five with no problem, and then 
all of a sudden it would be just a—you know, like I came 
in one day, I walked in my classroom and a kid was 


61 


laying underneath three desks. You know, and I said, 
“what are you doing?” “I was just taking a nap, man.” 


* * * * 


[131] Q. Did you notice that your disciplinary re- 
ferrals increased in the '87-88 period? 

A. Mine did, yes. 

Q. In your own classdoom? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You testified earlier that one of the reasons that 
rs wanted to adopt drug testing policies regarding 

ety— 

MR. MULLMAN: And I apologize, Your Honor, 
I'm not sure I covered this. I want to make sure I did. 

Q. (BY MR. MULLMAN) What concerns with 
[132] safety did you have for those athletes? 

A. First and foremost I think anybody that coached 
at that period of time had to be influenced by the death 
of Len Bias, the basketball student at the University of 
Maryland and Don Rogers a football player with the 
Cleveland Browns who suffered a heart attacks from 
overdoses of cocaine. 

I was concerned that kids would be using ampheta- 
mines and they'd get hurt and not—you know, not be 
able to recognize it and play beyond what they could— 
you know, normally you can play football in some amount 
of pain, but amphetamines may mask like a knee injury 
on the field and the kid may not feel the full effect of 
it and continue to play and injure it worse. 

I had an almost fanatical fear of a kid being hurt, 
being taken to the hospital, refusing to admit that he was 
using a certain—I'll say speed, and being injected with 
pain killers or whatever and having a reaction to it. 
Those kinds of concerns. I was concerned because you 
just—I don’t know, I guess because I want the kids to 
use the athletic program to—as a way to get through 
being a teenager and have in Vernonia especially have 
something to do, but get through it safely. 


62 


[133] 1 don’t—you know, I don’t want any kids to 
emerge from our program not being able to function and 
those kinds of concerns. 

Q. Were you concerned about the safety of teammates 
and opponents? 

A. Ina sense that—that the—if a student was using 
drugs and playing in particular—in particular football 
and wrestling, you could—there is a chance that kids 
could go outside the rules of the game and create injury 
situations to opponents or come flying into a pile in foot- 
ball for example with his head down and hit a teammate 
in the back. Those kinds of things. I have to say that 
that concern was there, but it wasn’t the primary concern. 
My primary concern was for each individual’s kid’s own 
protection. 

Q. From your experience is there a difference in the 
pressures between, say, interscholastic athletics and say 
for instance the P.E. class? 

A. Yeah. There’s no real comparison between P.E. 
classes and interscholastic athletics in terms of, you know, 
for example pressures on the kids to perform. If a boy 
comes into a P.E. class, for example, in my weight 
training class and says he’s [134] not feeling—you know, 
fecling well, he has a strained muscle in his back or 
something, he doesn’t participate and usually they will 
tell you that. 

Kids want to play in games and oftentimes they won't 
tell a coach when they’re hurt. And there’s that pressure. 
The workouts themselves are—are much, much more 
strenuous. First of all, in a high school P.E. class the 
actual activity length of time by—you know, by dressing 
down and having to shower and so on, the maximum 
time is 33 to 35 minutes of exercise, and that includes— 
that would include a period of time to stretch and warm 
up. 
In wrestling, for example, when kids use—use the idea 
that they determine the physical difficulty of the practice 
by the number of pounds they lose, they sweat off during 


63 


a practice, they have a two-pound practice or three-pound 
practice, or once in a while a four- or five-pound practice, 
depending on the kid. And there’s just—there’s no pres- 
sure, for example, in teaching a class. There’s no pressure. 
Nobody says you know, “did you win?” 

You know, you don’t go home on Friday [135] after- 
noon after classes and say, “did you win?” And the 
kids aren’t asked when they come out of P.E. class, “did 
you win today?” You know. I mean, there’s that kind 
of competitive situation. 

Q. Prior to imposing this drug policy did you try 
other educational programs to reduce drugs in the school 
system? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What did you do? 

A. Well, I teach modern problems class which is a 
class that’s dsigned to deal with whatever problems the 
kids find important. So we dealt with the problem of drugs. 
You know, we discussed the health aspect, the social as- 
pect, what pressures were put on kids to do drugs, was 
their peer pressure. You know, those kinds of things. 

I've done the reports, the kids have researched the drug, 
effects of the drugs, we looked at movies. We partici- 
pated—my student leadership class participated in the 
month long program we talked about. The—this—we 
were sort of the climax of the four-day thing in the spring 
right before spring vacation of ’88. My student council, 
we shut off the lights in the gym. 

The student council kids came in one at a [136] time 
with a flashlight under their face, you know, with their 
faces in white and read off the statistic about, you know, 
I'm number—we talked about the number of people 
killed by drunk drivers in the last 20 years and kids 
would say, “I’m number 5,102, I was driving to the 
prom,” so on, so forth, you know. Had the lights out and 
just the flashlights. 

The student council kids totally forgot about the as- 
sembly. However, the next day five of our best sopho- 


64 


more athletes skipped school and went to one of their 
kids’ houses and were arrested for drinking and using 
marijuana. 

Q. Now, this month-long program culminating in the 
four-day event—there’s some confusion about the date. 
Are you fairly certain about when that was? 

A. It was when the group that had been—you know, 
Big Elk group, it’s when they were sophomores. They 
graduated in 1990. So they were juniors in ’88-89, so 
they would have been sophomores in ’87-88, yes. 


* * * * 
[139] CROSS-EXAMINATION 
* * * * 


Q. Are you close enough to hear the sound of 
urination? 

A. Our locker room sometimes because of echoes 
from the gym and so on, so forth, sometimes you would 
be very difficult to hear it. If there was no P.E. class or 
any other activity in the gym or anywhere, I could hear 
them probably if I was to listen close. 

Q. Have you caught anyone attempting to cheat? 

A. Have I personally? 

Q. Yeah. 

A. No. 

Q. You would agree, wouldn’t you, that the risk of 
injury is inherent in all sports, isn’t it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And the degree of risk depends on sports? 

A. Yes. 

Q. It’s greater risk for contact sports than for non- 
contact sports? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Now, you have four non-contact sports in the 
district, don’t you; golf, volleyball, track [140] and cross 
country? 

A. I believe that’s correct. 


65 


Q. So really what you're concerned about is wrestling 
and football? 

A. No. What I’m concerned about is the safety of 
every single kid that participates in athletics. 

Q. But the risk is greatest in those two sports, isn’t it? 

A. Yes. 


Q. You mentioned two athletes who died, you believe, 


_ from cocaine overdose. Who were those? 


A. Those—to say that I believe they died from co- 
caine overdose makes it sound like that was my opinion. 
The autopsy reports on both Len Bias and Don Rogers 
were published in every newspaper in the country saying 
yes, they died from heart failure caused by an overdose of 
cocaine. 

Q. Len Bias was a basketball player? 

A. From the University of Maryland, yes. 

Q. Don Rogers, what was his— 

A. He was a defensive back for the Cleveland 
Browns. 

Q. Neither one of them died on the playing field, 
did they? 

[141] A. No, they did not. 

Q. You talked a little about the educational program. 
That was tried before the drug testing program? 

A. Yes. 


Q. You didn’t see immediate results apparently? 
A. No. 


Q. Do you expect immediate results when you teach 
students something? 

A. In areas where their health, immediate health is 
at risk, you could anticipate that after a period of weeks 
that there would be some indication, yes. 

Well, takes time to change behavior, doesn’t it? 
That depends on the behavior, I believe. 

Well, things seem better now than before, correct? 
For who? 

For you as a teacher and coach? 

In what manner do you mean? 


POPO?PO 


66 


Q. Student behavior, deportment. 


A. Yes. 
Q. And that could be the result of the seeds [142] 


that you sowed back in the education program? 

A. Those kids that are in my classes now were not 
in those education programs. 

Q. Maybe their older brothers and sisters were? 

A. Some of them were, yes. 

Q. Education is a long-term process, isn’t it? 

A. Ye. | 

Q. I guess I sense that you feel like you failed the 
educational mission when you adopted the drug testing 
policy, is that fair? 

A. I don’t feel that I failed. I felt that myself and 
my colleagues did everything educationally that we could 
find to do to change the behavior of the students. I 
believe and I believe today that the drugs mask the 
intellect of the person. And I don’t think that you can 
educate people as long as they’re under the influence 
of drugs. I don’t think that you can keep them safe. I 
don’t think that you can keep them healthy. 


* * * * 


67 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF 
DEFENDANT'S TRIAL EXHIBIT 106— 
Perpetuation Deposition of Robert L. DuPont, M.D. 
Expert Witness for Defendant 


* * * * 


[37] Q. In your opinion, would you expect that 
teachers and coaches and administration staff in a high 
school or a middle school could effectively observe stu- 
dents and determine which ones were under type-two 
impairment for marijuana use? 

A. No. In fact they’d even have some trouble with 
type-one because they see such a wide swing of behavior. 
Adolescents are characteristic for giving a lot of behavior, 
including mood swings and unpredictability, and all kinds 
of things. So it becomes even difficult to identify type-one 
impairment among adolescents because they’re so all 
over the place. But type two, they'd have no possibility 
of doing that. So I think the fact is that even if they 
were specially trained they would miss 90 percent, more 
than 90 percent of the impairment caused by drugs and 
alcohol. 

Q. In the drug-abuse treatment field, what is the 
standard for determining impairment among patients? 

A. The only standard is the drug test. I know of 
no other way that anybody who—counselors or—who 
counsels or treats drug addicts could do it [38] without a 
drug test. They would never, in my experience, use ob- 
servation as the basis. And these are people that are 
known tc be drug addicts. You think about how different 
that is from a school situation where you don’t know 
the person is a drug addict. You see them in a sea of 


68 


faces. And here’s a counselor who knows this person is a 
drug addict and still can’t tell whether the person is using 
or not. And that’s why they do the drug test. 


* * * * 


[45] Q. What affect does school leaders’ or student 
leaders’ drug use have upon this progression on other 
students? 

A. Well, within—I think this is true for all human 
populations, but it’s particularly true in the middle school 
and high school area—and that is that the definition of 
what’s desirable, the [46] definition of how you're a 
winner, is made on the basis of the status of the individual 
in the peer group. And the people who are at the top 
of that status hierarchy are the ones whose behavior is 
going to be emulated by the other students. So that the 
leaders play a very powerful role in terms of shaping 
the behavior of large numbers of students in the classes. 
And what they do about drugs makes an enormous dif- 
ference about what other kids are going to do who are 
watching them and making up their minds about what 
they want to do. 

Q. Doctor, are you generally familiar with kinds of 
interscholastic athletic events that middle school and high 
school students participate in? 

A. Yes, I am. 

Q. Have you observed middle school and high school 
interscholastic athletic events? 

A. Yes, I have. 

Q. Are you generally familar with the risks and 
physical stresses associated with interscholastic athletics 
for middle school and high school students? 

A. Yes, I am. 

Q. Doctor, do you have an opinion of whether stu- 
dents who participate on interscholastic athletic teams 
in the middle school and high school level who [47] use 
drugs are at a greater risk of injury to themselves or to 
others than those students who do not use drugs? 

A. Yes, I have an opinion. 


69 


What is that opinion? 

That they are a substantially greater risk. 
What is the basis of your opinion? 

There has been an enormous amount of research 
on accidents and injuries in large numbers of contexts, 
including studies of people’s behavior when they have 
been given drugs, to watch how they behave. All of the 
elements that go into having an accident occur have been 
studied in laboratory settings to demonstrate that the drug 
experience is highly correlated—with drug intoxication 
impairment—is highly correlated with accidents of all 
kinds. So the accidents associated with athletics are not 
different in terms of the mental capabilities required to 
avoid the accidents or the impairments that promote the 
accidents than any other sort of accident. 

And I just would call your attention to one particular 
study that I think is very compelling in the state of Mary- 
land. The shock trauma unit—that’s, of course, where 
my office is in Maryland—[48] studied 123 consecutive 
people who were brought there after accidents, injuries 
and accidents of all kinds, vehicular accidents and any 
other kind of accident, accidents in the home and biking 
and everything, every kind of accident in the state, and 
it was surprising to many people that 35 percent of the 
people had blood levels of marijuana. Now, unlike a 
urine level, a blood level means that they’d used very 
recently before the accident, and that was higher than the 
percentage who had used alcohol. The alcohol percentage 
was 33 percent. So that was pretty powerful evidence. 

Other studies have shown very high correlation with 
cocaine in accidents. I don’t know of any studies specifi- 
cally of athletes generally as a group, or of high school 
athletes, but all the elements that go into the risk of an 
injury and an accident in an athletic context are present 
in every other kind of human activity that has been clearly 
shown that drug use is a major risk factor in those situa- 
tions. That’s the reason that Safety is one of the two 


POP>O 


70 


principle indicators for drug tests is because of the con- 
nection between drugs and accidents. 

Q. And how is it that drug use increases these [49] 
risks? 

A. It leads people to take risks. It leads people to be 
careless. It leads people not to follow instructions to 
reduce the risks. So that people are impulsive, careless; 
they’re operating outside of the guidelines that they have 
learned and, therefore, increase their probability that 
they’re going to have an injury. 

Q. How would a middle school student who’s under 
marijuana impairment be at a greater risk of injury while 
participating in football, for example? 

A. The person would not be—if they were trained, 
for example, to tackle above the waist to try to reduce 
injury, they might go for an easy tackle and go after the 
other person’s knees. They might use a blocking tech- 
nique that they were specifically trained was a risk to 
the other person and use it anyhow. They might be 
involved in using a technique in terms of their own 
behavior that would put them at risk of a head injury or 
spinal cord injury or some other kind of injury. 

Q. So the risks associated with drug use to high school 
and middle-school athletes is not only to themselves, but 
to those other students who are on the athletic field or the 
practice in the gymnasium [50] with them; is that correct? 

A. That’s correct. And I think it’s very important to 
understand—this is a general statement about drug prob- 
lems, including accidents—that one of the concerns is that 
somehow the drug user is, himself, the only victim of his 
drug use. One of the myths about drug problems, includ- 
ing accidents, is that the drug user is only risking his own 
health or safety, and this is clearly not the case. The 
consequences of the impairment of drug use are shared 
by everyone who shares the environment in which the 
drug-impaired person is, and that very much includes the 
athletic field where the body is being pushed to the limits. 


71 


That’s what competitive athletics is all about. And where 
there is clearly a substantial risk, athletes have injuries. 
It’s a ubiquitous aspect of athletic competition is injuries. 
And a lot of energy is devoted to training athletes how 
to avoid injury to themselves and other people in the— 
on the playing field. And drug use is—undermines that. 
Drug use takes away the protections that exist, not only 
for the individual himself, but for the other people with 
whom he shares that practice field. 

Q. Are you generally familiar with the types of [51] 
athletic injuries that are common in middle schools and 
high school interscholastic sports? 

A. Yes, I am. And I think it’s important to know 

that those are the major—by far the biggest amount of 
injuries—largest amount of injuries related to sports, 
because so many more people are involved in the middle 
school and high school athletics. 
If you're talking about sport safety, where the action 
is is not at the professional or the college level but it's 
at the middle school and the high school. The intensity 
is very high. The training is much less than it is at the 
college and professional level, and the numbers of people 
involved, including the injuries, are so much greater. 
So I think if one is concerned about reducing injuries 
in sports generally, and I think everybody in sports medi- 
cine is, the action is in the middle school and high school 
population. 

Q. How would drug use affect a student athlete’s 
perception of an injury he or she may have sustained 
out on the volleyball court, for instance? 

; A. ba Py is ge! likely to play even with the 
injury a ivious of it, if the person is impaired 
with drug—by drug use. 

[52] ©. Are there other effects, for instance, of co- 
caine or amphetamines that an athlete who is engaged 
in some activity at a high level should be concerned 
about? 

A. Other—-say that again. 


72 


Q. Are there other—what are other possible effects 
of cocaine use on an athlete— 

A. Oh. 

Q. -—who's engaging in a strenuous activity? 

A. Remember I was talking about the Len Bias ex- 
ample. He wasn’t on the athletic field when he died, but 
that would be an example of the sort of thing. Cocaine, 
in particular, because of its effect on the heart, has an 
unpredictable effect, and it does raise a substantial risk 
for cardiac arrest for—and a fatal arrhythmia. So that 
cocaine in particular is a risk, not just in terms of play- 
ing through pain or not attending to the training that 
the person has, but also in terms of the heart danger 
because the athletics itself often raises—I mean, does 
always raise the heart rate in competitive athletics to 
high levels. And you add to that the unpredictable ef- 
fect of cocaine and you have a very dangerous combina- 
tion. 

Q. If a student has used cocaine while [53] partici- 
pating in an athletic event, for instance, a handful of 
times, does that necessarily mean that that student will 
always—will not encounter any negative effect? 

A. No. It could be very unpredictable. It can be 
the tenth time or the hundredth time that the person has 
a problem. It doesn’t happen right away. In fact, in 
general, if drug problems happened earlier and more 
predictably, we wouldn't have the drug use that we do 
in this society. The way it happens is a delay with re- 
spect to any individual, uncertain expression of the nega- 
tive consequence, and that permits the denial to go on, 
and that’s one of the major factors that perpetuates the 
drug addiction. 

Q. Are these risks associated with drug use for inter- 
scholastic student athletes greater than for those students 
participating in a P.E. class? 

A. Well, the level of intensity is enormously different 
in the typical interscholastic competition from the P.E. 
class. I think they're in the same family, but the rela- 
tive risks are very different in terms of the—in terms of 


73 


= by =p _ speed, the effort. The duration of the 
Ort is much greater in interscholastic t it is j 
PE (54) den han it is in a 


* * * * 


tive for the presence of cocaine, marijuana or ampheta- 


him or herself or to others? 
A. Yes, I believe that Student is. 


MR. POWELL: Sure. Why don’t 
for about five minutes. : =a tntaneey 


(Recess. ) 


MR. POWELL: Back on the record. 

Q. By MR. POWELL: Doctor, is it the impair- 
ment [56] effects that make Students who are testing 
— J drugs at a greater risk than other students? 

. es. 

Q. And can j i i 
pa” “fe ah ps briefly summarize what those 

A. The main effects have to do with the fact that the 


calling directions and has trouble recalling and using 
has to do with risk-taking where a person is 
to put himself or herself at added risk. So 


74 


ing for this is to find some kind of a screening test that 
would be the equivalent of the roadside sobriety test to 
establish probable cause or a reasonable basis for a drug 
test. So there’s been a lot of effort made to look for 
those sorts of tests. It’s a major funding area of the Na- 
tional Institute on Drug Abuse. The simple summary 
of the report of that work is that, with some interesting 
exceptions, it has not proven to be of any value. In fact, 
it actually creates problems when these sorts of tests are 
introduced, because the tests are not well correlated with 
drug use or drug-caused impairment; they both under 
identify drug problems and over identify other problems. 
So that they end up missing large numbers of people 
who have drug-caused impairment, and they include peo- 
ple who have no impairment whatsoever in them. They're 
also extremely subject to subversion. The simple thing 
that is done with these tests is for the drug users to learn 
ways to get very low baselines on the tests, and then 
when they’re retested, they don’t--even when they're very 
impaired they still past the test. 

So we could talk in some detail—I don’t know how 
much detail you want to get. But the bottom [58] line 
is that in no setting is there an impairment test of any 
kind. People talk about the rapid-eye movement test, for 
example, computer-assisted testing, as well as simpler 
kind of tests like hand/eye coordination and other kinds 
of things, and none of these have proved useful in any 
setting whatsoever as an alternative to the drug test. So 
in every setting where there’s a concern about safety, 
the drug test is the test that is used. 

One other things I should say about some of the tests, 
the one from the Los Angeles Police Department, which 
is probably the best of the performance tests, takes 45 
minutes for each person. You think about what that 
means. That means that it takes a trained individual 45 
minutes to assess impairment of a single person. Well, 
that obviously makes it totally unsuitable for any kind of 
screening purpose. And its application, outside of a 


75 


very narrow one in law enforcement, even if it worked, 
would be—it would be irrelevant. 


* * * * 
[71] 
EXAMINATION 


BY MR. CHRIST: 


Q. Doctor, have you been to Vernonia? 

A. No, I have not. 

Q. So you have no firsthand knowledge of the extent 
of the alleged drug problem there, do you? 

A. Ido not. 

Q. Likewise, you have no firsthand knowledge of the 
affects of the school’s drug testing policy on students 
there, do you? 

A. Ido not. 

Q. You've never met my client, have you? 

A. I have not. 

Q. So you have no idea how this policy is affecting 
my client? 

A. Ido not. That's correct. 

Q. Wouldn’t you agree that some risk of injury is 
inherent in all sports? 

A. Oh, yes, sir. 

Q. I think you testified that the risk of injury to the 
athlete or his opponent increases if the athlete is under 
the influence of illicit drugs; is that correct? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Wouldn’t you agree that the degree of risk [72] 
depends upon the sport? 

A. That's one of the factors. 

Q. And the risk would be greater for, say, a contact 
sport such as football than a non-contact sport such as 
volleyball, cross-country or track? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Wouldn’t you agree that the risk of injury to your 
opponent is negligible in a non-contact sport? 

A. In general, I think that that’s true, yes. Volley- 
ball you're only on your side of the net. 


76 


Q. And the risk of injury would be diminished to the 
athlete himself in a non-contact sport, too? 

A. That’s right. 

Q. Do you know what sports the Vernonia School 
District offers? 

A. I think a fairly broad range, but I don’t know 
exactly which sports. 

Q. Well, you say “a broad range.” Tell me what 
sports you think they offer. 

A. Basketball, baseball, football, volleyball, track, 
would be what I would assume, and maybe some others. 
I don’t think they have hockey, for example. 

Q. But you don’t know for sure what sports they 
offer? 


[73] A. No. 
Q. I take it you’re a proponent of random drug 
testing? 


A. That’s correct. 

Q. In fact you advocate random drug testing for 
everyone, don’t you? 

A. Well, as much as I can sell it. 

Q. Okay. For every segment of the population? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. You've written articles in favor of universal ran- 
dom drug testing? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. And you believe in that proposition, I take it? 

A. Ido. 

Q. Have you written any papers on the particular 
subject of illegal drugs in grade school or high school 
athletics? 

A. No, I have not. 

Q. You haven’t conducted any research on that par- 
ticular subject, have you? 

A. No, I have not. 

Q. Are you aware of any one who has? 

A. No, Im not. 


77 


Q. I think you testified, if I heard correctly, [74] that 
the incidents of illicit drug use by grade school and high 
school students has declined in recent years? 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. From a high in the mid-1970s; is that correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That’s the national trend? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And the Oregon trend corresponds? 

A. Yes, that’s correct. 

Q. And you attributed the decline to greater student 
awareness of the ill effects of drugs? 

A. Two factors. That is one, and the other is the 
decreased tolerance for drug use. 


Q. And greater student awareness comes about 
through education and counseling, doesn’t it? 

A. Well, a lot of things. I think Len Bias—for ex- 
ample. The biggest increase we ever had in perception 
of risk was between ’86 and ’87 for the drug cocaine. 

Q. Now, you mentioned Len Bias. He was a basket- 
ball player, wasn’t he? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. At the University of Maryland? 

[75] A. Yep. 

Q. He didn’t die on the basketball floor, did he? 

A. No, he didn’t. He died in a dormitory though. 

Q. And the cause of his death, do you know? 

A. Yes. Cocaine use. It stopped his heart. 

Q. Was that due to one large dose or— 

A. He’d been using it all through an evening. I 
don’t know how many doses. It wasn’t just one though. 
He died at about 5:00 a.m., to my recollection. 

Q. I think you spoke about a perceived ogression 
of drug use among school children. 2 

A. Yes, sir, a stepping-stone hypothesis is what it’s 


78 


Q. That’s what we used to refer to as leading to 
harder drugs? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That progression is not inexorable, is it? 

A. No, that’s right. A lot of people don’t go to the 
next step, but each of those steps, and it depends on 
which step it is, what the percentage is, but many people 
do not go to the next step. 


* * * * 


79 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


EXCERPTS OF PLAINTIFFS’ TRIAL EXHIBIT 4— 
DEFENDANT'S RESPONSE TO PLAINTIFFS’ 
INTERROGATORIES TO DEFENDANT 


Defendant Veronia School District hereby responds to 
Plaintiffs’ Interrogatories to Defendant as follows: 


INTERROGATORY NO. ]: Has any student been 
injured while under the influence of drugs in participating 
in a district-sponsored athletic event? (For each injury, 
please identify the student who was injured, the date of 
injury, the sport in which the injury occurred, and the 
name of the coach who was supervising the sport at the 
time of the injury?) [sic.] 


RESPONSE: 


The District has reason to believe that a student was 
injured while under the influence of drugs while par- 
ticipating in a District-sponsored athletic event, although 
this was not confirmed through tests. This incident oc- 
curred in February 1989 in a wrestling match under 
Coach Ron Svensen. The student name wil] not be re- 
leased as it would result in a violation of the Family Edu- 
cation and Privacy Rights Act (20 U.S.C. § 1232g and 
ORS 336.195. 


INTERROGATORY NO. 2: Has any student caused 
an injury to another student while the first was under the 
influence of drugs in participating in a district-sponsored 
athletic event? (For each injury, please identify the 


80 


student who was injured, the date of injury, the sport in 
which the injury occurred, the name of the coach who 
was supervising the sport at the time of the injury?) [sic.] 


RESPONSE: The District has not been able to confirm 
through tests or through any other means that any student 
has caused an injury to another student while the first was 
under the influence of drugs while participating in a Dis- 
trict-sponsored athletic event. 


INTERROGATORY NO. 3: Does defendant suspect 
James Acton of taking drugs? (If so, please specify in 
detail why it suspects him of taking drugs. ) 


RESPONSE: No. 


* * * * 


81 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF OREGON 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF 
PLAINTIFFS’ TRIAL EXHIBIT 5— 
Deposition of Ellis Mason, 
Superintendent of Vernonia School District 


* * * * 


[7] Q. Do you know what percentage of your students 
Participate in a sports program? 


A. No. 

Q. Do you have any way of finding out? 

A. Sure. 

Q. How would you do that? 

A. I would ask the building principals to give me a 


tae 
oe 
rn” 
aoe 


Q. Are you required by state law to offer sports? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you think Participation in sports is an im- 
portant part of the school experience? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Does your curriculum included physical education? 

A. Yes. 

Q. At what grade levels? 

A. I believe it starts at kindergarten, K through 8 
is required, and we have two required units at the high 
school. 

Q. Then is it an elective beyond those two units? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. What I mean by that, if a students wants more 
P.E. they could? 

A. If it was available. I am not sure spacewise how 
much of it is available. 


82 


[8] Q. In the P.E. classes do students play some of the 
sports you previously mentioned? 

A. Yes. . 

Q. Do you require drug testing as a condition of 
participating in P.E.? 

A. No. 

Q. Do some of your students drive cars to school? 

A. Yes. . 

Q. Do you have district regulations regarding driving 
cars to school? 

A. I don’t believe so. 

Q. Do the students who drive cars include both ath- 
letes and non-athletes? 

Yes. 

Do some of your students take illegal drugs? 

I don’t know that. 

Have you tried to find out? 

Have I tried to find out? I don’t understand. 

. Have you done anything to try, other than man- 
datory drug testing, to ascertain whether any of your 
students are taking drugs illegally? 

A. Yes, we have. 

Q. What have you done? 

A. I believe it was in the fall of 1990 we had a 
police officer, state police officer, come into the district 
[9] and train some of the administrators in drug detection, 
and I believe it was using what they term the Rapid Eye 
Movement Test. 


O>O>O> 


. . * + 


[12] Q. Were the surveys anonymous? 

A. Yes, I believe so. To— 

MR. POWELL: There is not a question pending. 
Do you need to clarify your answer? 

A. Yes. I think another aspect of what you may or 
may not be asking is a fact that we have a drug and 
alcohol program which we do for all the kids. We are 
required by law to do that. In terms of teaching kids 


83 


about the use of drugs and those type of things if that 
is—I don’t know if that is what you are leading at, but 
we have that program in place. 

Q. I will get to that in a moment. What I want to 
know now is what steps you have undertaken to ascertain 
that you have a problem. You have described these 
surveys. Other than the surveys, what have you done? 

A. The staff have gone to the building administrators, 
the building principals, with concerns about things the 
kids were telling them, observations they have had. Those 
were not things that, quote, we have done per se, but 
they have occurred. 

Q. Since the fall of 1989 have you determined that 
any particular student has taken illegal drugs? 

A. Yes. 

Q. More than one student? 

A. I am not sure we have. I believe two confirmed 
[13] positive—no—yeah, maybe two confirmed positive. 

Q. Were those students disciplined? 

A. No. 

Q. What did you do with those students? 

A. According to our policy, the student was given 
an option of continuing to participate in the sports pro- 
gram, undergoing a weekly urinalysis and getting some 
type of drug or alcohol counseling, drug counseling. The 
student chose to do that in one case. 

In another case a student came up positive on the first 
test and refused to take the second test and quit the pro- 
gram voluntarily. 

MR. POWELL: I am going to make a quite belated 
objection, but I took this last series of questions to 
mean talking about determining drug use through the drug 
testing program as opposed to other instances where a 
student may have been caught with drugs or what have 
you. So to that extent I thought the question was vague, 
and that is the way I perceived Mr. Mason’s answers 


through that last series. I don’t know if you want to 
clarify that. 


84 


Q. I see the confusion. Let's go back over that. Other 
than through the mandatory drug testing policy, have 
[14] you determined that any particular students have 
used drugs illegally? 

A. There have been students who have admitted that 
they have used drugs. And I am not aware that we have 
ever determined it outside of our drug program. 

Q. Through the drug testing program you have de- 
termined that two particular students have used drugs? 

A. I believe that is correct, yes. 

Q. Do you know what percentage of students who 
play sports take drugs illegally? 

A. No. 

Q. Have you made any effort to determine that other 
than through the drug testing program? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you have any reason to believe that a greater 
percentage of athletes, student athletes, take drugs than 
students generally? 

A. I think student athletes have reasons to take drugs 
which other students don't. Whether it is more than or 
less, I don’t know. 

Q. What would be those reasons? 

A. Well, you get pumped up for a game, play with 
pain or eliminate pain so they could play. 

Q. Do some of your students smoke tobacco? 

A. Yes. 


* * * * 


[21] Q. Do you know if any students avoid random 
testing entirely for a year? 

A. I don’t know that. It is mathematically possible. 

Q. So there is no guarantee that any particular stu- 
dent will be tested at least once during the year? 

A. Yes, they are all tested at least once. 

Q. At the first test at the start of the year? 

A. Correct. 


85 


Q. Now, you said the start of the year. Do you mean 
the start of the sport season or the start of the academic 
year? 

A. As an example, if a student plays football, which 
occurs in the fall, they get tested at the first of the 
academic year, or first of the season. If that same student 
plays basketball, they are not retested at the beginning 
of the season. If a new student comes out who has not 
Participated in the fall and comes out for a winter pro- 
gram, they are tested. 

Q. The testing is by urinalysis, correct? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. How is the urine specimen obtained? 

A. The students urinate either into a cup or a vial of 
some sort. 


* * * * 
[24] QO. Do you know how many tests you do in a 
year? 
A. No. 


Q. I believe you said there have only been two posi- 
tive results since you began. 

A. Only two that I believe we have confirmed positive. 
That is to the best of my recollection. 

Q. Do you know what grades those students were in? 

A. I believe they were high school students. 

MR. CHRIST: Why don’t we take a break for a 
minute and I will see if I have anything else for you. 


[Break]. 

[Student Athlete Drug Policy, EXB. 1, marked] 
[Logger Handbook 1991-1992, EXB. 2. marked | 
[Memo dated 10-4-89, EXB. 3, marked] 

[Student Survey on Fall Sports, EXB. 4, marked]. 


Q. Mr. Mason, you have listed some of the drugs 
that you test for, not including marijuana. Do vou test 
for marijuana, in fact? ; 

A. Yes, we do. 


86 


Q. Do you test for steroids? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you test for any performance enhancing drugs, 
such as steroids? 

[25] A. Not that I am aware—I don’t know in terms 
of the physical manifestations of the drugs we test for 
whether they would be considered performance enhancing. 

Q. Drugs specifically designed to enhance athletic 
performance as opposed to a drug that a particular stu- 
dent might perceive as enhancing his or her performance. 

A. The only drug that I am aware of that would be 
classified as that would be steroids, and we don’t test 
for steroids. 

Q. I would like you to identify some exhibits, if you 
would, please. I am handing you Exhb. No. 1. Do you 
recognize that? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Can you tell me what that is, please. 

A. This is a Student Athlete Drug Policy. 

Q. Is that the current policy of your drug testing 
policy? 

A. Yes, I believe so. Yes. 


* * * * 


