IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


JOHN A. RAMIREZ, 
Petitioner, 


vs. 


PACIFIC MARITIME ASSOCIATION; 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S AND 
WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION; 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S AND 
WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION, LOCAL 18; 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S AND 
WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION, LOCAL 13, 


Respondents. 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


JOHN A. RAMIREZ 
Petitioner in Pro Se 


1000 Haverhill Street 
West Sacramento, California 95691 
(916) 371-9330 


+ 


1) 


2) 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


Whether the Petitioner/longshoreman was 


first suspended from work and then, two 
years later, fired because he reported the 
Pacific Maritime Association/International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union 
Officials’ racketeering activities in Our 
West Coast Ports to government agencies. 

Whether the two district courts properly 
concluded that the National Labor 
Relations Board proceedings provided the 
Petitioner/longshoreman with an fair and 
full opportunity to litigate all issues 
and claims and therefore should be given 
collateral estoppel and res judicata 
effect and bar Petitioner’s State-Law 
based claim for Wrongful Termination in 


Violation of Public Policy. 


SUBJECT INDEX 


I. INTRODUCTION . . «© «© © © © © © © e oe «© 
II. OPINION CITED BELOW .....+.+.-.e. 1 
III. JURISDICTION . . .«. «© «© «© «© © © «© © e « 1 
EVs @emewemeweecseecseeese eee eevnee's @ 
V. STATEMENT OF THE CASE ....-+-e+-+--s+ 2 
A. BACKGROUND . .. +++ « «© «© «© « 6 
B. THE PMA/ILWU OFFICIALS’ ILLEGAL 
AND CRIMINAL CLASS B LONGSHORE 
REGISTRATION IN THE PORT OF 
SACRAMENTO (1988-89) ... ++. 12 
Cc. THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD PROCEEDINGS ........ 15 
D. THE UNITED STATES NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 
DISTRICT COURT PROCEEDINGS ... 19 
E. THE UNITED STATES EASTERN CALIFORNIA 


DISTRICT COURT PROCEEDINGS ... 21 


VI. REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION .. 23 


VII. CONCLUSION ... . + « «© « © © © « « « 29 


ii 


APPENDIX A: OPINION OF UNITED STATES 
Deeemeen Gee « 4 © © 0 @ 6+ @ @ ee 6 ts BS 


APPENDIX B: JUDGMENT OF UNITED STATES 
DI STRICT COURT * © * * * 7 es e aa a oe ® os e Bl 


APPENDIX C: MEMORANDUM AND ORDER 
OF COURT OF APPEALS e ” = es ” s e * o * e . Ci 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases 


Carr v. Pacific Maritime Association 
904 F.2d 1313, 1320-24 (9th 
Cir. 1990) oe * a . 2 * s a © e . .. . a 2 e ” 5 


titut; 12 , 
First Amendment (Free Speech) .... 2 
Fifth Amendment (Due Process of Law) . 2 


Federal Statutes 
28 Bees 1254 (1) — a a *- a + - a + * 1 


California Statutes 


Labor Code section 1102.5 subdivisions (a) 
and (b) * € * * * e o * o & — oe . 2 


Government Code section 12940 
eugaweeiem €5) « «© sw eo 8h ee et ee 2 


I. INTRODUCTION 

John A. Ramirez, Petitioner in _ se, 
prays that the Supreme Court of the United 
States grant a Writ of Certiorari to review the 
two judgments below. (Petitioner will be filing 
a second related petition-CA Case No. 92-16848- 
on or before July 21, 1994.) 

II. QPINION CITED BELOW. 

The Memorandum and Order issued and 
Judgment was entered on May 7, 1993. Appendix 
A and B.. 

Til. JURISDICTION 

The judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit was entered on 
January 21, 1994. The Court of Appeals then 
denied Petitioner’s timely petition for 
rehearing and rejected his suggestion for an 
rehearing en banc on March 18, 1994. Appendix 
Cc. 


The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked 


under 28 U.S.C. 1254 (1)}. 


// 


IV. STATUTES 
The First Amendment protection of Free 


Speech and the right to Due Process of law under 
the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution of the 
United States. 

And California Labor Code section 1102.5 
subdivisions (a) and (b) and California 
Government Code section 12940 subdivision (f). 
California statutes which provide protection to 
all employees-unionized or not-against Employer 
and/or | Union retaliation for reporting 
reasonably suspected unethical, illegal, or 
criminal conduct in the workplace to government 
agencie- 

V. STATEMENT OF THE CASE. 

Petitioner/Longshoreman’s case concerns the 
Pacific Maritime Association/International 
Longshoremen’s Union Officials’ pattern of 
corrupt activity over the past 20 years which 
has bilked Taxpayers and Consumers out of 
Millions of dollar. 


The following racketeering activities are 


widespread and notorious in the longshore 
industry on the West Coast: 

1) PMA/ILWU officials working in concert 
to prearrange their Class B_ registrations 
exclusively for their eighteen year old 
relatives and friends meaning giving them 
$60,000.00 or more a year jobs plus important 
fringe benefits such as medical/dental care by 
using fraud including mail and wire fraud and 
deception. These schemes also have enabled 
PMA/ILWU. officials in breach of their fiduciary 
duty as ILWU/PMA officials Trustees of the 
ILWU/PMA Benefits Plan to unlawfully retain 
long-time casual longshoremen’s earned but not 
paid fringe benefits by systemically denying 
them Class B registration in violation of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act. These 
schemes have also provided the means by which 
PMA/ILWU officials have maintained absolute 
control over the union membership. Casual 


longshoremen without the right connections no 


matter how long they have worked in the 


longshore industry need not apply. 


2) Doubling and Tripling back wnareby 
Union members are permitted by the PMA and Port 
efticials to take two or three eight-hour paid 
jobs in a single 24-hour period by only actually 
working four hours of each eight-hour shift in 
violation of the Collective Bargaining Agreement 
and of Health/Safety Code which has defrauded 
the public of it’s intangible right to honest 
services and of it’s right to employment 
opportunities. 

3) Padding the Payroll whereby Union 
officials are permitted by the PMA and Port 
officials to take two or three eight-hour paid 
jobs in a single eight-hour shift involving Tax 
evasion, mail/wire fraud, and kickbacks. 

4) And finally the PMA/ILWU’s law firms 
which have so far successfully manipulated- 
because of it’s resources: Billions of dollars- 
government agencies like the National Labor 
Relations Board to cover up these illegal 


activities and to therefore keep intact this 


corrupt systen. 


What the Honorable Judge Cynthia Holcomb 
Hall stated that PMA/ILWU officials worked in 
concert to register their relatives and friends 
was just the tip of the iceberg. Carr v. PMA 
904 F.2d 1313, 1320-1324 (9th Cir. 1990). 

The Petitioner/longshoreman, with sixteen 
years of experience in the industry, went first 
to the National Labor Relations Board to expose 
these corrupt practices. After the NLRB refused 
to prosecute the PMA/ILWU but instead chose to 
cover up this pattern of activity, Petitioner 
requested other public agencies to not only 
investigate the PMA/ILWU but also the NLRB. 

The result of Petitioner’s protected 
conduct was: suspension from work, unlawful 
exclusion from the NLRB’s settlement agreement 
with the PMA/ILWU, NLRB General Counsel’s 
deliberate failure to gather or present evidence 
in Petitioner’s suspension and hardship transfer 
cases in the NLRB (the only cases actually 


litigated in the NLRB proceedings), Petitioner’s 


-5- 


own private attorney deliberate failure to 
gather or present relevant evidence in the NLRB 
proceedings plus his participation in the 
unlawful NLRB settlement (Petitioner has filed 
an Complaint for Legal Malpractice against his 
private attorney Kevin S. Robinson), and finally 
the Petitioner’s firing. 

The Petitioner has therefore been 
permanently banned from the longshore industry 
by the PMA/ILWU with the NLRB’s assistance 
because he called public attention to the 
PMA/ILWU’s corruption and greed in Our West 
Coast Ports. The Petitioner/longshoreman is 
just one of the many casualties of the 
PMA/ILWU’s corrupt systen. 

A. BACKGROUND. 

The Port of Sacramento, California, opened 
in 1963. The PMA/ILWU and affiliate ILWU Local 
18 operate a longshore hiring hall in the Port 
of Sacramento. 

Petitioner, John A. Ramirez, worked as a 


casual longshoreman in Sacramento from 1975 to 


1987. Then he was registered as a Class B 


longshoreman in the Port of Los Angeles and 
remained so until he was fired in November, 
1991. Petitioner’s father, Martin Pete Ramirez, 
was a Local 18 union member from 1963 to 1986. 

In the early 1970’s there was a casual 
longshoreman named Jerry Milton. Milton, a 
part-time worker with no benefits, would work 
because of the tremendous workload two or three 
eight-hour paid jobs in a single 24-hour period. 
Milton being a casual longshoreman without a 
steady paycheck or fringe benefits therefore 
worked as much as he could. 

Once ILWU Local 18 union members realized 
that Milton was making more money than they were 
in a week, they decided that only union members 
would be permitted to double and triple back. 

But ILWU Local 18 members had it better 
than Milton because whereas Milton had to work 
the total eight hours of each eight-hour shift, 
union members would only have to work four hours 


of each eight-hour shift and therefore would be 


paid 24 hours for 12 hours of work. Casual 
longshoremen would have to cover union members 
on the job while they were on their four hours 
off and pick-up the extra workload created by 
their absence. ILWU Local 18 therefore created 
this institutionalized dishonest practice on the 
West Coast. CR. 7 Exhibit C NLRB Transcript 
pages 436-38 and Exhibit D page 62. 

Furthermore, the PMA and the Sacramento 
Port officials permitted ILWU Local 18 officials 
to pad the payroll. The Petitioner witnessed on 
several occasions union officials bouncing from 
one job to the next during an eight-hour shift 
and thereby taking two or three eight-hour paid 
jobs in a single eight-hour shift. 

For instance, an ILWU Local 18 Dispatcher 
would take the gear job on one ship, the gang- 
boss job on another ship, and the janitor job 
cleaning the bathrooms for the Port of 
Sacramento plus receive another eight-hours of 
overtime pay for dispatching longshore jobs. 


(In larger ports they have no-show jobs which 


union officials regularly take). 


ILWU Local 18 union member Eddie Holland 


Senior - a former Stockton Port President and 
Sacramento Port President/dispatcher - and 
Sacramento Port Superintendent David Helmecy 
were finally convicted of this padding the 
payroll scheme in April, 1988. Despite 
Holland’s criminal conduct which required his 
deregistration-firing-under the PMA/ILWU’s 
stated rules, PMA/ILWU officials took no 
disciplinary action against him. Eddie Holland 
also participated in the PMA/ILWU Local 18’s 
illegal and criminal Class B longshore 
registration (1988-89) which resulted in the 
firing of sixteen Sacramento Class B 
longshoremen in April, 1991. CR.7 Exhibit B 
pages 52-53 and Exhibit D page 50. 

Despite the tremendous workload in the 
1970’s and 1980’s under which these corrupt 
practices flourished, PMA-ILWU Local 18 
officials refused to register long-time casual 


longshoremen (casual longshoremen with 10-15 


years of longshore skills and experience in the 


Port of Sacramento) as Class B longshoremen and 


pay them their earned fringe benefits. By the 
early 1980’s, many of these Sacramento casual 
longshoremen had already accumulated several 
“good years" - meaning years inwhich they had 
worked 480 hours in a given year - credited 
towards their fringe benefits such as 
medical/dental care, vacation pay, PGP, and the 
retirement income plan. The only thing that 
stopped them from receiving those fringe 
benefits was the PMA/ILWU’s unjustified refusal 
to register them as Class B longshoremen. CR.7 
Exhibit C NLRB Transcript pages 547-550. 

And to add injury to insult, PMA/ILWU Local 
18 officials would, instead of registering these 
long-time Sacramento casual longshoremen, 
transfer registered longshoremen from High Work 
Opportunity Ports like Los Angeles into the Port 
of Sacramento. Sacramento casual longshoremen 
would have to train these transfers on how to 


load and unload the PMA-Employer members’ ships 


-10- 


in the Port of Sacramento. 

Petitioner’s father fought against these 
corrupt practices and for Class B registration 
for these long-time casual longshoremen, but to 
no avail. He believed in eight hours work, 
eight hours play, and eight hours sleep. And 
that therefore Doubling and Tripling back and 
depriving two other people of jobs was totaily 
against union principles. ILWU Local 18 members 
were very happy when he retired in 1986. CR. 7 
Exhibit C NLRB Transcript pages 436-38. 

The PMA/ILWU encouraged these corrupt 
practices so that the PMA-Employer could employ 
less people and not have to pay these long-time 
casual longshoremen their earned but not paid 
fringe benefits and so that union members could 
make more money. If you add to this equation 
the PMA/ILWU officials’ fraudulent schemes to 
register their eighteen year old relatives and 
friends, then it becomes clear how the PMA/ILWU 


has profited from this pattern of corruption. 


// 


-li- 


B. THE PMA/ILWU’s ILLEGAL AND CRIMINAL 
CLASS B LONGSHORE REGISTRATION IN THE 


PORT OF SACRAMENTO (1988-89). 


In 1986, ILWU Local 18 officials’ eighteen 


year old sons’ started to work as casual 
longshoremen in the Port. 

In 1987, Petitioner and other long-time 
casual longshoremen were told by ILWU Local 18 
officials that there would not be a Class B 
longshore registration in the Port of 
Sacramento. Petitioner and others therefore 
applied for Class B longshore registration in 
the Port of Los Angeles. Petitioner and two 
other long-time Sacramento casual longshoremen 
were registered in Los Angeles in August, 1987. 

Four months later, PMA/ILWU Local i18 
officials create an identified casual longshore 
list - ID list - in the Sacramento Port. 
Petitioner like other long-time Sacramento 
casual longshoremen qualified for this ID list 
but wasn’t notified by these officials. The 


creation of this ID list - preferred work list - 


-12- 


was the start of the PMA/ILWU Local 18 
officials’ plan to register their relatives and 
friends as Class B longshoremen. 

During 1988, ILWU Local 18 officials padded 
the payroll for their relatives who were on this 
ID list in anticipation of the criterion to be 
used for their 1989 Class B_ longshore 
registration. The criterion used was 1988 ID 
casual longshore hours. 

On January 19, 1989, these same PMA/ILWU 
Local 18,officials send by mail an unpublicized 
referral to the Joint Coast Labor Relations 
Committee - a Committee composed of the highest 
ranking officers in the PMA/ILWU which has 
ultimate control over all Class B registrations 
and the same Employer/Union officers who are 
PMA/ILWU Pension Plan Trustees. 

The referral stated that Local Sacramento 
Port PMA/ILWU officials would like to "deviate" 
from the existing Coastwise Rules of 
Registration and select new Class B registrants 


from the identified casual longshore list - ID 


-13- 


list - based on a hours test developed by then. 

On January twenty-fifth and February third, 
1989, the above stated Coast Committee agreed to 
this plan by mail and wire which was to register 
Class B longshoremen by identified casual 
longshore hours in 1988. 

In Mid-February, 1989, PMA/ILWU officials 
registered sixteen Class B longshoremen in the 
Port of Sacramento. 

Therefore, PMA/ILWU officials working in 
concert first unlawfully excluded casual 
longshoremen from their Sacramento Port 
identified casual longshore list, then padded 
the payroll, and finally deliberately modified 
the existing Coastwide Rules of Registration 
without notifying affected employees to register 
their relatives and friends. 

Petitioner’s documentary evidence - the 
PMA/ILWU’s own documents which the NLRB had 
possession of in September cf 1989 - revealed 
this mail and wire fraud scheme which also 


violated the National Labor Relations Act. CR. 


-14- 


7 Exhibit B pages 2-9. PMA/ILWU officials 
finally - without litigation - fired those 
sixteen Sacramento Class B longshoremen in April 
of 1991 under an illegal NLRB settlement 
agreement with the PMA/ILWU. 

The National Labor Relations Board also had 
knowledge of similar Class B registration 
schemes in the Ports of Los Angeles (1987), 
Oakland (1988), and San Francisco (1989). In 
the San Francisco Port even the PMA/ILWU’s 
supposedly neutral Coast Arbitrator Sam Kagel 
was involved. But as planned, the NLRB found a 
way to dismiss these cases against the PMA/ILWU. 

Therefore, the Port of Sacramento is just 
an example of how the PMA/ILWU operates in every 
West Coast Port. 

Cc. THE NLRB PROCEEDINGS. 

Petitioner started to call public attention 
to the PMA/ILWU officials’ illegal activities in 
February, 1989, by filing an NLRB charge and by 


contacting Congressman Vic Fazio. CR.7 Exhibit 


B pages 24-26. 


Petitioner and other longshoremen filed 
various NLRB charges with NLRB San Francisco 
Region 20 from February 21, 1989, to September 
25, 1990, covering the Ports of Sacramento, Los 
Angeles, Oakland, and San Francisco regarding 
the PMA/ILWU officials’ racketeering activities 
- fraudulent Class B registrations, doubling and 
tripling back, and padding the payroll. 

As the NLRB’s part in this cover-up of this 
corruption, Region 20 proceeded to fail to file 
or investigate charges, to dismiss cases, to not 
gather or present relevant evidence, to permit 
Ex-Region 20 attorney Robert Remar (the ILWU 
attorney) to suspend Petitioner from work and 
misrepresent facts to the Administrative Law 
Judge Jay R. Pollack, to formulate an illegal 
settlement agreement with the PMA/ILWU to 
deprive Petitioner of his property/employment 
rights by excluding him from the Sacramento 
Port’s casual longshore list and from the Port’s 
Class B re-registration process. Petitioner 


protested to NLRB Chairman James M. Stephens and 


-16- 


General Counsel Jerry M. Hunter about NLRB 
Region 20’s deliberate misconduct, but to no 
avail. Petitioner also asked other public 
agencies to not only investigate the PMA/ILWU 
but also the NLRB. Petitioner believed early on 
in these proceedings that Region 20 Director 
Robert H. Miller was assisting his old friend 
ILWU attorney Robert Remar in protecting the 
PMA/ILWU’s corrupt system. CR.7 Exhibit B pages 
31-75. 

Furthermore, the only adverse employment 
actions against Petitioner actually but not 
fully and fairly litigated - because NLRB 
General Counsel and his’ private attorney 
deliberately failed to gather or present 
relevant evidence - in the NLRB proceedings were 
the PMA/ILWU’s denial of his transfer from Los 
Angeles to Sacramento and his suspension from 
work. Petitioner argued that the PMA/ILWU 
denied his transfer and suspended him from work 
because of his protected conduct against the 


PMA/ILWU. 


-17= 


And the NLRB Administrative Law Judge found 
that according to the causation test established 
in the Board’s Wright-line test that despite the 
ILWU officials’ expressed animus towards 
Petitioner because of his protected conduct, 
that Respondent PMA had legitimate business 
reasons for denying his transfer from Los 
Angeles to Sacramento and for placing him on the 
nondispatch list - no work list. 
Petitioner/longshoreman’s dismissal was not 
litigated. Nor was the PMA/ILWU’s widespread 
racketeering activities brought forth. 

NLRB Region 20 attorney Jonathan Seagle and 
Petitioner’s attorney Kevin Robinson 
deliberately failed to present documents to the 
ALJ which directly contradicted the PMA’s stated 
reasons which would have proven that he PMA/ILWU 
officials’ real motivation was retaliation. 
CR.7 Exhibit B pages 76-95 are notes taken by 
Robinson from the PMA/ILWU’s own documents which 
Region 20 had possession of but failed to 


present to the ALJ. 


-18— 


® 
— 
a 
j 


a ai ONE ier odd Died 


Petitioner did not piece together the facts 
and law until after his attorney Kevin Robinson 
turned over his files regarding these matters on 
November 8, 1991. Petitioner/longshoreman, who 
had been suspended from work since September 6, 
1989, was fired on November 9, 1991. The ALJ 
had already issued his decision and order on 
October 16, 1991. 

In January and March of 1992, Petitioner 
did attempt to bring these matters to the 
Board’s . attention by appealing the ALJ’s 
decision, but the Board completely ignored one 
brief and then rejected his second brief. 

Petitioner/longshoreman did not receive due 
process of law in the NLRB proceedings because 
of Fraud, Misrepresentation, and other 
misconduct. 

D. THE UNITED STATES NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 


DIS co Oo Ma : 


After the Board refused to consider the 
Petitioner’s relevant evidence, he filed an 


Complaint for Retaliatory Discharge in this 


-19- 


en 


district court on April 28, 1992. (This is the 
related Appeal case no. 92-16848 which 
Petitioner will file on or before July 21, 
1994.) 

In this Complaint, Petitioner stated that 
the NLRB had covered up the PMA/ILWU’s illegal 
activities in Our West Coast Ports. CR. 1 pages 
4, 18-19. 

On July 28, 1992, the Board reaffirmed the 
Administrative Law Judge’s findings as to only 
the denial of Petitioner’s transfer and 
suspension from work. Petitioner/longshoreman 
did not appeal this decision. 

On October 2, 1992, the district judge held 
a hearing. Respondents moved for summary 
judgment based on the ALJ’s findings - 
collateral estoppel-to bar Petitioner’s claim 
for wrongful discharge. 

The district judge decided, without giving 
the Petitioner an opportunity to present his 
documentary evidence, that the ALJ had decided 


all issues and claims, despite the fact that 


-20- 


the Petitioner’s discharge without just cause 


was not litigated by the ALJ. CR.32 page 9 
lines 26-27. Petitioner argued that the NLRB 
proceedings had failed to comply with due 
process and were tainted by fraud, 
misrepresentation, and other misconduct, but the 
judge proceeded to dismiss the Complaint. 
Transcript pages 1-15 of this district court 
hearing. 
E. THE UNITED STATES EASTERN CALIFORNIA 
DISTRICT COURT PROCEEDINGS . 


After the Northern California district 


court failed to provide Petitioner with an 
opportunity to present his documentary evidence, 
he filed an Complaint for Wrongful Termination 
in Violation of Public Policy in California 
Superior Court of Yolo County on October 28, 
1992. 

Respondents proceeded to remove this action 
from State court claiming that it involved an 
Federal question. Respondents then moved for 


dismissal based on the doctrines of collateral 


-2i1- 


estoppel and res judicata. Petitioner filed his 
opposition with his documentary evidence in this 
court. 

Petitioner opposed Respondents’ motion by 
showing that PMA/ILWU officials and their 
attorneys had knowledge of the Petitioner’s 
protected conduct, that adverse employment 
actions against him occurred within days of his 
protected conduct, that he was’~ treated 
differently than similarly situated employees, 
that their stated reasons for denying his Class 
B registration and transfer (Sacramento Port), 
and for suspending him from work were false, and 
that PMA/ILWU officials failed to follow their 
own stated rules regarding his termination. 

Therefore, Petitioner had put _ forth 
sufficient evidence of knowledge of protected 
conduct, timing of adverse employment actions, 


and of the unusual treatment of the employee to 


defeat a motion for summary judgment. 


Although the district judge noted that it 


might be prudent to stay the action until after 


the first appeal was resolved, he declined to do 
so. Appendix A, page 7, footnote 3. 

Instead, the judge proceeded to grant 
summary judgment for Respondents based on the 
prior district court’s judgment - res judicata - 

and bar Petitioner’s state-law based claim for 
wrongful termination. 

VI. REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION. 

It is important for the Court to review the 
two judgments below because if the PMA/ILWU 
officials are permitted to fire Petitioner with 
impunity, then this will reinforce their corrupt 
system and will have a chilling effect upon the 
Constitutional and Statutory rights of all 
employees. 

PMA/ILWU officials have so far successfully 
utilized the Petitioner’s suspension from work, 
his unlawful exclusion from the NLRB settlement, 
and his dismissal - which has blackballed 
Petitioner from the longshore industry - as an 
example to other longshoremen of what happens to 


a longshoreman who chooses to speak out against 


-23- 


their systen. 


PMA/ILWU officials still have iron-clad 
control over who works and who is registered. 
A longshoreman makes approximately $200.00 
dollars for an eight-hour shift. Class B 
registration provides a longshoreman with a 
$60,000 or more a year job plus fringe benefits. 
Yes the power of employment is a very strong 
weapon against dissent. (The ILWU is not a 
Union, but a social club whereby membership is 
granted to the select and privileged few.) 

Petitioner/longshoreman reported the 
PMA/ILWU officials’ unethical, illegal, and 
criminal conduct to government agencies. Is 
this the type of conduct we want to discourage? 
Do we want employees to remain silent when they 
reasonably suspect illegal conduct in the 
workplace? 

The Court should therefore grant review and 
reaffirm every employee’s right to freely 
exercise his or her Constitutional and Statutory 


rights without fear of retaliation. 


-24- 


And send a message to the PMA/ILWU that the 
status quo of depriving the public of eaplapeunt 
opportunities and of it’s intangible right to 
honest services, of unlawfully retaining casual 
longshoremen’s earned but not paid fringe 
benefits from them and their beneficiaries, and 
ef providing lucrative employment - Class B 
registration - to only their eighteen year old 
relatives and friends must change because this 
corrupt system is hurting too many people and , 
more importantly, costing the Taxpayers and 
Consumers too much money. We must therefore 
move to eliminate this corruption and greed - 
cancer - from OUR WEST COAST PORTS. 

For the past 20 years, PMA/ILWU officials 
have treated long-time casual longshoremen 
without the right connections like disposable 
objects. These real human beings who have 
worked hard for 10-25 years in the industry 
deserve better because a just wage including 
earned but not paid fringe benefits is the 


legitimate fruit of work. To refuse or withhold 


-25- 


it is a grave injustice. Unfortunately, in the 


longshore industry on the West Coast, injustice 
and dishonesty is the status quo. 

I, the Petitioner, by registered letter 
dated May 9, 1994, have asked NLRB Chairman 
William Gould to restructure the NLRB’s 
settlement agreement with the PMA/ILWU in the 
Port of Sacramento so that long-time Sacramento 
Casual longshoremen are given preference for 
Class B longshore’ registration. I have 
therefore asked the NLRB to implement the fair 


and just principle of rewarding work by using as 


the main criterion Sacramento casual 


longshoremen’s total longshore hours in the Port 
of Sacramento since 1968. And rewarding those 
casual longshoremen with the most longshore 
hours since 1968 with Class B_ longshore 
registration. The PMA-Employer has’ kept 
computerized records of all casual 
longshoremen’s hours since 1976. Therefore, a 
simple and just proposal. 


But so far, the NLRB has refused to listen. 


-26- 


~. LOT CO ee ee 


Instead, the NLRB and PMA/ILWU have insisted on 
using irrelevant rules and tests to re-register 
Class B longshoremen in the Port of Sacramento. 
The preferred method of the PMA/ILWU so that 
they can pick and chose their relatives and 
friends and exclude these long-time casual 
longshoremen without the right connections. 

I have also requested that fifty Sacramento 
casual longshoremen be registered as Class B 
longshoremen in the Port of Sacramento by this 
concept of rewarding work because of the 
tremendous workload- the Port started to export 
thousands of tons of Rice to Japan in October of 
1993-and because this would reduce the amount of 
Doubling-Tripling back and padding of the 
payroll in the Port. If there is any doubt as 
to whether the PMA-Employer can support these 
fifty additional positions, then I would suggest 
that the NLRB review the PMA’s payroll records 
for 1994 as provided by this settlement 
agreement. The NLRB would soon discover that 


the PMA-Employer has enough work-jobs-for 100 


-27= 


additional Class B longshoremen in the Port of 


Sacramento. 

I have therefore asked this public agency, 
the NLRB which is supposed to promote and 
protect the public good, to register/include 
people by rewarding work. In other words, to do 
the right thing. 

There are several Sacramento casual 
longshoremen who have loaded and unloaded the 
PMA-Employer members’ ships in the Port of 
Sacramento since 1968 who have yet to receive 
their earned but not paid fringe benefits, i.e. 
Class B longshore registration. And some have 
already died - their relatives/beneficiaries 
should at least receive from the PMA/ILWU some 
type of severance pay for their many years of 
longshore service. 

Since there is not a school of longshoring, 
shouldn’t Class B longshore registration be 
granted to those who have worked for it? And 


not just to the PMA/ILWU officials’ eighteen 


year old relatives and friends with little or no 


dni Data WDE Methane eee 


longshore experience? 

So far the NLRB has chosen to protect the 
PMA/ILWU officials’ corrupt system and to 
proceed with this unethical and illegal - if not 
criminal - settlement agreement at the expense 
of the public good. 

The PMA/ILWU has been violating the public 
trust for the past 20 years. When will this 
stop. 

VII. CONCLUSION. 

Therefore, the Court for the above reasons 


should grant the Petition. Thank you. 


DATED: June 16, 1994 Respectfully submitted. 


JOHN A. RAMIREZ 

1000 Haverhill Street 
West Sacramento, CA 
95691 

(916) 371-9330 


-29- 


APPENDIX A 


Den Seek! 


——————— 


1 ‘PILED 

2 May 7, 1993 

3 Clerk U.S. District Court 
Eastern District of California 

4 By: 

5 


6 IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR 


7 THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 


FFE ETI AE OTA EE 


9|| JOHN A. RAMIREZ, | 
10 Plaintiff, 
11 Vv. 


12 || PACIFIC MARITIME ASSOCIATION; 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S 
13 || & WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION; 

ILWU LOCAL 18; and 

14}/ ILWU LOCAL 13, 


15 Defendants. 
16 / 
17 This matter is before the court on 


18} defendants’ motion for summary judgment. 
19} After reviewing the record and the documents 
20}| filed in support of and in opposition to the 
21}| motion, the court has determined that this 


22|| matter is appropriate for resolution without 


POD Be 


-Al=- 


oral argument. See Local Rule 230(h). 
Accordingly, the hearing set for May 14, 
1993, is vacated and the matter is ordered 
submitted. For the reasons set forth below, 
the court grants defendants’ motion and 
dismisses the complaint. 
BACKGROUND’ 

Plaintiff’s complaint alleges that he 
was wrongfully terminated from his job as a 
longshoreman in 1991, in violation of public 
policy. He contends that he was fired in 
retaliation for filing contractual 
grievances concerning defendant ILWU Local 
18’s allegedly illegal registration of Class 
B longshoremen in the Port of Sacramento. 
In addition, plaintiff’s lawsuit appears to 


challenge defendants’ decision not to allow 


1 The facts recited in this order are 
taken from a multitude of documents. In 
that connection, the court grants 
defendants’ judicial decisions involving 
these parties, both before the National 
Labor Relations Board and the united States 
District Court of the Northern District of 
California. 


-A2< 


WwW 


> 


wm 


24 
25 


him a hardship transfer from the Port of Los 


Angeles to the Port of Sacramento. 

The present lawsuit is but one of 
several avenues of redress the plaintiff 
has pursued in the last four years to 
protest defendants’ failure to allow 
plaintiff to register as a longshoreman in 
the Port of Sacramento. Along the way he 
has filed several charges of unfair labor 
practice with the National Labor Relations 
Board ("NLRB"), has appealed administrative 
rulings which were adverse to him, and has 
filed two lawsuits against the defendants 
arising out of his termination. 

On October 16, 1991, NLRB 
Administrative Law Judge Jay Pollack issued 
a lengthy and thorough decision finding that 
plaintiff was not entitled to either a 
hardship transfer or to registration as a 
Class B longshoreman in Sacramento. Exhibit 
B, attached to Defendants’ Request for 


Judicial Notice. This decision was 


-A3- 


23 


24 


subsequently affirmed on appeal on July 28, 
1992 by a three-member panel of the NLRB. 
Exhibit C, attached to Defendants’ Request 
for Judicial Notice. Meanwhile, on April 
28, 1992, plaintiff filed "A Complaint By An 
Employee Against An Employer And Union For 
Retaliatory Discharge" in the United States 
District Court for the Northern District of 
California. Exhibit A, attached to 
Defendants’ Request for Judicial Notice. 
Judge Marilyn H. Patel granted defendants’ 
motion for summary judgment and dismissed 
this complaint by order filed October 16, 
1992, finding that plaintiff’s claim was 
barred by the doctrine of collateral 
estoppel. Exhibits D & E, attached to 
Defendants’ Request for Judicial Notice. 
Plaintiff appealed this ruling on November 
2, 1992, which appeal is presently pending 
before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
Exhibit F, attached to Defendants’ Request 


for Judicial Notice. Finally, on October 


~A4- 


28, 1992, before filing his notice of appeal 
in the federal case, plaintiff filed the 
instant complaint in the Yolo County 
Superior Court. Defendants removed the case 
to this court alleging federal question 
jurisdiction. 
DISCUSSION 

Defendants move for summary judgment on 
the grounds of res judicata and collateral 
estoppel, contending that plaintiff is 
barred from pursuing the claims raised in 
this case because of the judgment entered 
against him by Judge Patel. Plaintiff’s 
opposition does not directly discuss this 
issue. Instead, plaintiff argues that the 
NLRB decisions were fraudulent and should be 
vacated and that judge Patel’s decision was 
erroneous. Even if both these allegations 
are correct, this court is not the proper 
forum for contesting the validity of those 


prior decisions. Plaintiff had an 


opportunity to, and did, challenge the NLRB 


SOE 


24 


25 


decision through the proper administrative 
channels. His appeal however, was denied. 
In addition,, plaintiff is currently 
challenging Judge Patel’s decision by way of 
his pending appeal in the Ninth Circuit. In 
any event, the court finds that the claims 
raised in the instant complaint were either 
litigated or could have been litigated 
before Judge Patel in the Northern District 
action. Accordingly, they are barred by the 
doctrine of res judicata. 

"A final judgment on the merits of an 
action precludes the parties . . . from 
relitigating issues that were or could have 
been raised in that action." Federated 
Department Stroes v. Moitie, 452 U.S. 394, 
398 (1981). A final judgment is any prior 
adjudication in another action that is 
deemed "sufficiently firm" to be given 
conclusive effect. See Robi v. Five 
Platters, 838 F.2d 318, 326 (9th Cir. 1988), 


citing Restatement (Second) of Judgments 13 


-A6—- 


1 


2 


24 


25 


(1982). Since a decision by a court of 


competent jurisdiction is presumptively 
correct, the pendency of an appeal in the 
Northern District action is not of 
sufficient moment to preclude application of 
res judicata to the present case if the 
other requirements of that doctrine are met. 


See Wright, C., Miller, A. & Cooper, E., 


Federal Practice & Procedure 4433 (1981) 
("in federal courts .. . the preclusive 


effects of a lower court judgment cannot be 
suspended simply by taking an appeal that 
remains undecided"). 

Plaintiff’s first lawsuit was a 
complaint for retaliatory discharge. The 
instant lawsuit, which names the identical 
defendants as those in the first action, is 
a complaint for wrongful termination in 
violation of public policy. The present 
complaint, while 15 pages shorter than the 
first complaint, arises from the same set of 


facts and makes the same allegations against 


-A7<=- 


24 


25 


the defendants as the first complaint. the 
only difference appears to be that the 
plaintiff did not expressly articulate a 
cause of action for wrongful termination in 
violation of public policy in the first 
complaint. However, 

under federal law, [plaintiff] 

does not avoid the bar of res 

judicata merely because he now 

alleges conduct by [defendant] not 

alleged in his prior suit, nor 

because he has pleaded a new legal 

theory. Rather, the crucial 

question is whether [plaintiff] 

has stated in the instant suit a 


cause of action different from 
those raised in his first suit. 


Costantini v. Trans World Airlines, 681 F.2d 
1199, 1201 (9th Cir. 1982) .? 

The Ninth Circuit uses the following 
criteria to determine if successive lawsuits 


involve the same cause of action: 1) 


’ Since the judgment to which 
defendants seek the application of res 
judicata was rendered by a federal court, 
the preclusive effect of judgment is 
determined by federal common law. Western 

s , 958 F.2d 864, 871 
n.11 (9th Cir. 1992), citing Robi v. Five 
Platters, 838 F.2d 318, 322 (9th Cir. 1988). 


-A8- 


ene erent aT ie 


24 


25 


whether prosecution of the second action 
will impair or destroy rights or interests 
established in the prior judgment; 2) 
whether the actions involve substantially 
the same evidence; 3) whether both actions 
involve infringement of the same right; 4) 
whether both actions arise out of the same 


transactional nucleus of facts. 


Costantini, 681 F.2d at 1201-01, quoting 


Harris v. Jacobs, 621 F.2d 341, 343 (9th 


Cir. 1980). 

Here, all four requirements are met. 
First, defendants effectively defended the 
first lawsuit and have right to rely on the 
judgment entered in that case. Failure to 
give preclusive effect to the first judgment 
will impair defendants’ rights by requiring 
them to litigate again issues previously 
decided in their favor. Second, a review 
and comparison of plaintiffs’ opposition to 
the present motion with the findings of the 


Administrative Law Judge and Judge Patel, 


-~AIS 


make it abundantly clear that the admissible 
evidence presented in both actions will be 
virtually identical. Third, it is beyond 
question that both lawsuits involve 
infringement of the same right. In both 
cases plaintiff seeks compensatory and 
punitive damages resulting from his 
termination by defendants. Finally, a 
comparison of the complaints in both actions 
demonstrates that they arise from the same 
facts. Plaintiff does not dispute this. In 
fact, he does not argue that the actions are 
Gissimilar, instead, he merely disagrees 
with the decisions in the first two forums, 
arguing that the NLRB’s decision was 
fraudulent and that Judge Patel’s decision 


was erroneous. 


-A10- 


gli aaa tas y 


oN OO OW 


oO 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 


23 


24 


It is apparent that the cause of action 
alleged in the instant case is but a 
separate legal theory upon which plaintiff 
seeks recovery, based on the same set of 
facts which underlie the first action. 
Accordingly, the doctrine of res judicata 
precludes plaintiff’s second lawsuit and 
defendants’ motion for summary judgment is 
granted. The Clerk of Court is directed to 
enter judgment in accordance with the 


court’s ruling.? 


. As discussed above, the pendency 
of an appeal in the Northern District action 
does not preclude dismissal of this case 
based on application of res judicata. while 
it might be prudent to stay the present case 
until after the appeal is resolved, the 
court is not inclined to do so. However, 
the court notes that in the event 
plaintiff’s appeal in that action is 
successful, it will be necessary to set 
aside the judgment in this case pursuant to 
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60 (b) (5). 
See Ornellas v. Oakley, 618 F.2d 1351, 1356 
(9th Cir. 1980) (reversed judgment cannot 
serve a basis for disposition of subsequent 
action on res judicata grounds). See also, 
Wright, C., Miller A. & Cooper, E., 

4433, at 311 ("a 
second judgment based upon the preclusive 
effects of the first judgment should not 
stand if the first judgment is reversed"). 


-All- 


1 IT IS SO ORDERED. 


2 Dated: May , 1993 


EDWARD J. GARCIA, JUDGE 
6 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


APPENDIX B 


a 


FILED 
MAY 7, 1993 


CLERK U.S. DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 


BY 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 
John A. Ramirez JUDGMENT IN A CIVIL CASE 


Vv. CASE NUMBER: CIV S 93-171 EJG JFM 
Pacific Maritime Assoc et al 


CLOSED 
DATE: MAY 7 


xx - - Decision by the Court. This action 
came to trial or hearing before the 
Court. The issues have been tried or 
heard and a decision has been 
rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED 


THAT JUDGMENT IS HEREBY ENTERED IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH THE COURT’S ORDER 
OF 5/7/93. | 


Jack L. Wagner, 
Clerk of the Court 
ENTERED: May 7, 1993 


-Bl- 


= Se eae eee ee Oe 7 a ee ee ee ee oe ee 
ae ee IR ee ee ee ee ET Se eS ete ee Ca Re Th Tm ey ER ee ee ea ee te 


A Bowser, Deputy Clerk 


by: 


-B2- 


APPENDIX C 


17 | 


FILED 
JAN 21 1994 


CATHY A. CATTERSON, CLERK 
U.S.. COURT OF APPEALS 


NOT FOR PUBLICATION 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 
JOHN A. RAMIREZ No. 93-15941 


Plaintiff-Appellant, 
D.C. No. CV-93-00171-EJG (J 


Vv. 


PACIFIC MARITIME ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S AND 
WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION; INTERNATIONAL 
LONGSHOREMEN’S AND WAREHOUSEMEN’S 

UNION, LOCAL 18; INTERNATIONAL 
LONGSHOREMEN’S AND WAREHOUSEMEN’S 

UNION, LOCAL 13, 

MEMORANDUM* 


Defendants~Appellees. 


Appeal from the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of 
California 
Edward J. Garcia, District Judge, 
Presiding 


-Cl- 


23 


24 


Submitted January 18, 1994¢ 
Before: REINHARDT, O’ SCANNLAIN and 
KLEINFELD, Circuit Judges. 

John A. Ramirez appeals pro se from the 
district court’s grant of summary judgment 
in favor of Pacific Maritime Association and 
the International Longshoremen’s and 
Warehousemen’s Union Locals 13 and 18 in his 
action alleging retaliatory discharge in 
violation of Cal. Labor Code § 1102.5. 
After this case was removed from California 
Superior Court to the federal district 
court, the district count granted summary 
judgment on res judicata grounds. We have 
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. 

We agree with the district court’s 
conclusion that the instant action is 
precluded by the prior decision of the 
United States District Court for the 


Northern District of California in Docket 


No. CV-92-01579-MHP, affirmed this day by 


ae The panel unanimously finds this case 
suitable for decision without oral argument. 
Fed. R. App. P. 34 (a); 9th Cir. R. 34-4 


-C2- 


1] separate memorandum disposition, and affirm 
2}| for the reasons stated in district court 
3]| order. 


4 AFFIRMED. 


24 


FILED 
MAR 18 1994 


CATHY A. CATTERSON, CLERK 
U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 
JOHN A. RAMIREZ No. 93-15941 


Plaintiff-Appellant, 
D.C. No. CV-93-00171-EJG 
Eastern California 


Ve 


PACIFIC MARITIME ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL LONGSHOREMEN’S AND ORDER 
WAREHOUSEMEN’S UNION; INTERNATIONAL 
LONGSHOREMEN’S AND WAREHOUSEMEN’S 

UNION, LOCAL 18; INTERNATIONAL 
LONGSHOREMEN’S AND WAREHOUSEMEN’S 

UNION, LOCAL 13, 


Defendants~Appellees. 


Before: REINHARDT, O’SCANNLAIN, and 
KLEINFELD, Circuit Jud +s. 


The panel has voted to deny appellant’s 
petition for rehearing and to reject the 
suggestion for rehearing en banc. 

The full court has been advised of the 


suggestion for rehearing en banc and no 


-C4- 


Thats sid on * 


teed Ub Be 


23 


24 


25 


active judge has requested a vote on whether 
to rehear the matter en banc. Fed. R. App. 
P. 35. 

The petition for rehearing is DENIED 
and the suggestion for rehearing en banc is 


REJECTED. 


-C5- 


