


 
  
  
  

	
	
	
	
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Meghrig et al. v. KFC Western, Inc., 516 U.S. 479 (1996).
 
 

    
    
	
		
			
LII

			 
			
Supreme Court
		 
		
	


 



Meghrig et al. v. KFC Western, Inc. (95-83), 516 U.S. 479 (1996). 
Opinion 
 [ O'Connor ]Syllabus 
  HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version


 

 
 
 
 


 
 


NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
 as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
 is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
 but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
 of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
 U.S. 321, 337.
 
 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
 
 


Syllabus


MEGHRIG et al.
 v. KFC WESTERN, INC.
 
 

certiorari to the united states
 court of appeals for the ninth circuit
 
 

No. 95-83.
 Argued January 10, 1996 -- Decided
 March 19, 1996
 
 



 
 


Three years after complying with a county order to clean up petroleum
 contamination discovered on its property, respondent KFC Western, Inc.,
 brought this action under the citizen suit provision of the Resource Conservation
 and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), 42
 U.S.C. § 6972(a), to recover its cleanup costs from petitioners,
 the Meghrigs. KFC claimed, among other things, that the contamination had
 previously posed an "imminent and substantial endangerment to health or
 the environment," see §6972(a)(1)(B), and that the Meghrigs were responsible
 for "equitable restitution" under §6972(a) because, as prior owners
 of the property, they had contributed to the contaminated site. The District
 Court dismissed the complaint, holding that §6972(a) does not permit
 recovery of past cleanup costs and that §6972(a)(1)(B) does not authorize
 a cause of action for the remediation of toxic waste that does not pose
 an "imminent and substantial endangerment" at the time suit is filed. The
 Ninth Circuit disagreed on both points and reversed.
 
 


Held: Section 6972 does not
 authorize a private cause of action to recover the prior cost of cleaning
 up toxic waste that does not, at the time of suit, continue to pose an
 endangerment to health or the environment. Pp. 3-9.
 
 


(a) A private party cannot
 recover the cost of a past cleanup effort under §6972(a), which authorizes
 district courts "to restrain any person [responsible for toxic waste],
 to order such person to take such other action as may be necessary,
 or both." (Emphasis added.) Under a plain reading of this remedial scheme,
 a citizen plaintiff could seek a mandatory injunction that orders a responsible
 party to "take action" by attending to the cleanup and proper disposal
 of waste, or a prohibitory injunction that "restrains" a responsible party
 from further violating RCRA. Neither remedy, however, contemplates the
 award of past cleanup costs, whether denominated "damages" or "equitable
 restitution." A comparison with the relief provided in the analogous, but
 not parallel, provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
 and Liability Act of 1980 demonstrates that Congress knows how to provide
 for the recovery of past cleanup costs, and that §6972(a) does not
 provide that remedy. Pp. 4-5.
 
 


(b) Section 6972(a)(1)(B)--which permits citizen suits against
 persons responsible for "waste which may present an imminent
 and substantial endangerment to health or the environment" (emphasis added)--does
 not authorize a suit based upon an allegation that the contaminated site
 posed such an endangerment at some time in the past. This timing restriction's
 plain meaning demonstrates that an endangerment can only be "imminent"
 if it threatens to occur immediately, and the reference to waste which
 "may present" imminent harm quite clearly excludes waste that no longer
 presents such a danger. This language implies that there must be a threat
 which is present now, although the impact of the threat may not
 be felt until later. It follows that §6972(a) was designed to provide
 a remedy that ameliorates present or obviates the risk of future "imminent"
 harms, not a remedy that compensates for past cleanup efforts. Other aspects
 of RCRA's enforcement scheme strongly support this conclusion, and the
 existence of such an elaborate scheme refutes the Government's contention
 that district courts may award past cleanup costs under their inherent
 equitable remedial authority. Pp. 5-8.
 
 


(c) This Court does not consider whether a private party could seek
 to obtain an injunction requiring another party to pay cleanup costs arising
 after a RCRA citizen suit has been properly commenced. P. 8.
 
 


49 F. 3d 518,
 reversed.
 
 


O'Connor, J., delivered the
 opinion for a unanimous Court. 
 

 



 


