Wisconsin v. City of New York et al., 517 U.S. 1 (1996).
LII
Supreme Court
Wisconsin v. City of New York et al. (94-1614), 517 U.S. 1 (1996).
Opinion
[ Rehnquist ]Syllabus
HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
U.S. 321, 337.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus
WISCONSIN v. CITY
OF NEW YORK et al.
certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the second circuit
No. 94-1614.
Argued January 10, 1996 -- Decided
March 20, 1996
[n.*]
The Constitution's Census Clause vests Congress with the responsibility
to conduct an "actual Enumeration" of the American public every 10 years,
with the primary purpose of providing a basis for apportioning congressional
representation among the States. That responsibility has been delegated
to the Secretary of Commerce, who determined that an "actual Enumeration"
would best be achieved in the 1990 census by not using a postenumeration
survey (PES) statistical adjustment designed to correct an undercount in
the initial enumeration. In this action brought by several of the respondents
and others, the District Court concluded that the Secretary's decision
not to statistically adjust the census violated neither the Constitution
nor federal law. In reversing and remanding, the Court of Appeals looked
to a line of precedent involving judicial review of intrastate districting
decisions, see Wesberry v. Sanders, 376
U.S. 1, and its progeny, and held, inter alia, that a heightened
standard of review was required here because the Secretary's decision impacted
the fundamental right to have one's vote counted and had a disproportionate
impact upon certain identifiable minority racial groups.
Held: Because it was reasonable
to conclude that an "actual Enumeration" could best be achieved in the
1990 census without the PES based statistical adjustment, the Secretary's
decision not to use that adjustment was well within the constitutional
bounds of discretion over the conduct of the census that is provided to
the Federal Government. Pp. 11-23.
(a) The Secretary's decision
was not subject to heightened scrutiny. In two recent decisions, Department
of Commerce v. Montana, 503
U.S. 442, and Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505
U.S. 788, this Court rejected the application of Wesberry's
"one person one vote" standard to Congress, concluding that the Constitution
vests Congress with wide discretion over apportionment decisions and the
conduct of the census, and that the appropriate standard of review examines
a congressional decision to determine whether it is "consistent with the
constitutional language and the constitutional goal of equal representation,"
see Franklin, supra, at 804. Rather than the strict scrutiny standard
applied in Wesberry and adopted by the Court of Appeals, the standard
established in Montana and Franklin applies to the Secretary's
decision here. The Constitution's text vests Congress with virtually unlimited
discretion in conducting the "actual Enumeration," see Art. I, §2,
cl. 3 (Congress may conduct the census "in such Manner as they shall by
Law direct"), and there is no basis for thinking that such discretion is
more limited than that text provides. Through the Census Act, 13
U.S.C. § 141(a), Congress has delegated its broad authority over
the census to the Secretary. Hence, so long as the Secretary's conduct
of the census is "consistent with the constitutional language and the constitutional
goal of equal representation," it is within the Constitution's limits.
Pp. 11-18.
(b) The Secretary's decision conformed to applicable constitutional
and statutory provisions. In light of the Constitution's broad grant of
authority to Congress, that decision need bear only a reasonable relationship
to the accomplishment of an actual enumeration of the population, keeping
in mind the census' constitutional purpose of apportioning congressional
representation. The Secretary based the decision upon three determinations,
each of which is well within the bounds of his constitutional discretion.
First, he held that in light of the constitutional purpose, the census'
distributive accuracy--i.e., getting most nearly correct the proportions
of people in different areas--was more important than its numerical accuracy.
A preference for distributive accuracy (even at the expense of some numerical
accuracy) is not inconsistent with the constitutional need to determine
the apportionment of the Representatives among the States. Second, the
Secretary's determination that the unadjusted census data should be considered
the most distributively accurate absent a showing to the contrary was based
on his well founded understanding of historical census practice and experience,
an important consideration in this context. See, e.g., Montana, supra,
at 465. Respondents misplace their reliance on statistical adjustments
that were used in the 1970 and 1980 censuses, since those adjustments were
of an entirely different type than the one at issue and took place on a
dramatically smaller scale, and since a PES based adjustment would have
been the first time in history that the States' apportionment was based
upon counts in other States. Third, respondents' contention that this Court
should review de novo the Secretary's conclusions on this point fundamentally
misapprehends the basis for deference to his determination, which arises
not from the highly technical nature of his decision, but from the wide
discretion bestowed by the Constitution upon Congress, and by Congress
upon him. The Secretary's conclusion that the PES based adjustment would
not improve distributive accuracy, which was based on his review of extensive
research and the recommendations of some of his advisers, was a reasonable
choice in an area where technical experts disagree. Pp. 18-23.
34 F. 3d 1114,
reversed.
Rehnquist, C. J., delivered
the opinion for a unanimous Court.
Notes
* Together
with No. 94-1631, Oklahoma v. City of New York et al., and
No. 94-1985, Department of Commerce et al. v. City of New York
et al., also on certiorari to the same court.
