f Supreme Court, US| 
\1 FILED 


No. 95-8836 WAY 28 1996 


CORK 
In The — 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
o 


ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, 


Petitioner, 


TONY TURPIN, Warden, Georgia Diagnostic 
and Classification Center, 


Respondent. 


° 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The United States 
Court Of Appeals For The Eleventh Circuit 


¢ 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENT 
e 


Susan V. BOLEYN 
Senior Assistant 
Attorney General 
Counsel of Record 
for Respondent 


Micuaet J. Bowers 
Attorney General 


Mary BetH WesTMORELAND 
Deputy 


Attorney General 
Please serve: 


Susan V. BoLEYN Pauta K. SMITH 


Senior Assistant 
State Law Department 
40 Capitol Square, S.W. Attorney General 
Atlanta, Georgia 30334 Paice Reese WHITAKER 
(404) 656-3397 Assistant Attorney General 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


ee ee 


se 


—-- 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page(s) 
PRS GS RAF CCE Ee cs cvveedivaseacstweveeen ii 
PEE. $05 a ccdihbanese ceussdageeuuaisadawss 1 


I. AS PETITIONER CONCEDES, THERE IS NO 
VIOLATION OF THE SUSPENSION CLAUSE IN 
FUP ANE + 6 ceca ccedvarsdsadeukecesceweasehes 1 


Il. TITLE I OF THE ACT DOES NOT UNCON- 
STITUTIONALLY RESTRICT THIS COURT’S 
JURISDICTION, NOR DOES THE CONSTITU- 
TIONALITY OF THE ACT DEPEND UPON THIS 
COURT’S EXPANSION OF DIRECT WRITS 
oe OB ee ee er rere 2 


CRTC DAMEUREED 6.e5 oso neatucedésnsipeu cdncbacbansees 12 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Bowen v. Johnston, 306 U.S 19 (1939). ....... 6666 c cue, 2 
Felker v. Turpin, No. 96-1077 (11th Cir. May 2, 

CC CrLEL SU Ue Seu hun eadees Wa eess poeesestoeseeces 1 
Johnson v. Avery, 393 U.S. 483 (1969) ..... 6.6... cece 2 
McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U.S. 467 (1991)............. 7, 10 
Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535 (1974) ........ 6.6465. 5 
Pittsburgh & Lake Erie R. Co. v. Railway Labor Exec- 

utives’ Assn., 491 U.S. 490 (1989)........... 6c enue 5 
Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986 (1984)...... 5 
Salinger v. Loisel, 265 U.S. 224 (1923) ...........06065 10 
Sawyer v. Smith, 497 U.S. 227 (1990)......... 66. cece 8 
Sawyer v. Whitley, 505 U.S. __, 112 S.Ct. 2514 

EE ere ee Aah bb eRe Ad seenS eenéess 8 
Schlup v. Delo, __. U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 851 (1995)...... 8 
Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989) ......... 6c cece eens 8 
Vimar Seguro Y Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky Reefer, 

ee, Ce COP os cccccccecsocces 5 
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 
i Cc hbGhasapivsscovsseresseccereces passim 
ee aU las ie Nenveresbesresceccevees ) 


OrHer AUTHORITIES 


W. Church, Writ of Habeas Corpus § 386 (2d ed. 
ONTO GEASS a 10 


ARGUMENT 


Il. AS PETITIONER CONCEDES, THERE IS NO VIO- 
LATION OF THE SUSPENSION CLAUSE IN HIS 
CASE. 


Respondent acknowled, » and welcomes Petitioner's 
concession under Question 3 as posed by this Court that 
the application of the new Act to Petitioner’s case does 
not violate the Suspension Clause of the United States 
Constitution and cannot serve as the basis for granting 
any relief to Petitioner. Petitioner draws this conclusion 
“in view of the disposition by the court below.” (Peti- 
tioner’s brief at 7; 27-29). Respondent readily agrees with 
the statement made by Petitioner that the decision of the 
Circuit Court denying Petitioner leave to file his second 
habeas corpus petition is the “key to this conclusion.” 
(Petitioner's brief at 28). Unlike Petitioner, however, 
Respondent asserts, as he did initially, that the Circuit 
Court correctly decided the “merits” of Petitioner's 
claims and correctly found the new Act’s restrictions had 
no unconstitutional effect on Petitioner. Felker v. Turpin, 
No. 96-1077 (11th Cir. May 2, 1996). Compare Petitioner's 
brief at 29. 


Petitioner acknowledges that the resolution made of 
Petitioner's case by the Circuit Court justifies no granting 
of relief to Petitioner on the Suspension Clause issue, and 
this conclusion stands independently of whether this 
Court determines that this case is an appropriate vehicle 
in which to discuss broader issues relating to the present 
scope of federal habeas corpus. 


ll. TITLE 1 OF THE ACT DOES NOT UNCONSTITU- 
TIONALLY RESTRICT THIS COURT'S JURISDIC- 
TION, NOR DOES THE CONSTITUTIONALITY 
OF THE ACT DEPEND UPON THIS COURT’S 
EXPANSION OF DIRECT WRITS UNDER 28 U.S.C. 
§ 2241. 


In return for recognizing that Title I of the new Act 
does not impermissibly restrict this Court's jurisdiction, 
(Question 1), Petitioner seeks to exact a quid pro quo 
from this Court that this Court simultaneously agree to 
dramatically expand the scope of direct writs under 28 
U.S.C. § 2241 (Question 2). Absent compliance with Peti- 
tioner’s demand that this Court allow 28 U.S.C. § 2241 to 
be used to avoid following new congressionally manda- 
ted statutory procedures governing successive petitions, 
Petitioner explicitly states in his Summary of the Argu- 
ment that he will assert the Act is unconstitutional. (Peti- 
tioner’s brief at 7). Petitioner seeks to force upon this 
Court his view that the Constitution requires that peti- 
tioners be allowed to use 28 U.S.C. § 2241 to abuse the 
system by creating perpetual habeas corpus review. Such 
a convoluted reading of the Constitution, this statute, and 
this Court’s precedent cannot be sustained. 


Petitioner attempts to lend legitimacy to his strained 
constitutional interpretation by invoking the talismanic 
phrase, “ ‘there is no higher duty than to maintain [the 
writ of habeas corpus] unimpaired.’ ” Johnson v. Avery, 
393 U.S. 483, 485 (1969) (quoting Bowen v. Johnston, 306 
U.S. 19, 26 (1939)). (Petitioner's brief at 12). The imvoca- 
tion by Petitioner of the traditions of habeas corpus does 
not cloak his “interpretation” with legitimacy. While 
Respondent agrees with the necessity of maintaining the 


writ unimpaired, the views of Respondent and Petitioner 
diverge significantly on the meaning of “unimpaired.” 


As urged initially by Respondent, to maintain the 
writ of habeas corpus unimpaired is to maintain the 
integrity of the writ of habeas corpus, meaning the writ 
must be protected from abuse. Even Petitioner acknowl- 
edges that abuses of the writ of habeas corpus can be 
permissibly regulated by Congress. (Petitioner’s brief at 
22 n.20). Therefore, since the new Act is such a permis- 
sible regulation, its constitutionality on this basis is not in 
question. 


Another faulty premise for Petitioner’s argument is 
his invocation of the phrase “preexisting practice” to 
require not only that 28 U.S.C. § 2241 be unaffected by the 
new Act, but at the same time that 28 U.S.C. § 2241 be 
expanded. Petitioner attempts to use the “preexisting 
practice” of the Court as a basis for the expansion of 
direct writs. This ignores Petitioner's own admission that 
“[t}he Court’s preexisting practice, described in Supreme 
Court Rule 20.4(a), has treated the entire subject of origi- 
nal habeas as exceptional and discretionary.” (Petitioner's 
brief at 15). Petitioner conveniently omitted recognition 
of the portion of Rule 20.4(a) which states, “This writ is 
rarely granted.” Petitioner also fails to note the require- 
ment of the Rule that a petitioner show “that exceptional 
circumstances warrant the exercise of the Court's discre- 
tionary powers” in terming the writ as an “exceptional” 
one. Thus, the Rule, read as a whole, renders unconscion- 
able Petitioner’s attempt to expand direct writs and is in 
direct contravention of the “preexisting practice” of this 
Court. 


This expansion of the availability of direct writs as 
urged by Petitioner is without historical or legal prece- 
dent. Nothing in the “preexisting practice” of this Court 
with respect to direct writs authorizes a conversion of 
this writ from “rare” to commonplace usage or allows all 
habeas corpus petitioners to seek direct review from this 
Court despite their failure to comply with other applica- 
ble statutory requirements. Such a conversion would 
authorize perpetual, rather than exceptional, review. 


In addition, Petitioner illogically relies on the “plain 
meaning” rule of statutory construction to justify the 
expansion of 28 U.S.C. § 2241. Petitioner argues that 
because “plain meaning controls statutory construction,” 
(Petitioner's brief at 10 n.7), the new Act does not, by its 
terms, affect the jurisdiction of this Court as contained in 
28 U.S.C. § 2241. Petitioner ignores the logical conclusion 
which must be drawn from this assertion. If a “plain 
meaning” reading of the new Act is that 28 U.S.C. § 2241 
direct writs are not affected, Petitioner cannot use “plain 
meaning” to expand the scope of direct writs beyond 
their traditionally limited and extraordinary scope. 


While seeking to apply the plain meaning rule to the 
new Act, Petitioner contradictorily ignores this rule in 
connection with Supreme Court Rule 20.4(a) by seeking 
to redefine “exceptional circumstances” as contained in 
that rule. Under Petitioner's proposed definition, “excep- 
tional circumstances” would include all unsuccessful ATF 
applicants and all capital habeas corpus petitioners. 
Nothing in this Court's jurisprudence compels such a 
reading of 28 U.S.C. § 2241. 


While stressing one rule of statutory construction, 
i.e., the plain meaning rule, Petitioner neglects to cite 
another rule of statutory construction which is even more 
significant in the context of this case. As noted in the 
brief filed on behalf of the Solicitor General, this Court in 
Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986, 1018 (1984) 
stressed that “where two statutes are capable of co-exis- 
tence, it is the duty of the courts, absent a clearly 
expressed congressional intention to the contrary, to 
regard each as effective.” (Solicitor General's brief at 
30-31). See also Vimar Seguro Y Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky 
Reefer, _. U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 2322, 2326 (1995) (citing 
Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535, 551 (1974) and Pittsburgh 
& Lake Erie R. Co. v. Railway Labor Executives’ Assn., 491 
U.S. 490, 510 44989)). Thus, as Respondent argued in his 
opening brief, plain meaning in this context may be read 
to allow peaceful coexistence between the new Act and 
the traditional scope of 28 U.S.C. § 2241. 


Even though the gravamen of Petitioner’s argument 
is to urge a more expansive interpretation of 28 U.S.C. 
§ 2241, Petitioner alternatively relies on what he terms as 
this Court’s “immemorial power to review plainly wrong 
refusals of habeas corpus relief on the basis of improper 
legal standards applied by lower federal courts.” (Peti- 
tioner’s brief at 10-11). The new Act does not interfere 
with any “immemorial power.” 


Petitioner's denomination of the ATF procedure set 
forth in § 106(b)(3)(A) of the Act as a “strict screening 
mechanism” (Petitioner’s brief at 10) for successive peti- 
tions in the circuit courts is an implied concession that 
removal of the review of that decision does not derogate 
any “immemorial power.” Respondent pointed out in his 


initial brief that there historically did not exist any 
“immemorial power” concerning state prisoners, see 
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867; nor has this Court chosen to 
exercise any “immemorial power” regarding successive 
petitions; nor has this Court shown any tolerance for 
repeated abuses of the writ of habeas corpus. Thus, 
Respondent disputes Petitioner’s assertion that the 
“immemorial power” of this Court is somehow abridged 
by the provisions of the new Act simply creating a “strict 
screening mechanism” for successive petitions. 


Petitioner argues that there is a need for this Court to 
review the circuits courts’ judgments on ATF applications 
in order to prevent the creation of “circuit supreme 
courts” and to prevent conflicts in the circuits. As 
asserted in the brief amici curiae of the Criminal Justice 
Legal Foundation and Citizens for Law and Order in 
support of Respondent, such an asserted “constitutional 
imperative for appellate jurisdiction” is without support 
in caselaw or history and is a matter for congressional 
consideration and resolution. (Brief of Amici Curiae for 
Respondent at 10). This Court can in future decisions 
interpret the standards set forth in the new statute and 
the manner in which an applicant can satisfy these stan- 
dards (an analysis and interpretation unnecessary in this 
case under the circuit court’s ruling) in cases in which an 
authorization to file has been granted and thereby, in 
reviewing those decisions, insure uniformity in the appli- 
cation of the successive petition requirements. 


In the amici curiae brief of the American Civil Liber- 
ties Union and the ACLU of Georgia in support of Peti- 
tioner, amici make reference to what they call the “small 
core of successive petitions still permitted under the Act” 


as needing review by this Court to assure “the supremacy 
of federal law and a uniform interpretation of the federal 
Constitution.” (Amici Curiae Brief on behalf of the Amer- 
ican Civil Liberties Union and the ACLU of Georgia at 7). 
It is the intention of Congress under the new Act, as jit 
was the intention of this Court under such cases as 
McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U.S. 467 (1991), to severely limit 
the number of successive petitions to this “small core.” 
However, Respondent takes issue with the assertion of 
those amici for Petitioner which alleges that the Court 
will effectively be denied jurisdiction to review these 
cases. This “small core” of successive petitions permitted 
under the Act will of course be reviewable by this Court 
because if such petitions are permitted to be filed under 
the Act, they will be filed in the district court and pro- 
ceed to be reviewed on the appellate level in the same 
manner as under the old law. If review of the denial of 
ATF were available under the new Act, the only review 
would be whether there had been an abuse of discretion 
in not allowing the successive petition to be filed. The 
Court would not be reviewing to insure a “uniform inter- 
pretation of the federal Constitution.” This argument 
therefore provides no support for the assertion that 
removal of the abuse of discretion review amounts to an 
improper restriction of the Court’s jurisdiction. 


In cases under the old law where this Court reviewed 
a lower court’s decision to dismiss a petition as an abuse 
of the writ, the Court generally engaged in no sweeping 
constitutional pronouncements but rather determined 
whether, as a factual matter, a petitioner had met the new 
requirements to proceed as to the “merits” of the petition. 
In the past, the decisions of this Court in such instances 


have been of little precedential value but, rather, have 
been brief statements as to whether the lower court 
abused its discretion in applying the appropriate stan- 
dard at that time. A similar and limited review is all that 
this Court would be engaged in if it reviewed the denial 
of ATF applications. Respondent questions whether this 
Court should exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under 
28 U.S.C. § 2241 to review ATF applications for abuses of 
discretion in order to assure uniformity. 


Petitioner argues that without review of decisions 
denying ATF, habeas corpus applicants such as those in 
Schlup v. Delo, __ U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 851 (1995), and 
Sawyer v. Whitley, 505 U.S. __, 112 S.Ct. 2514 (1992), 
would not have obtained relief under the new habeas 
corpus provisions. (Petitioner's brief at 22-27). This argu- 
ment is unavailing as it is sheer speculation to assume 
that those petitioners would not have met the ATF crite- 
ria and thus been allowed to have their successive peti- 
tions reviewed in due course under the statute, including 
seeking review on a petition for certiorari in this Court. 


In removing this Court’s obligation to review this 
“strict screening” decision, this Court is not being 
removed, as Petitioner asserts, from reviewing important 
federal constitutional principles and insuring their uni- 
formity in interpretation and application. As this Court 
has observed, very few new “bedrock” principles of con- 
stitutional law are now being propounded by this Court, 
and those which are can still be litigated under the pre- 
sent system. Moreover, as this Court specifically recog- 
nized in Sawyer v. Smith, 497 U.S. 227, 243 (1990) (quoting 
Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989)), “it is ‘unlikely that 
many such components of basic due process have yet to 


emerge.’ “ The likelihood of such “bedrock” principles 
emerging in the course of reviewing denials of ATF is 
negligible. 


As Petitioner acknowledges at page ten of his brief, 
under the ATF provisions of the new act, a respondent (in 
this case, the state warden where Petitioner is incarcer- 
ated) is not authorized to appeal a decision to allow a 
successive application to proceed. Despite the state’s rec- 
ognized interest in the finality of its judgments and in 
eliminating delay caused by collateral review, a respon- 
dent will be unabie to evade the provisions of the act if 
there is disagreement with the circuit court’s judgment. If 
a petitioner could circumvent the inability to appeal by 
filing a direct writ, a petitioner would be allowed a 
benefit not flowing to the respondent. Would Petitioner 
agree that an unsuccessful respondent would thereby also 
be able to utilize direct writs to seek review of a stat- 
utorily unreviewable decision of the circuit court? 


There are numerous indications in both statutory 
provisions and this Court's rules that 28 U.S.C. § 2241 
should not be utilized in lieu of filing an application for 
federal habeas corpus relief in the lower courts. For 
example, 28 U.S.C. § 2242 states that if an application for 
writ of habeas corpus is addressed to the Supreme Court 
or justice thereof, “it shall state the reasons for not mak- 
ing application to the district court of the district in 
which the applicant is held.” This provision appears to 
serve as a warning that 28 U.S.C. § 2241 is not to be 
utilized to forum shop. This premise is supported by the 
provisions of Rule 20.4(a) of this Court which also 
requires that a petitioner filing under 28 U.S.C. § 2241 be 
required to show “that adequate relief cannot be obtained 


10 


in any other form or from any other court.” This is also 
supported by Petitioner’s recognition of the transfer 
authority incorporated within 28 U.S.C. § 2241 authoriz- 
ing this Court to transfer direct writs to the appropriate 
lower federal court. (Petitioner’s brief at 16 n.11). Such 
acknowledgement by Petitioner is at odds with Peti- 
tioner’s assertion that the direct writ should be 
expanded, as the statutory provision already recognizes 
and generally applies the transfer authority so as not to 
function as an additional federal court and thus expand 
the foruins in which successive petitions can be filed. 


Respondent submits that, contrary to Petitioner's 
assertions, in order to make the requisite showing under 
28 U.S.C. § 2241, it is not sufficient to show that resort to 
another court is futile, but a petitioner must in fact show 
that resort to another court is unavailable. The required 
showing is more than futility; it is unavailability. 


In light of these current statutes and rules, the pro- 
motion by Petitioner of a system which permits the lower 
courts to be bypassed or ignored if they do not offer a 
“friendly forum,” amounts to forum shopping and is 
reminiscent of the writ as it existed at common law 
allowing a petitioner to continually seek new forums 
until he was able to obtain release. See, e.g., McCleskey v. 
Zant, 499 U.S. 467, 479-481 (1991) (quoting W. Church, 
Writ of Habeas Corpus § 386, p. 570 (2d ed. 1893) and 
Salinger v. Loisel, 265 U.S. 224, 230-231 (1923) (recognizing 
that the common law rule allowed endless renewed 
applications for the same relief to be made to “every 
other judge or court in the realm,” but that this Court had 
since held that the availability of appellate review in the 


11 


criminal case required a material modification of this 
practice to permit disposal of successive petitions). 


The extraordinary discretion of this Court should not 
be allowed to be used to denigrate this Court's para- 
mount task of reviewing significant cases of far-reaching 
application. A writ which has been rarely used and even 
more rarely granted should not be allowed to be utilized 
to broaden the opportunity for successive petitioners to 
seek review of frivolous claims. The direct writ should 
not be interpreted to give a petitioner a greater oppor- 
tunity to obtain collateral review, rather than narrowing 
the opportunity for obtaining successive collateral review 
as contemplated by the Act. 


In summary, to allow the use of 28 U.S.C. § 2241 
direct writs to review ATF denials would circumvent the 
statutory provisions set forth in the new Act as to succes- 
sive petitions; unduly burden this Court by increasing 
this Court’s duty over nonfundamental functions; add 
another commonly available layer of review to a system 
already providing multiple reviews; and expand beyond 
all present comprehension the scope and availability of 28 
U.S.C. § 2241. 


Petitioner's arguments fly in the face of the clear 
congressional intent underlying the new Act and threaten 
to undermine any statutory scheme for successive peti- 
tions adopted by Congress. If such a proposed expansion 
of 28 U.S.C. § 2241 is adopted by this Court, this will 
effectively absolve successive habeas corpus petitioners 
from the necessity of meeting the requirements of the 
new Act and allow the use of 28 U.S.C. § 2241 to review 


12 


unsuccessful attempts to meet the ATF provisions of the 
Act. 


As to the remaining broader constitutional issues 
included in the Court’s questions, Respondent has 
already stated his position that these questions present no 
case or controversy in the context of Petitioner’s case and 
thus, recalendaring of these issues in this case is unwar- 
ranted. Any resolution which this Court wishes to make 
of these broader issues can more appropriately be 
resolved in future cases where the application of these 
constitutional principles presents a case or controversy. 


— e 


CONCLUSION 


By virtue of the Eleventh Circuit’s disposition of 
Petitioner’s ATF application below, and in light of Peti- 
tioner’s failure to establish that the specific successive 
petition provisions of the new Act are unconstitutional on 
their face or as applied to Petitioner, Respondent submits 
that this petition for writ of certiorari should be dis- 
missed as improvidently granted. Respondent opposes 
Petitioner’s request that the stay of execution remain in 
effect until this Court is able to address Petitioner’s ques- 
tions, i.e., the standards which should govern original 
petitions and that the circuit court violated rather than 
applied the Act. Petitioner has established no basis upon 


which his questions are entitled to resolution and has 


demonstrated no basis for being granted an additional 


13 


Stay of execution for the purpose of answering questions 
the resolution of which will not afford him relief. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Micuaet J. Bowers 
Attorney General 


Mary BetH WesTMoRELAND 
Deputy Attorney Generai 


Susan V. BoLeyn 
Senior Assistant Attorney 


General 
Please serve: Pauta K. SmitH 
Susan V. BOLEYN Senior Assistant 


40 Capitol Square Attorney General 


Atlanta, Georgia 30334 Paice Reese WHITAKER 
(404) 656-3397 Assistant Attorney General 


