EDITOR'S NOTE 


THE FOLLOWING PAGES WERE POOR HARD COPY 
AT THE TIME OF FILMING. IF AND WHEN A 
BETTER COPY CAN BE OBTAINED, A NEW FICHE 
WILL BE ISSUED, 


™ 
~ 


IN THE SUPREM£ COURT OF “HE UNITED SLATES 


gh 
er ~ 


OCIOFER TERM, 1995 


no. 95- 8836 (A- 890) 


In re ELLIS WAYNE FELKER 


RECEIVED 
MAY 2 1995 


OFFICE OE THE CLERK 
SUPREME COURT, U.S. 


a 


| 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS, FOR APPELLATE 


OR CERTIORARI REVIEW OF THE DECISION OF 


THE UNITED STATES CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE ELEVENTH 
CIRCUIT, AND FOR STAY OF EXECUTION 


*Counsel of Record 


M. ELIZABETH WELLS 


Georgia Bar No. 747852 
STEPHEN C. BAYLISS* 
Georgia Bar No. 043348 
Georgia Resource Center 
101 Marietta Street 


Suite 3310 


Atlanta, Georgia 30303 


404/614-2014 
FAX 404/614-4656 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 

Petitioner, a death-sentenced inmate in the custody of 
Respondent, presents the following questions: 

1. Did the State of Georgia obtain Petitioner’s conviction 
and death sentence in violation of his federal constitutional 
rights? 

2. Does the one week old Antiterrorism and Effective Death 
Penalty Act of 1996 ("The Act"): 

a. unconstitutionally tie the hands of the federal 
courts with respect to the exercise of jurisdiction in habeas 
corpus actions, violating the requirement of separation of powers 
and encroaching on Article III powers of federal judges? 

b. violate the Petitioner’s Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, 
Eighth, and Pourteenth Amendment rights, and the Supremacy 
Clause, in that it allows state courts to decide federal 
constitutional issues in a manner that is inconsistent with 
federal law, with impunity? 

c. introduce uncorrectable arbitrariness into the 
federal habeas corpus process, in violation of the federal 
constitution? 

2. What is a prima facie showing within the context of 
Sec. 106(b)(3)(C) of the Act? 

3. What constitutes "previously unavailable" within the 
context of Sec. 106(b)(2)(A) of the Act? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Questions Presented. .....--+-s+seee8% TYTTYTTITTTTTTTTrTTtTtt i 
Table Of CONTENTS... . cece cccrsccnccsecesccesecsesesssssssessedd 
Table of Authorities... .... cece eceeecereeccceces eccccscccccec ls” 
Opinions BELOW... 1... eee en ence ee cesneersenressessereseeessseeseed 
JULISAGICTION. .. cece cere reece eeeereeseseseresesesssssaseseseseend 


Statement of Reasons for not Making Application to the 


District COUFR. ccccceeeceeeseessseseesesse *“e e@eewee#eee TTTTYTiIritTitiitt 
Statement of the CASE 2... cscs eecesreceeeeeerene WYTTTTITITITT TTT 
A. Statement of the FactS...-.-sscececevscsecseseeed 
B. Procedural History .....«.++«+- WYTTITITITITITT TTT. 
Reasons for Granting the Writ.........-. ceecese ccccccccsocscccce cS 


I. The Antiterroism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
1996 ("The Act”) is Unconstitutional as Written and 
Applied to Petitioner, and its Constitutionality is an 
Issue Which this Court, Rather than the Lower Court, 
Ought to Resolve. .....eesccescecrcccereweneeeessseeee® 


II. The Lower Court’s First Impression of the Act was 
Incorrect and Decided Issues Which Have Not Been but 
Which Ought to be Decided by this Court, Including A) 
What is a Prima Facie Showing?, and B) What Does it 
Mean for a Claim to Have Been Previously Available?.10 


A. Cage Error Cannot be Harmless, But There Was 
Manifest Harm in This Case--Petitioner is 
TOMASO oc cccccccceceeeececcecescooceeseseooseseas 


B. Unconstitutional Jury Instructions Allowed the 


Jury to Convict Without "Utmost Certainty,” In re 
Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364 (1970), of the Time of 


DE . . cc bedoceesbesdeesssesneceoseoneouesousne 
c. Cage is to Be Retroactively Applied.......-.--+.20 
D. This Claim Was Not Previously Available........21 


ii 


III. Petitioner is [Entitied to Habeas Corpus Relief on his 
Claim that the Process through Which He was Convicted 
was Unconstitutional and that his Execution would 


Violate the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments........ 21 
A. Petitioner is Innocent of Murder............... 22 
a. Dr. Disco re sbebeebseeee s-eeee cecccecscconn 
b. Dr. Arden se @ 8 «© een eeeeeeeeeeaee seer eeeeeeeeeee 24 


B. Having a State Agent, Non-Physician, Testify to 
the Critical Issue of Time of Death Violates Due 
Process and the Prohibition on Cruel and Unusual 
DUD an Codncoercceconseseeeeecccoebeccsccecctll 


SOs 6 bcc eeebebesecocesetssén eeenveeeeeeeaeanee eerecesecseceseda 


iii 


— — —_ 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIFS 


Federal) Cases 
Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68 (1985).............. pesees ccococdl 
Arizona vy. Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279 (1991)........... poacedéa 20 
Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 880 (1983)..... peedase ecnéedase 12 
Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39 (1990)........ peéeecen 10, 14, 20 
Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104 (1982)............ TTTTTTTT 
Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501 (1976)......... néeece cceceed® 
Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399 (1986)...... oséednes pebecess 32 


Sxiffin vy. Delo, 33 F.3d 895 (8th cir. BODE) ccccceccece TTTTT 31 
Herrera v. Collins, 113 S. ct. 853 C2ODS) oc ccccccccccocces 21, 31 
2D xe Winship, 397 U.s. 35% TTEe sSeebeobacsesonocec 11, 18, 19 


Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307 (1979)............ cocccseccdl 
hanigan v. Maloney, 853 F.2d 40 (ist Cir. 1988).............. 12 
Nutter v. White, 39 F.2d 1154 (11th Cir. 1994)............ scold 
Perez v. Irvin, 963 F.2d 499 (24 Cir. 1992)............. scceclD 
Sawyer v. Smith, 497 U.S. 227 (1990) ........cccccceccccceccedll 
Sullivan v. Louisiana, 113 S. ct. 2078 (1993)............12, 20 
Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989)..... eeedesscccsocsccecesell 
Vistor_v. Nebraska, 114 S.Ct. 1239 (1994)................ oceck® 
State Cases 
State v. Cage, 554 So.24 39 (La. 1989)..... 0... cc cece eee ceceed® 


Miscellaneous 


Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, §§ 
BOG (BD) (2) (A) cccccccccccccccccccsccccccccsessccccccccccece cGy 10 


Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, §§ 
PEOEES Gleb Mi Olccdedactehesésesacsbeccssenocbicnececl 


iv 


(3d @d. 1993)... .cceees 


$66 6660066 00000a0ece. .19 IN YHE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
Nebster’s Ii New Riverside Dictionary (198, a 19 OCTOBER TERM, 1995 
Nebster’s Third New International Dictionary - 
Unabridged (1986).....- " oe 
Se 66 666606000866 6 6cbecune TTTTTTI TTT Tee «+219 


in re ELLIS WAYNE FELKER 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS, FOR APPELLATE 
OR CERTIORARI REVIEW OF THE DECISION OF 
THE UNITED STATES CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE ELEVENTH 
CIRCUIT, AND FOR STAY OF EXECUTION 


The Petitioner, Ellis Wayne Felker, respectfully requests 
that this Court enter a stay of execution so as to consider and 
grant Petitioner’s petition for a writ of habeas corpus and to 
conduct appellate review of the lower court’s actions. 

OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit 

is not reported. A copy of the opinion is attached hereto. 
JURISDICTION 

This Court’s jurisdiction is invoked pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 

Section 2241 and 2254(a), and 28 U.S.C. Section 1651(a). 


STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR NOT MAKING APPLICATION 
TC THE DISTRICT COURT 


As required by Rule 20 (4), Petitioner states that he has 
not applied to the district court because the circuit court 
prohibited such an application. The Petitioner exhausted his 
estate court remedies when the Georgia Supreme Court denied relief 
on May 2, 1996. Petitioner has complied with 28 U.S.C. § 


TOTAL P.@7 


2254(bD), @S Now amended by the Act, to the extent he has had 
notice of those requirements and to the extent they are capable 
of being met. Exceptional circumstances warrant the exercise of 
this Court’s jurisdiction and adequate relief cannot be obtained 
in any other form or fron any other court. 

STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

A. Statement of the Facts 

3. On February 5, 1983, Petitioner was convicted of the 
murder of Evelyn Joy Ludlum. The primary controversy at trial 
was when the victim died. The Gay after the victin’s 
Gisappearance, police placed Petitioner under constant 
surveillance, meaning he thereafter had the best alibi known. 

2. The victim’s body was discovered on December 8, 1981, 
thirteen days after her disappearance. A state crime lab 
employee who was not a physician conducted an autopsy. Georgia 
is the only jurisdiction in the Western World that allows a non- 
Physician to conduct an autopsy. This state agent told his 
colleagues that the victim had been dead for three days when 
found. When this made Petitioner innocent--he had a state 
provided alibi for more than a week before this time of death-- 
this agent changed his opinion. 

3. The agent was allowed to testify at trial that the time 
of death could have been two weeks before the body vas found, 
making Petitioner potentially guilty. A medical doctor testified 
on behalf of Petitioner that the agent’s original opinion was 


TOTAL P.35 


correct--the victim had been decd three to five days when found-- 
making Petitioner imocent. 

4. Thus, the jury was left to determine whether the state, 
through its non-physician state agent, had proven guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt. The jurors’ task was made unconstitutionally 
easy by a jury instruction and voir dire statements which equated 
the absence of reasonable doubt with the presence of moral 
certainty of guilt. The jury convicted Petitioner and sentenced 
him to death. This Court has recognized that such instructions 
violate bedrock constitutional principles. 

5. Petitioner sought in the circuit court the retroactive 
correction of this error. He also challenged the 
constitutionality of the Act as written and as applied, raised 
the claim that he was innocent and that his execution would be 
unconstitutional, and raised the claim that the manner in which 
he was tried and convicted, i.e., state agent, non-physician, 
testimony regarding autopsy findings and time of death, violated 
the constitution. Relief was denied. 

B. Procedural History 

i. The nape and location of the court which entered the 
judgment of conviction and sentence under attack are: 


Superior Court of Houston County 
Perry, Georgia 


2. The date of the judgment of conviction was February 5, 
i963. 


3. The date of the judgment of senience was February 7, 
1983. The sentence was that Petitioner be put to death by 
electrocution for the crime of murder. 

4. The nature of the offenses involved is that Petitioner 
was convicted of murder, in violation of 0.C.G.A. § 165-1, rape, 
in violation of 0.C.G.A. § 16-6-1, aggravated sodomy, in 
violation of 0.C.G.A. § 16-6-2, and false imprisonment, in 
violation of 0.C.G.A. § 16-5-41. 

5. At his trial, Petitioner pled not guilty. 

6. The trial on the issue of guilt or innocence and on the 
issue of sentence was had before a jury. 

7. Petitioner testified at the trial on the issue of guilt 
or innocence. He did not testify at the sentencing trial. 

8. Petitioner appealed his conviction and sentence of 
death. 


9. The facts of Petitioner’s appeal are as follows: 

(a) The Supreme Court of Georgia affirmed Petitioner’s 
conviction and sentence of death on March 15, 1984. Felker y. 
State, 252 Ga. 351, 314 $.£.24 621 (19864). A timely filed Motion 
for Reconsideration was denied on March 29, 1984. 

(b) Petitioner thereafter filed a Petition for writ of 
Certiorari in the United States Supreme Court. The United States 
Supreme Court denied the Petition for writ of Certiorari on 


October 1, 1984. Felker vy, Georgia, 469 U.S. 873, 105 S.Ct. 229 
(1984). Rehearing was denied November 26, 1984. 


(c) Petitioner fileu a Petition fur Writ of Habeas 
Corpus in the Superior Court of Butts County on December 17, 
1984. The Petition was denied August 6, 1990. A timely filed 
Certificate of Probable Cause to Appeal was denied by the Georgia 
Supreme Court on September 3, 1991. 

(4) Petitioner filed a Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari in the United States Supreme Court, which was denied 
on January 21, 1992. Felker vy. Zant, 502 U.S. 1064, 112 S.Ct. 
950 (1992). 

10. A federal petition for habeas corpus relief was filed 
in the district court on April 28, 1993. The district court 
would not allow Petitioner to proceed in forma pauperis. On June 
2, 1993, a filing fee was paid and the district court moved the 
petition from the miscellaneous docket to the civil docket. On 
January 26, 1994, the Court denied relief. 

11. On May 8, 1995, the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the denial of relief by the 
District Court. Felker v. Thomas. 52 F.3d 907 (1995). 
Petitioner’s timely filed Petition for Rehearing and Suggestion 
for Rehearing En Banc was denied on August 9, 1995. Felker vy. 
Thomas, 62 F.3d 342 (1995). 

12. Petitioner filed a Petition for Writ of Certiorari in 
the United States Supreme Court. The Petition was denied on 
February 20, 1996. Felker v. Thomas, _ U.S. __ 116 S.Ct. 956 
(1996). A Motion for Reconsideration in the United States 
Supreme Court was denied April 15, 1996. 


13. On April 30, 1996, Petitioner filed a petition for writ 
eof habeas corpus in the Superior Court of Butts County, Georgia. 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 
I. 

THE ANTITERROISM AND EFFECTIVE DEATH PENALTY ACT OF 

1996 ("THE ACT") IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL AS WRITTEN AND 

APPLIED TO PETITIONER, AND ITS CONSTITUTIONALITY IS AN 

ISSUE WHICH THIS COURT, RATHER THAN THE LOWER COURT, 

OUGHT TO RESOLVE. 

The Applicant is a death-sentenced inmate in the custody of 
Respondent. His execution is scheduled for May 2, 1996, at 7:00 
P-m. The Applicant has filed a previous federal habeas corpus 
action, but relief was denied. 

The Act contains provisions for the initial screening and 
then final disposition of potentially second or subsequent habeas 
corpus petitions. Section 106 of the Act requires a Petitioner 
te seek the permission of a three judge panel of the circuit 
court to file a second or subsequent habeas corpus petition in 
the district court. See Sec. 106(b)(3)(A), (B) and (C). The 
motion seeking leave to file the petition shall be granted if 
“the application makes a prima facie showing that the application 
satisfies the requirements of this section (Sec. 106]." See Sec. 
106(b) (3) (C). 

Petitioner sought leave to file in the district court a 
petition which, as permitted by § 106, contained a claim which 
“relies on a new rule of constitutional law, made retroactive to 
cases on collateral review by the Supreme Court, that was 
previously unavailable." Sec. 106(b)(2)(A). The circuit court 


feanicad pemaission fo. the filing of a petition. This action by 
the lower court was erroneous under the Act. See Argument II, 
dntxa. 

As a threshold matier, however, this Act raises myriad 
constitutional concerns and is seriously constitutionally flawed. 
The Act’s attempted removal of circuit rehearing, en banc 
rehearing, and certiorari review of claims of state violations of 
federal constitutional rights is unprecedented, dangerous, and 
invites anarchy in the processing of claims.’ The Act’s order 
that federal courts must hear certain claims and must rule on 
them in certain ways more than blurs the distinction between the 
legislative and judicial branches of the federal government. The 
Act’s requirement that federal courts bow to state courts’ 
incorrect applications of federal constitutional law impacts the 
Supremacy Clause, and other federal constitutional provisions-- 
total control of the application of the federal constitution to 
the states is handed over to the states, the very entities that, 
in this context, are to be controlled by federal courts via the 
Great Writ. Thus, the Act violates the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, 
Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments, the Supremacy Clause, and 
Article III, in that it allows state courts to decide federal 
constitutional issues in a manner that is inconsistent with 


federal law, with impunity. 


1. The circuit-wide, and yy Soehesene oe 
whether someone is innocent enough to execu ° 
example, will be ad hoc. The Act thereby introduces ostensibly 
uncorrectable arbitrariness into the federal habeas corpus 
process, in violation of the federal constitution. 


7 


These infirmities arise in at least the following ways:? 

a. The Act prohibits the filing of a Petition for 
rehearing and a petition for certiorari if a panel determines 
that a second or subsequent petition cannot be filed. Thus, what 
a three judge panel holds in denying permission to file a second 
or subsequent petition can be completely inconsistent with what 
another panel holds under identical circumstances and with what 
other circuit courts hold. Inter- and intra-circuit 
inconsistency in the enforcement of federal constitutional rights 
is its own constitutional violation, and the statute is 
unconstitutional on its face. Under such circumstances, the 
death penalty will strike like lightning--there is no provision 
for, much less guarantee of, uniformity in the handling of 
Similarly situated Applicants. 

b. The standard for determining whether an Applicant 
is permitted to file a second or subsequent petition is too vague 
to protect Applicants from State court violations of federal 
constitutional rights. Whether a Petitioner receives federal 
review of a constitutional challenge in a second petition setting 
will depend upon whether he or she makes a “prima facie" showing 
of a violation of a retroactively applied constitutional right. 
"Prima facie" showing is not defined by the Act. 


2. Undersigned counsel have been unable fully to di 
provisions, much less to research, brief, and emo | all i 
ramifications, of the Act. It appears that Applicant is the 
first person in the country to whom the Act will be applied. 


r % 


c. the Act allows the filing of a second petition 
with respect to a "previously unavailable" claim, but does not 
define what previously unavailable means. 

d. The Act requires federal courts to defer to wrong 
state court applications of federal constitutional law. 

e. The Act allows the execution of a person who is in 
fact innocent but who had a constitutional trial;? and 

ft. The Act does not allow a federal court to announce 
and apply in the Applicant’s case a federal constitutional 


violation of the most bedrock sort which infected the truth- 


seeking process.‘ 


g. The Article III power of federal judges cannot be 
constrained by Congress. Congress cannot require federal judges 
both to entertain, and to rule a specific way regarding, civil 
actions. Under the Act, Congress requires federal courts to 
entertain, but to rule in certain ways regarding, habeas corpus 
actions. This violates the doctrine of separation of powers, and 


is unconstitutional. °* 
The application of this statute to Applicant violated these 


and other constitutional guarantees. The issues deserve more 


considered treatment than is allowed by the existence of a one 


3. See Section III, infra. 


4. See Section III, jnfra.- 


5S. The Act does not amend 28 U.S.C. Sections 2241 or 2254 
(a), which confer jurisdiction on the federal courts to entertain 
petitions for writs of habeas corpus. Federal courts still have 
jurisdiction; Congress has acted only to direct results. 


TOTAL P.@2 


week old statute. Under these circumstances, and under the 
prevailing case law, Petitioner is entitled to stay of execution. 
See Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 880 (1983). 
II. 

THE LOWER COURT’S FIRST IMPRESSION OF THE ACT WAS 

WHICH OUGHT TO BE DECIDED BY THIS COURT, INCLUDING A.) 

MEAN FOR A CLAIM TO HAVE BEEN PREVIOUSLY AVAILABLE? 

Petitioner contends that he made a prima facie showing that 
his claim under Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39 (1990), satisfies 
the requirements of Sec. 106(b)(2)(A), and that he was entitled 
to a stay of execution and permission to file his habeas corpus 
petition in the district court. A prima facie showing is a 
showing which on its face may entitle a petitioner to relief. 
Petitioner is entitled to district court consideration of his 
claim upon a prima facie showing that a) his claim is one which 
has been applied retroactively® and b) it was not previously 
available to him. Petitioner pled that Cage error occurred, that 
Cage is retroactive, and that at the time he filed his first 
petition the retroactive application of Cage was not available. 

In denying permission to file a petition, the circuit court 
assessed both the Petitioner’s showing and the Respondent’s 
response, which is the antithesis of a prima facie assessment. 
Prima facie is “on its face" without any showing from the 
Respondent. Further, the circuit court assessed the merits of 


the claim, which it had no jurisdiction to do, under the Act. If 


6. Respondent concedes the retroactivity issue. 
10 


a prima facie showing is made, the district court dccides the 
merits.’ 

Plainly Petitioner made a prima facie showing. The Due 
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment “protects the accused 
against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of 
every fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is 
charged." In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364 (1970); see also 
Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 315-16 (1979). This Court has 
consistently recognized that the reasonable doubt standard is a 
bedrock element of due process and "plays a vital role in the 
American scheme of criminal procedure." Winship, 397 U.S. at 
364. The Court has also emphasized that, "(ijn the 
administration of justice, courts must carefully guard against 
dilution of the principle that guilt is to be established by 
probative evidence and beyond a reasonable doubt." Estelle v. 
Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 503 (1976). 

As this Court has explained, the concept of reasonable doubt 
means that the trier of fact must be convinced of the defendant’s 
guilt “with utmost certainty.” In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364 
(1970). Similarly, the Court has held that to convict, jurors 
must reach "a state of near certitude." Jackson v. Virginia, 443 
U.S. 307, 315 (1979); gee also Lanigan vy. Maloney, #53 F.2d 40, 
47 (1st Cir. 1988) (concept of proof beyond a reasonable doubt 
must “convey the critical point that, while absolute certainty is 


7. Sec. 106 (b)(3)(A), (B) and (C); see also Nutter v. 
White, 39 F.3d 1154, 1158 (11th Cir. 1994). 


12 


unnecessary, & belief in guilt at least approaching absolute 
certainty was required") (emphasis in original). The "utmost 
certainty” referred to in Winship refers to the highest level of 
certainty attainable in the domain of human affairs, involving 
factual questions depending on empirica] evidence, i.e., the 
level of certainty a notch shy of the absolute certainty 
available only in the domains of physics or mathematics. 
Petitioner has maintained his innocence of the crime in this 
case, he waived his right to silence and testified to his 
innocence, and he continues to state, unequivocally, that he is 
innocent. Objectively, there is a very real and substantial 
probability that he is innocent and that his conviction resulted 
from an antiquated autopsy and crime scene investigation system 
in Georgia, gee sub-section A, infra, and an unconstitutional, 
and equally antiquated, jury instruction and voir dire which 
equated the absence of reasonable doubt with "moral certainty” 
and allowed the jurors to accept the state’s theory without 
"utmost certainty” of guilt. See sub-section C, infra; Cage v. 
Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39 (1990). This Court (and the lower court) 
has held that such jury instructions constitute structural (and 
to be retroactively corrected) constitutional error. Sullivan vy. 
Louisiana, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993); Nutter v. White, 39 F.3d 1154 
(1ith Cir. 1994). See sub-section B, infra. Because of this 
violation, and because this claim was not previously available to 
Petitioner, see sub-section C, inixrs, the Petitioner should have 


12 


‘* 


been allowed to file # habezs corpus pciitio., in the district 


"Time of death was a critical issue at triel."* It was 
critical because if death occurred after November 25, 1981, 
Petitioner was innocent. “His alibi (thereafter) was a good one- 
-the police had him under surveillance ...." Felker v. thomas, 
S52 F.3d 907, 909-910 (l1ith Cir. 1995). If the victim was killed 
after November 25, 1981, someone else killed her.’ 

The victim’s body was found on December 8, 1981. If she had 
been dead less than thirteen days, then Petitioner did not kill 
her. 

An autopsy was performed by Warren Tillman. He was an agent 
with the Georgia state crime lab. He was not a medical doctor. 
He told his colleagues--law enforcement authorities--that the 


victim had been dead for three days, or from eight to ten days 


8. Brief on behalf of the Appellee By the Attorney General, 
filed in the Georgia Supreme Court on direct appeal, at p. 132. 


©. While there was other circumstantial evidence of 
Petitioner’s guilt, he would not have been convicted if the tine 


of death was after the police surveillance began. 
13 


after Petitioner was placed under surveillance.*° This meant 
that Petitioner was innocent. 
After further discussions with his associates, "Tillman | 
advised investigators that the victim could have been dead for | 
two weeks prior to the discovery of her body, [and) a search 
warrant was issued for the search of appellant’s automobile." 
Pelker y. State, 314 S.E.2d at 639.** 
Thus, Tillman told his associates that the victiz had been 
dead for three days, which made Petitioner innocent. Tillman 
later told his associates the victim could have bee. dead long 
enough for Petitioner to have killed her. 
Worse, Tillman was allowed to tell the jurors--as an expert- 
“that the time of death could have been up to two weeks before 
the victim’s body was discovered. Tillman’s testimony was the 
sole evidence: that the murder occurred at a time when Petitioner 


10. Sworn statements submitted for the of obtaining 
search warrants on December 9, 1981, recited that “the affiant 
has learned from medical examination, that she died approximately 
three (3) days prior to her discovery." See Exhibits 1 and 2, 
December 21-22, 1982, hearings. The affiant testified pre-trial 
that Tillman "stated [after the autopsy) that he felt like she 
had been dead about three days." Ig. at 24; see also ig. 
("Based on what Mr. Tillman had told us about the possibility of 
her being dead three days prior to her being discovered ...."). 


11. This search warrant was obtained on December 23, 1981, 
but it, unlike the December 9, 1981, warrants, contained po time 
of death. Nevertheless, officer Sullivan testified that the 
December 23, 1981, warrant was obtained because “we had heard 
from Dr. Tillman that, through a little bit further 
investigation, that it was possible that she had been dead in 
the, or had been dead from the time she had come up missing or 
possibly for two weeks." December 21-22, 1982, hearings, p. 29. 
Again, Tillman was not « medical doctor. 


14 


could have been guilty, i.e., before !\iitioner’s police 
supported alipi.*? 

No _ physician who has reviewed the evidevce in this case 
agrees with Tillman. Indeed, one of the world’s leading experts 
on cause and time of death, Dr. Werner Spitz, a physician whose 
authoritative text was referred to throughout trial,» has 
concluded that the time of death was long after Petitioner was 
placed under police surveillance. See Appendix 3.*4 

Having non-physicians conduct autopsies and testify with 
respect to cause and time of death has caused great controversy 


in Georgia and has led to reform. See Appendix 5.75 Even more 


12. Furthermore, the only forensic evidence that the victis 
was bound and hence tortured came from Tillman’s testimony. 
Petitioner’s physicians disagree with this testimony and from the 
a — say that the victim was raped or sodomized. See 
Append x >. 


13. Dr. Werner Spitz is the editor of the principal 
textbook of forensic pathology, Medicolegel Investigation of 
Death, third edition, Charles C. Thomas, publisher, Springfield, 
Tllinois, 1993. An earlier edition of this text was referred to 
by counsel at trial repeatedly. See, @.9., R. 361, 383-86, 392- 
93, 404, 410-11, 450-53, 1003-04. 


14. Jonathan Arden, M.D., an medical examiner, 
agrees that the death occurred after Petitioner had an alibi, and 
disagrees with Tillman’s testimony that the victim was raped, 
bound, and tortured. Appendix 4. 


1S. Se@ Appendix 5: “Getting With Murder," The Atlanta 
Constitution, June 4, 1989 (*’ ia the only state in the 
country and the only jurisdiction the western vorld that 
allows non-physicians to do autopsies.’"); “Critics advocate 
Geath of Georgia Coroner System." The Atlanta Constitution, 
August 15, 1988, Al ("The coroner in this state should 
have gone out with the horse and buggy.’"); “Experts Urge 
lawmakers to Coroner’s System," The Atlanta Constitution, 
September 14, 1989, Cl ("Besides an autopsy, death scene 
investigations--and standards for conducting them--need to be 
adopted in Georgia, the experts told legislators ...."). 


a5 


controversial is the policy of allowing non-physicians from the 
state crime lab to conduct autopsies and testify for the state in 
. criminal prosecutions,**® as occurred in Petitioner’s case. 

The peril of having non-physician, state advocates testify 
to critical issues with respect to time and manner of death is 
most acute in a capital context where the tolerated margin of 
error with respect to fact-findings is lowest. The peril in 
Petitioner’s case turned into actual harm--Tillman was wrong, the 
jury relied upon him,*” and no other person in the country 


would be sentenced to death on the basis of such testimony. 


16. The freedom of forensic 
pathologists to present their 
findings in court -- whether in 
favor of the defense or the 
prosecution -- is at the heart of 
the debate over a bill that would 
change Georgia’s system of death 
investigation.... Georgia remains 
the only state in the nation that 
allows non-physicians to perform 
autopsies. “** National model 
standards for medical examiners 
indicate that, ideally, those who 
perform autopsies should be free 
from any political pressure. 


App. 5, "Question of control dominates bill to upgrade coroners 
," The Atlanta Constitution, September 12, 1990, E3. 
Problems of non-independence and bias arise when the witness 


about cause and time of death is a Georgia Bureau of 
Investigation employee. jg. 


17. At trial, Petitioner presented medical testimony that 
the time of death made it impossible for him to be guilty. The 
jury verdict credited Tillman. 


16 


the utmost certainty and to a "near certitude” that the victiz 


was killed before Petitioner was placed under surveillance The 


jury instructions, and the jurors’ voir dire Pledges to follow 


them, allowed conviction based upon less than utmost certainty 


The jurors were instructed as follows: 


In a criminal case ... the State must prove each of its 


contentions beyond a 
y reasonable doubt and to mora) 


The state, however, is not r i 
’ ’ ired t 
oy 3 wy @ll doubt. Moral and Foascnabis sastaisty 
can be expected in a legal investigation. 


A reasonable doubt is Gefined as a doubt which is 


based on the evidence, a lack conf 
9 of evidence 
in the evidence. It is doubt that is reasonably esti 


R. 1102-03. 


The jurors who served were Girectly asked Guring voir dire 
if they would apply the standard of reasonable doubt embodied in 
the single phrase: “Moral and reasonable certainty is all that 


can be expected in « legal investigation.” 
do so. 38 


The jurors agreed to 


18. Ten of the jurors selected to de 
ne were, during voir dire, expressly gg ony ll 
°PP my ~~ ae definition of proof beyond a reasonab @ doubt 
above. See R. 215, 1610 (juror Mill 
1611 (Mayo); R. 313-14, 1612 (Sirmon);: 35 (my ~ ry 
R. 586-87, 1614 (Brady); R. 629, 1610 (Geifeiicnn te 3 
, ; . ’ 14 (Gri ; e 
(Daffron); R. 973, 1618 (Boltz); R. shes. Saab queues _ 


(continued...) 
17 


Equating proof beyond a reasonable doubt with proof "to a 
moral certainty” is unconstitutiona) because mora) certainty can 
be established with less proof than can proof beyond a reasonable 
doubt. The trial court in Petitioner’s case equated moral 
certainty with the absence of reasonable doubt. In Cage y. 
Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39 (1990), this Court found instructions very 
Similar to those given in Petitioner’s case to be 
constitutionally invalid. The Court held that the Louisiana 
state trial court had violated the due process principles 
established In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358 (1970), when it defined 
reasonable doubt as “such doubt as would give rise to a grave 
uncertainty,” "an actual substantial doubt," and requiring "not 
an absolute or mathematical certainty, but a mora) certainty.” 
Sage, 498 U.S. at 40 (quoting State v. Cage, 554 So.24 39, 41 
(La. 1989)). The cage court noted that its previous decisions 
had repeatedly emphasized the constitutional] underpinnings of the 
beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard in criminal trials. 

The reasonable doubt instruction condemned by the Court in 
Gage is in all material respects identical to the charge given in 
Petitioner’s case. The voir dire and the jury instructions 
clearly expressed the notion, condemned by the Supreme Court in 
Cage, that the beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard is “synonymous” 


18. (...continued) 
1069, 1619 (Johnson). The other two jurors that they 
would convict if they vere "satisfied in (their) heart and 
conscience of the defendant’s guilt.” R. 25, 1609 (Hill); R. 189- 
90, 1610 (Yawn). Juror Yawn agreed not to "regquire[{ the state) 
to prove his guilt beyond all doubt, aust to a reasonable and 
moral certainty." R. 190 (emphasis added). 


18 


with “proof to « wore) certainty,” thar any doubt: muet be more 
weighty than "vague," and thet moral Certainty is “all that can 
be expected" or required.19 Given the Supposed circumstances 
of this case-~-abduction, rape, sodomy, torture and a history of 
Sexual deviancy--juror morals could easily, but 
unconstitutionally, have entered into the reasonable doubt 


equation. ?° 


19. The phrase "mora! certainty" in contemporary parlance 
means a level of certainty distinctly below that required by 
Proof beyond a reasonable Goubt. See , 114 

-Ct 1239, 1247 (1994). To the extent that "moral certainty” is 
currently understood as denoting only the probability or even a 
strong probability of a fact, it is inconsistent with the 
requirement of “utmost certainty” enunciated in Winship, and 
instead conveys a meaning far more consistent with the legal 
concept of "preponderance of the evidence," or at most "clear and 
convincing evidence. * 


facts, on emotion rather than on evidence. , 
963 F.2d 499 (24 Cir. 1992) ("the concern is that the use of the 
words [moral certainty) might lead a jury to reach a verdict 
based on feelings rather than on the facts of the case"). This 
occurs because the phrase "moral certainty” has acquired an 
additional meani » @part from the nere “probability” definition 
noted above. A cluster of current dictionary definitions define 
"moral certainty" as a strong personal belief in a particular 


the absence of or regardless of objective 
(1986) defines “nora) Certainty” as 


conviction"; and “virtual rather than ectual, 
or completely demonstrable.* Zid. at 1468, col. 3; see 


1173, col. 2 ( 1993) (defining moral certa nty as "[(b)ased 
on @ firm conviction, rather than upon the actual evidence: a 
) (emphasis added) ; ° 
769, col. 1 (1984, 1988) (moral certainty def as 
ae on strong likelihood of conviction rather than on solid 
evidence"). 


(continued...) 
19 


Su Kade is to Be Retroact ively Applied 
The Cac¢ holding is, ineluctably, retroactive. The State 
agrees. In Sullivan v. Louisiana, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993), the 
Court, applying Cage, noted that reasonable doubt instructional 
error is a *’structural defect() in the constitution of the trial 
mechanism’" because the jury guarantee that it violates is a 
*‘basic protectio(n)’ whose precise effects are immeasurable, but 
without which a criminal trial cannot reliably serve its 
function." Jd, at 2082-83 (quoting Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 
U.S. 279, 310 (1991)). The Sullivan Court concluded: 
The right to jury tria) reflects, as we have 
said, "a profound judgment about the way in 
which law should be enforced and justice 
administered.* » 391 U.S. 
(145), 155. The Geprivation of that right, 
with consequences that are necessarily 
unquantifiable and indeterninate, 
unquestionably qualifies as "structural 
413 S.Ct. at 2082. 
Petitioner has Challenged the constitutionality of the jury 
instructions given at the guilt or innocence phase of his trial, 


relying on the Court’s unanimous per Suriam opinion in Cage. 


In light of this additional meaning of the phrase "moral 
certainty," the damaging potential of the defective reasonable 


have a jury rtially determine whether the state had met its 
burden beyond a reasonable doubt. 
20 


4 


Because Petitioner’s direct appeal was final before the Court 
announced Cage, however, a federal habeas court may entertain the 
Claim only if the Cage holding does not constitute a "nev rule" 
or if the holding “alter(s) our understanding of the bedrock 
procedural elements essential to the fairness of a proceeding.” 
Sawyer v, Smith, 497 U.s. 227, 242 (1990); see also Teame v, 
Lane, 489 U.s. 288 (1989); the Act, Sec. 106(b) (2) (A). 
Clearly (1) Cage did not announce a “new rule" of criminal 
procedure, or (2) if new, the rule in Cage falls within the 
"fundamental fairness" exception to the nonretroactivity 
Principle of Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989). 

R. This Claim Was Not Previously Available 

Gage was decided after Petitioner was denied relief in the 
state habeas corpus court in 1990. Petitioner filed a federal 
petition on April 28, 1993, and it was placed on the district 
court’s civil docket on June 2, 1993. Sullivan was decided June 
2, 1993. Petitioner thus made a prima facie showing that the 
retroactive application of Cage to Applicant’s case was not 
available before the filing of this application. 

Iii. 


PETITIONER IS ENTITLED To HABEAS CORPUS 
RELIEF ON HIS CLAIM THAT THE PROCESS THROUGH 


Under the Act, a clain that a person is innocent and that 
their execution would violate the Eighth and Fourteenth 


Amendments, see Herrera v. Collins, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993), cannot 


21 


be heard at all. A claim that a person’s constitutional rights 
were violated at trial in a manner that will constitute a newly 
announced, yet bedrock and retroactive, rule (the second Jeaque 
exception) cannot be heard. Petitioner presents both of these 
habeas corpus claims here, because there is no other forun. 

A. Petitioner is Innocent of murder 

Petitioner presented testimony at trial from an expert 
Physician that the time of death was three to five days before 
the victim’s body was discovered, making it impossible for 
Petitioner to be guilty. The State attacked this physician 
because he had been paid to testify, and because he had 
supposedly made a mistake in the past. The jury obviously chose 
to believe the State’s non-physician, agent, and revised, 
"expert" opinion. 

Tillman’s opinion ought not to provide the sole basis for 
executing Petitioner. Tillman’s opinion is not reliable. 
Petitioner has presented all of the forensic evidence regarding 
the victim to two highly qualified Physicians, both of whom 
disagree with Tillman’s revised "opinion" regarding time of 
death. 

a. Dr. Spits 

Dr. Spitz is the nationally recognized expert on forensic 
pathology. He has reviewed the materials relevant to a 
determination of time of death and has concluded that death 
occurred when Petitioner could not have been responsible: 


ZT am a licensed physician, specializing in 
forensic pathology. I received an M.D. degree from The 


22 


Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical School, in 
Jerusalem, Israel, in 19523. I completed an internship 
and residency in forensic pathology at Hadassah Medica] 


forensic Pathology at the University of Maryland froz 
1959-1961. I have held numerous faculty, hospital, and 


Pathology, and I am a member of a number of 
professional societies in medicine and the forensic 
sciencee. I am the editor of the principal textbook of 
forensic pathology, Medicolegal Investigation of Death, 
third edition, Charles c. Thomas, publisher, 
Springfield, Illinois, 1993. The copy of ny 
curriculum vita which is attached as Appendix A details 
my professional experience and background. 


At the request of counse) for Mr. Ellis Wayne 
Felker, I have reviewed background materials relevant 
to the death of Joy Ludlun. These include the report 
of the autopsy of Joy Ludlum, the testimony of Warren 
Tillman, prosector, the testimony of Dr. James 
Whitaker, pathologist, the testimony of Dr. Joseph 
Burton, defense pathologist, Dr. Larry Howard, Crime 
Lab Director, and Steven Hartman, geologist, 
photographs of the scene where the body was discovered 
and photographs of the autopsy, and local 
Climatological data provided by the vU.s. Department of 
Commerce. 


Based upon this information and my experience of 
forty-three years in the field of forensic pathology, 


certainty that the death of Joy Ludlum was properly 
estimated by Warren Tillman, who performed her autopsy, 
as having occurred 3-5 days prior to the morning of 
December 8, 1981, when her fully dressed body was 
recovered in Scuffle Creek. 


The minimal decomposition of the body, as 
described in the autopsy report and as evident in the 
photographs, in consideration of the prevailing 
Climatic conditions and the temperature of the water in 
the creek at that time of year are consistent with this 
estimate. 


I have testified as an expert witness in the field 


ef forensic pathology in state and federal courts 
throughout the United States on many occasions. To ny 


23 


at sshusitian te ert . 


Appendix 3 (emphasis added). 


b. Dr. Arden 


Dr. Arden, an expert medical examiner, agrees with Dr. 


Spitz: 


I an currently the acting First Deputy Chier 
Medical Examiner for the City of New York and have held 
that position since 1991. 1 graduated from the 
University of Michigan Medical School] in 1980 with an 
M.D. Following that, r completed a residency in 
anatomic pathology at New York University Medica] 
Center, from 1980 to 1983. fr participated in a 
forensic pathology fellowship at the Office of the 
Chief Medical Examiner, State of Maryland from 1983 to 
1984. I was board certified by the American Board of 
Pathology, Anatomical and Forensic Pathology, in 1985 
and am licensed to practice medicine in New York and 
Delaware. TI have been a practicing medical examiner 
for twelve years, practicing exclusively as a forensic 


Pathologist. 


I was recently asked by an attorney for Wayne 
Felker to review files and records in the above 
Captioned case. I reviewed the following files: 


1. Autopsy Report on Joy Ludlum; 
2. Testimony of Warren Tillman; 

3. Testimony of Dr. James Whitaker; 

4. Testimony of Dr. Larry Howard; 

S. Testimony of Dr. Joseph Burton; 

6. Testimony of stephen Hartman; 

7. Rebuttal testimony of Dr. James Whitaker; 

8. Autopsy and crime scene Photographs of the body. 


I was asked -, Rng attorney to review these files 
to determine the t of death of the victim. Based 
upon my review of these records, 


reasonable degree of medica) and scientific certainly 
at the tine the bey age sensomny maces $0 five dave 


consistent with the initial findings of Warren Tillman, 
the autopsist for the state. It is also consistent 
with the findings and trial testimony of Joe Burton, 
M.D. 


24 


The figure of three to five days is based upon my 
independent review of the above listed records and 
photographs ang wy extensive experience in the field of 
forensic pathology. aA number of factors recorded in 
the autopsy report and photographs support this 
finding. 


The photographs indicate that the body is in a 
very good state of preservation. The body is intact, 
not significantly marbled, with good features, no 
protrusion of the eyes, no Garkened face, good texture 
of skin, and a general lack of other post-morten 
changes. The Photographs and autopsy report do not 
Support a description of this body as decomposed. 
Initially I would note the absence in the autopsy 
report of any mention of rigor mortis. One of the 
critical observations that Should be made both at the 
time the body is @iscovered and at the time of the 
autopsy is the degree of rigor mortis or lack of rigor 
mortis. Rigor mortis is one of the cardinal 
Gescriptors of the time of Geath, and the best time to 
get that information is fron the scene. This is 
information that should always be recorded in an 
autopsy, yet the autopsy in Mr. Felker’s case fails to 
mention anything about rigor mortis. The photographs 
of the body from the scene do indicate the presence of 
rigor mortis, both fron the position of the arms and 
the legs and from the general position of the body. 
For example, State’s Exhibit 10 shows legs bent 
Slightly at the knees with the knees pointing upward 
and slightly out at an angle, clearly suggesting the 
presence of rigor mortis. If rigor were not present, 
the forces of gravity would cause the knees to spread 
apart and fall toward the ground, and/or the legs would 
straighten at the knees. 


Under average conditions and with an average 
person, detectable rigor mortis is generally seen in a 
body within two to three hours, and after five to six 
hours there is strong evidence of rigor that is 
noticeable in most parts of the body and takes pressure 
to overcome. By twelve hours, rigor mortis ew 
reaches its maximum level. The period of t 
necessary for rigor to dissipate is roughly equal to 
the time of onset, if the body is not disturbed. In 
average conditions, the duration of rigor mortis would 
be between twenty-four to thirty-six hours, with a high 
estimate of forty-eight hours. 


The victim was of average size. The submersion in 
cool water would slow down the onset and dissipation of 
rigor mortis. Testimony indicates that the average 


25 


temperature of the water was fifty to fifty-seven 
degrees, some fifteen to twenty degrees below the og Ry. 
average temperature upon which the above calculations 


urveen days may have been the result of 
the body’s exposure te the air fui twenty-four bours. 


rely. The equation of one day in air als two days condi 

in water that was in the testimony is a valid equation, seek nod depicted in the pasise deen tos gthe autopsy 
and is relevant to both the process of rigor mortis as finding that the victim had been dead for many days and 
well as other post-morten changes. The fact that this there is no medical o1 Scientific basis for the finding 
victim still showed Signs of rigor mortis at the scene that the victim had been dead for fourteen Gays prior 
supports the finding that She was dead three to five to the discovery of the body. The lack of disturbance 
days, and is patently inconsistent with a finding that by aquatic life is noteworthy. Testimony indicates 


she was dead fourteen days. that turtles, fish and other aquatic life were present 


in the stream where the body was found. It is 


The Photographs and records also do not indicate a common to have some evidence of tnimal activity on 
great degree of skin Slippage. The skin is Slightly bodies that have been submerged, Particularly in a body 
wrinkled, with some evidence of slippage, but a body that had been submerged for two weeks. 


that has been submerged in water for two weeks would 
show a much Greater degree of skin Slippage. The autopsy in this case Was poorly done. 
Tillman had insufficient qualifications to be 


The autopsy report indicates that the body was in performing autopsies, particularly forensic autopsies. 


the earliest stages of decomposition. The condition of Was Surprised to read that a rson with no medica) 
the victim’s body is consistent with a body that had ieee was ——- <X eutepeies’ in 1982, and that there 
been in average temperature and Conditions for one to were states where this was permissible. In my 
two and one half Gays. For example, the report does experience, I have never heard of non~-physicians 
not describe the Organs as soft and Pulpy, a condition performing autopsies. To qualify as a pathologist, a 
that occurs as a body decomposes. person must first complete medical school. Then - 
ee year minimum residency in thol where a 
Additionally, there was no evidence of the purging ne is supervised and seviinend - a qualities 
of fluid from the nose and the mouth. This is a pathologist is required. To become properly trained in 
condition that occurs within a few days after death in forensic pathology, an additional one year residency in 
a body that is not submerged. As noted above, it is forensics is essential. 
accurate that a that has been in water since death “ 
Will be Slightly better preserved than a body that is 
not submerged. Taking the fact of Submersion of the The first omission in the examination of this body 
body into account would Provide a time of death of two was the failure of either the eutopsist or anyone fron 
to five days. his staff to attend the scene and make initia 
observations of the body. In fact, no observations 
The green marbling Gescribed in the autopsy report concerning the condition of the body were made by 
is consistent with a body that had been dead for no anyone from the autopsist’s starr until) the autopsy was 
longer than three to five Gays. The aut report performed twenty-four hours after the was 
describes marbling primarily around the anterior chest Giscovered. It is routine and necessary in this field 
and abdomen. aA body that had been dead for fourteen for either the medical examiner or a trained 
days would likely show such more extensive signs of investigator to visit the scene where the body was 
marbling throughout the body. This extent of marbling discovered and to make preliminary observations about 
was not indicated in either the autopsy report nor the the condition of the - These observations include 
Photographs. the ef rigor mortis in the , any evidence of 
lividity, the texture of the skin, and other evidence 
The autopsy was not conducted unti) twenty four of post mortes deterioration. If an investigator from 
hours after the y was removed from the water. the medical examiner’s office attends the scene rather 
® body is removed from water, the ition process than the medical examiner, he or she should be both 
begins v quickly. Many of the signs reported the forensically and medically trained. The autopsist in 
autopsist to Support his conclusion that the victim had Mr. Felker’s case did not have sufficient 
26 27 


qalifications to be designated as Pathologist 
investigator, much less as the Primary autopsist. 


Second, the autopsist failed to take sections of 
the victin’s body that should have been taken. 


sodomized. These Sections could have shown the extent 
of the alleged bruising, whether the bruising was 
internal and the age of the bruising. The 
pathologist’s testimony about the dilatation being 
indicative of an object being inserted in the anus 
after death is mere conjecture and is not s 


either the anus or the vagina, contrary to the 
testimony presented at trial. 


The exhumation in this case provided no further 
information of value. The autopsist had failed to make 
the appropriate observations at the autopsy, so had 
insufficient evidence to Support the time of death of 
fourteen days. After burial, the decision was made to 
exhume the body. The persons handling this procedure 
were unqualified to do so. When the body was exhumed, 
& local Pathologist was brought in to observe, while a 
biochemist did the work. There is no indication that 
the pathologist participated in the autopsy other than 
by his mere presence. Records indicate that this was 
the only participation in the autopsy and related 
procedures by anyone with any medical experience. No 


of genital bruising, or the degree of injury prior to 
ne oes critical issues in the prosecution of mr. 
Felker. 


The Photographs and records do not support the 
conclusion that there were circumferential] contusions 
#round the vagina and anus indicative of an object 
being entered into the orifices with force. There is 
no evidence of bruising to the vagina or anus. As 
noted in the autopsy report, swabs of the vagina and 
anus revealed no evidence of semen. Based upon al) 


*)" ’ *)¢ .* “a i 


‘\* a 
i ‘? <b “| 


The conclusions concerning the bruising around the 
wrist and ankle area are supported neither by the 
Photographs nor by the autopsy. Photographs of the 


26 


extremities show no evidence of binding. The Photos 
show only one bruise on the left wrist and one bruise 
on the ankle. Both of these bruises are oval, non- 
descript bruises, more consistent with a blow to the 
body than with binding of the extremities. State’s 
Exhibit 47, a Photograph of the bruise on the wrist, 
shows no indication that this bruise extended around 
the wrist as would be expected if the wrist had been 
bound. The bruise has no pattern, no linearity, is not 


wrist, all of which is contrary to what is generally 
seen with a bruise resulting from binding. There are 


Exhibit 12, a Photograph of the body at the scene, 
indicates that the bruise did not extend to the back of 
the wrist. With a ligature on the wrist, generally 


evidenced on the bone extending to the thumb. sut 
photographs show no evidence of any bruising on this 
bone, nor is any bruising on this bone reported in the 
autopsy report. In Summary, there is no feature that 
is specific or diagnostic to Support the finding that 


The bruise on the ankle is similar to the bruise 
on the wrist. Again, there is no evidence of 
ligature nor any other factors which would suggest 
binding. State’s Exhibit 48, a photograph of the 
bruise on the ankle, shows an oval bruise that does not 
extend around the ankle. This bruise ‘- more 
consistent with a blow to the ankle, the ankle making 
contact with an object as a result of a kick, or the 
result of @ struggle than vith a ligature around the 
ankle. Again, there is no specific or diagnostic 
feature that would support a finding that this bruise 
on the ankle was a result of binding. Both the bruise 
on the ankle and the bruise on the mane A enh a 
over-interpreted in the testimony, resulting in 
findings that are not supported by the scientific and 


Conclusion 
Based my review of the @utopsy notes and all 
other files Tieton above, 


a ‘ <=" 


“? 


Appendix 4 (emphasis added) . r 

Under these circumstances, Petitioner is innocent of murder 
and his execution would violate the Eighth and Fourteenth 
Amendments. The state has no process for assessing this clain, 
and the circuit court would not hear it. 


Capital proceedings must be accompanied by all the 
*#ccoutrements of due process “befit(ting) a decision affecting 
the life or death of a human being.” Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.s. 
399, 411 (1986). It is axiomatic that procedures surrounding the 
judicial finding of facts which will result in a person living or 
Gying must "aspire to a heightened standard of reliability." 3g 
at 411; see also Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.s. 104, 117-18 (1982) 
("(Tjhis Court has gone to extraordinary measures to ensure that 
the prisoner sentenced to be executed is afforded process that 
will guarantee, as such as is humanly possible, that the sentence 
was not imposed out of whim, passion, prejudice, or mistake.") 
(O’Connor, J., concurring). "That need is greater still because 
the ultimate decision (in Petitioner’s case) will turn on the 
finding of a single fact, not on a range of equitable 
considerations." Forg, 477 U.s. at 412, 

The sole, determinative, issue in Petitioner’s case was the 
time of the victim’s death. The only evidence that the death 


30 


occurred when Pevitionex could have caused it was the "expert" 
testimony of a non-physician employed by the prosecution arn of 
the State of Georgia. All physician testimony on the time of 
Geath makes the Petitioner innocent. The process employed by the 
State of Georgia for determining whether the Petitioner was 
guilty was seriously flawed, and the state has no legitimate 
interest in such a flawed process. Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68, 
80 (1985) ("[t)he State’s interest in prevailing at trial ... is 
necessarily tempered by its interest in the fair and accurate 
adjudication of criminal cases"). 

The process employed to determine that Petitioner was guilty 
and deserved the death penalty violated the Petitioner’s right to 
Gue process of law and to be free from cruel and unusual 
punishment, guaranteed by both the United States and the Georgia 
Constitutions. The State of Georgia is the only jurisdiction in 
the western world which would allow a conviction based upon the 
testimony provided by the state’s expert in this case. Plainly 
Georgia is out of step, is wrong, and is poised to execute a 
person whose guilt was unfairly and wrongly determined. See 


Herrera vy. Collins, 113 S. ct. 853 (1993) (majority of court 


accepts that it would violate the constitution to execute an 


innocent person) ; Griffin v. Delo, 33 F.3d 895, 908 (8th Cir. 
1994) (Supreme Court in Herrera declared “that in a capital case a 
truly persuasive demonstration of ‘actual innocence’ made after 
trial would render the execution of a defendant unconstitutional, 


31 


and warrant federal habeas relief if there were no state avenue 


open to process such a clain."). 


CONCLUSION 
Petitioner respectfully requests that the Court enter an 


order staying his execution and granting the relief requested. 


32 


Respectfully submitted, 


M. ELIZABETH WELLS 
Georgia Bar No. 747852 
STEPHEN C. BAYLISS 
Georgia Bar No. 043348 
Georgia Resource Center 
101 Marietta Street 
Suite 3310 

Atlanta, Georgia 30303 


Exhibit 


"“A® 


No. 95- 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
October Term, 1995 


In re Ellis WAYNE FELKER 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO PROCEED 
IN FORMA PAUPERIS 


Petitioner, ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, by and through his undersigned 
counsel, asks leave to file the attached Petition for Writ of 
Habeas Corpus, For Appellate or Certiorari Review of the Decision 
of the United States Circuit Court For the Eleventh Circuit, and 

‘For Stay Of Execution, and to proceed in forma pauperis, pursuant 
to Rule 39 of the Rules of this Court. 
Petitioner's Affidavit in support of this motion is attached 


hereto as "Exhibit A." 


Respectfully Submitted, 


Georgia Bar # 747852 

Georgia Resource Center 

101 Marietta Tower, Suite 3310 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303 

(404) 614-2014 


No. 95- 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


October Term, 1995 


In re Ellis WAYNE FELKER 


AFFIDAVIT OF POVERTY 


I, ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, declare that I am the Petitioner in 
the above-entitled case; that in support of my motion to proceed 
without being required to prepay fees, costs, or give security 
therefor, I state that because of my poverty I am unable to pay 
the costs of said proceedings or to give security therefor, and 
that I believe that I am entitled to relief. 


1. Are you employed? Yes No Vw 


a. If the answer is "yes," state the amount of your 
salary or wages per month, and give the name and 
address of your employer. 


b. If the answer is "no," state the date of last ex- 
ployment, 


e ne. er received. 


2. 


Have you received within the last twelve months any money 
from the following sources? 


Business, profession or form of self-employment? 


Yes Nos 


Rent payments, interest, or dividends? Yes No «— 
Pensions, annuities, or life insurance 


ena nov 8 


if the answer to any of the above is "yes," describe each 
source of income and state the amount received from each 
during the past twelve months. 


Do you own any cash, or do you have any money in any 
checking or savings account? 


Yes No (Include any funds in prison account) 
If the answer is "Yes," state the total value of the items 
owned. 


Do you own any real estate, stocks, bonds, notes, auto- 
mobiles, or other valuable property (excluding ordinary 
household furnishings and clothings) ? 


Yes No (— 


If the answer is "Yes," describe the property and state its 
approximate value. 


List the persons who are dependent upon you for support, 
state your relationship to those persons, and cate 
how much you contribute to their support. 


I understand that a false statement or answer to any question in 


this Affidavit will subject me to penalties for perjury. 


LPs hey wt Polbek 


Sworn to subscribed before me, 
this theo/?”~day of April, 1996. 


otary 


7 KAN 


My Commission expires: 


Public. Clayton County. Gecrpe 
‘vay Comentaaion Expires Jan. 17, 1888. 


payments? Yes No — 
Gifts or inheritances? Yes__ No wo 
Any other sources? Yes No 


ChR's LFICATE 


I hereby certify that Petitioner, ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, EP- 


155370, has the sum of 7s on account to his credit at the 
Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Center where he is confined. 
I further certify that Petitioner likewise has the following 
securities to his credit according to the records of said Georgia 


Diagnostic and Classification Center. 


£ aes Pl f 


re 


Authorized Officer Institution 


7 pee es C6 OS Ye YY ee "7" 623 2.tabeae wwe 
is 
. 
ane 
No. 95- ” 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


mvve 


[ PUBLISH) 
October Term, 1995 IN THE UNITED STATFS COUxs OF APPEALS 
r -- ' 
. FILED ‘ 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT US. COURT OF APPEALS 
. CIRCUIT ! 
ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, No. 96°1077 : : 
Petitioner, WA = 2 SS | 
ey MIGUEL J. CORTEZ 
TONY TURPIN, Warden, LKER GENK j 
Georgia Diagnostic and SLLIS WAYNE FS , 
Classification Center, Petitioner, 
Respondent. versus 
TONY TURPIN, Warden, 
Georgia Diagnostic and 
Classification Center, 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE Respondent 
I hereby certify that I have served a co f th On lication for Leave to File 
| Py of the foregoing Gounickes Habeas Corpus Petition 
Motion For Leave To Proceed In Forma Pauperis upon Respondent by 
hand, addressed as follows: CARNE i 
Before BIRCH, BLACK and S, Circuit Judges. 
Susan V. Boleyn, Esq. 
Assistant Attorney General 
132 State Judicial Building BY THE COURT: 
4 pitol Square. sS.w. 
Atlanta, Georgia 30334 In Felker _v. Thomas, 52 F.3d 907 (lith Cir.), extended on 
? denial of rehearing, 62 F.3d 342 (1995), cert, denied, 116 S. Ct. 
This the Z day of . 1996. 


956 (1996), we affirmed the denial of habeas corpus relief as to 
the murder, rape, aggravated sodomy, and false imprisonment 


convictions, as well as the death sentence of Ellis Wayne Felker. 


A EY FOR PETITIONER The procedural history, evidence, and facts in the case are 
summarized in our prior opinions and in the Georgia Supreme Court's 


decision affirming his convictions and sentence on direct appeal, 


TOTAL P.@8 


Felker _v. State, 252 Ga. 351, 314 S.E.2d 621, cert. denied, 469 
U.S. 873, 105 S. Ct. 229 (1984). 


On February 20, 1996, the Supreme Court denied Felker's 
petition for writ of certiorari seeking review of our decision 
denying his first federal habeas corpus petition. On April 17, 
1996, the Superior Court of Houston County, Georgia, set May 2 
through May 9, 1996, as the period during which Felker's execution 
would be carried out. On April 29, 1996, Felker filed a petition 
for writ of habeas corpus in the Superior Court of Butts County, 
Georgia. (It was his second state habeas petition: his first had 
been denied in 1990.) The Superior Court denied Felker's second 
state habeas petition on May 1, 1996, and the Georgia Supreme Court 
denied his petition for writ of certiorari at 11:00 a.m. ET, today. 

Felker is now back before us. Yesterday afternoon, he lodged 
with this Court a request for a stay of execution and an 
application, pursuant to § 106 of the newly enacted Antiterroriem 
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 ("the Act"), for permission 
to file a second federal habeas petition in the district court. He 
lodged a corrected application at 9:35 a.m. ET, this morning, and 
his application was formally filed at 11:30 a.m. ET, today. 

Only last month, the Supreme Court emphasized the nonautomatic 
nature of stays of execution in second or successive habeas 
petition cases. Vacating the entry of a stay order by the Eighth 


Circuit in Bowersox v. Williams, 116 S. Ct. 1312 (1996), the Court 
reiterated that: "A stay of execution pending disposition of a 


second or successive federal habeas petition should be granted only 


"7" © Sethe Bowe Re 


when there are substantial grounés upon which ielief might be 
granted." Id. (citation and internal quetation marks omitted). 
The Supreme Court reminded us, in no uncertain terms, that: 
“Cejntry of a stay on a second or third habeas petition is a 
drastic measure, and we have held that it is ‘"particularly 
egregious"' to enter a stay absent substantial grounds for relief." 
Id. (quoting Delo vy. Blair, 509 U.S. 823, 113 S. Ct. 2922 (1993)). 
Neither party in the present case contends that the standard 
applicable to stays of execution in second or successive petition 
cases has been changed by the Act.’ Accordingly, we proceed to 
determine whether Felker has shown substantial grounds upon which 
relief might be granted, thus entitling him to the "drastic 
measure” of a stay of execution in this second petition case. 
Felker requests that we enter a stay of execution “to allow 
full briefing on the many life or death issues created by the Act,” 
which he contends violates the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and 
Fourteenth Amendments, the Supremacy Clause, and the Separation of 
Powers doctrine. Alternatively, he requests a stay "because the 
Applicant has satisfied the provisions of the Act and is entitled 
to a remand." (footnote omitted). We address the second 


alternative first. 


‘Nothing that we say about the Act in this opinion concerns § 
107, which applies special habeas corpus es to capital 
cases arising in those states that qualify under the provisions of 
the newly enacted 28 U.S.C. § 2261. There is no contention, yet, 
that the State of Georgia has shown — or even had an opportunity 
to show — that it qualifies to benefit from the special procedures 
established by § 107 of the Act. Whether it does is a question for 
another day. 


sVee | 


I. FELKER'S CONTENTION THAT HE HAS 
SATISFIED THE PROVISIONS OF THE ACT 
AND IS ENTITLED TO A REMAND 


Section 106 of the Act amends 28 U.S.C. § 2244(b) to read, in 


pertinent part: 


(b) (1) A claim presented in a second or successive 
habeas corpus application under section 2254 that was 
presented in a prior application shall be dismissed. 


(2) <A claim presented in a second or successive 
habeas corpus application under section 2254 that was not 
presented in a prior application shall be dismissed 
unless-- 


(A) the applicant shows that the claim 
relies on a new rule of constitutional law, 
made retroactive to cases on collateral review 
by the Supreme Court, that was previously 
unavailable: or 


(B) (i) the factual predicate for the 
claim could not have been discovered 
previously through the exercise of due 
diligence; and 


(ii) the facts underlying the claim, if 
proven and viewed in light of the evidence as 
a whole, would be sufficient to establish by 
clear and convincing evidence that, but for 
constitutional error, no reasonable factfinder 
would have found the applicant guilty of the 
underlying offense. 


(3) (A) Before a second or successive application 
permitted by this section is filed in the district court, 
the applicant shall move in the appropriate court of 
appeals for an order authorizing the district court to 
consider the application. 


(B) A motion in the court of appeals for an order 
authorizing the district court to consider a second or 
successive application shall be determined by a three- 
judge panel of the court of appeals. 


(C) The court of appeals may authorize the filing 
of a second or successive application only if it 
determines that the application makes a prima facie 
showing that the application satisfies the requirements 
of this subsection. 


-_ —+ © dati “~~ &© 9 SC ALaL ews 


Felker's application seeks an order from this Court 
authorizing the district court to consider a second or successive 
petition containing two claims. The first is a Cage v. Louisiana, 
498 U.S. 39, 111 S. Ct. 328 (1990), claim. Felker does not, and 
could not, contend that this is a claim the factual predicate of 
which “could not have been discovered previously through the 
exercise of diligence,” within the meaning of new § 2244(b) (2) (B), 
because the factual predicate of the claim has been available on 
the record since Felker's trial. 

As for § 2244(b)(2)(A), we have held that the Cage rule is 
retroactively applicable to cases that had completed direct review 
before the Cage decision was announced. Nutter v..White, 39 F.3d 
1154 (llth Cir. 1994). However, we cannot find that Felker's Cage 
claim was “previously unavailable” to him when he filed his first 
habeas petition in 1993, which was long after Cage was decided. 
Felker argues in his application that the Cage claim was not 
available to him until Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 113 S. 
ct. 2078 (1993), made it obvious that the Cagg rule was 
retroactive. Even assuming for present purposes the dubious legal 
premise that Cage was not available to Felker until the Sullivan 
decision was announced, the fact remains that Sullivan was decided 
on June 1, 1993, and Felker's first habeas petition was not 
formally accepted and placed on the docket until June 2, 1993.’ 


"Felker attempted to file his first habeas petition on April 
27, 1981, but he did not pay the filing fee, and the magistrate 
judge denied his motion to proceed in forma pauperis. Not until 
Felker paid the filing fee on June 2, 1981, was the petition placed 


“ves 


And, of course, nothing would have prevented Felker from filing a 
motion to amend his first petition, even if the Sullivan decision 
had been released days or weeks after, instead of just before, the 
petition was filed. No answer was filed to the petition until 
August 6, 1993, and amendments to habeas petitions are freely 
permitted. 

The other claim Felker seeks to litigate in a second or 
successive petition is a claim that “it violates the Eighth and 
Fourteenth Amendments for a non-physician, state agent to provide 
sole evidence upon which a jury relied to determine the critical 
issue of time of death." As we explain on pp. 17 - 19, below, this 
Claim has no basis in the record, which contradicts it. However, 
even assuming for present purposes that there was some factual 
basis for the claim, it is not one which “relies on a new rule of 
constitutional law, made retroactive to cases on collateral review 
by the Supreme Court, that was previously unavailable” as required 
by newly amended § 2244(b) (2) (A). Not only is there no new 
decision announcing a rule of law that has been made retroactively 
applicable, Felker does not cite any decisional law whatsoever in 
support of his proposition. 

As for § 2244(b)(2)(B), Felker does not contend that the 
factual predicate for this claim could not have been discovered 
previously through the exercise of due diligence. The factual 
predicate, to the extent any exists, is apparent on the face of the 


on the civil docket. On June 9, 1981, the district court judge 
entered an order granting Felker's motion to proceed in forma 
pauperis and for appointed counsel. 


~~ St tee bere eke 


trial record. The qualifications or lack of qualifications of 
Medical Examiner Warren Tillman were brought out on direct and 
cross-examination at the trial. There is no contention that 
Tillman did not testify truthfully concerning his background and 
qualifications. Moreover, as we explain on pp. 17 - 19, below, the 
facts underlying this claim if proven and viewed in light of the 
evidence as a whole, would not be sufficient to establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence, much less by clear and convincing 
evidence, that but for the alleged constitutional error, no 
reasonable factfinder would have found the applicant guilty of the 
underlying offense. Accordingly, under the new Act, Felker is not 
entitled to an order from this Court authorizing him to file a 


second or successive petition raising this clain. 


II. FELKER'S CONTENTION THAT THE ACT IS 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL 


Felker also contends that the Act violates his rights under 
the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments, as well 
as the Supremacy Clause and the Separation of Powers doctrine. His 
application provides very little discussion and cites no 
authorities for that proposition. However, given the time 
constraints facing us, we choose to analyze this claim not in the 
abstract, but instead in terms of whether the Act makes any 
difference insofar as a second or successive petition raising the 
Claims Felker wants to litigate is concerned. C£. Specter Motor 
Company v. McLaughiin, 323 U.S. 101, 105, 65 S. Ct. 152, 154 (1944) 
("If there is one doctrine more deeply rooted than any other in the 

7 


wows 


process of constitutional adjudication, it is that we ought not to 
pass on questions of constitutionality ... unless such adjudication 
is unmavoidable."); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of 
Miami, Florida, 734 F.2d 608, 612 (llth Cir. 1984) (declining to 
address whether a statute was unconstitutional, because “[a)ny 
resolution of this issue would not affect the outcome of the 
case"). If Felker is barred from litigating the claims he presents 
under pre-existing law, then the Act's restrictions can have no 
unconstitutional effect on him. Cf. United States v. Missio, 597 
F.2d 60, 61 (Sth Cir. 1979) (affirming a denial of 28 U.S.C. § 2255 
relief and holding that the district court correctly declined to 
address an issue involving the constitutionality of prior 
convictions where the same sentence would have been imposed even if 
those convictions had not been included in the presentencing 
report). Stated somewhat differently, if under pre-existing law 
Felker's claims do not present substantial grounds upon which 
relief might be granted, then his claim that the Act 
unconstitutionally restricts his presentation of such claims does 
not present substantial grounds for relief, either. 

Under the pre-Act law concerning second or successive 
petitions, Felker would not be able to litigate the merits of the 
claims he presents unless he was able to establish cause and 
prejudice sufficient to excuse his failure to present those claims 
in his first petition, or failing that, unless the constitutional 
claims he attempts to litigate fall within the "narrow class of 


cases ... implicating a fundamental miscarriage of justice.” 


»w ve ~~ -* ww . a a 
oe — vs vve + uty sw +S 44 wi wee 


t 77" £2 DLTFREME CULL RSA 


Schlup v. Delo, 115 S. Ct. 851, 861 (1995) (quoting McCleskey v. 
Zant, 499 U.S. 467, 494, 111 S. Ct. 1454, 1470 (1991)) (alteration 
in original). As it applies to claims relating to the guilt stage 
of a capital case, the fundamental miscarriage of justice exception 
to the cause and prejudice rule “requires the habeas petitioner to 
show that 'a constitutional violation has probably resulted in the 
conviction of one who is actually innocent.'" Id. at 867 (quoting 
Murray v. Carrier, 477 U.S. 478, 496, 106 S. Ct. 2639, 2649-50 
(1986)). The petitioner must show that absent the constitutional 
violation “it is more likely than not that no reasonable juror 
would have convicted him in light of the new evidence." Jd. That 
is a stronger showing than is required to establish prejudice, and 
will be found only in a “truly ‘extraordinary'" case. j[9. 

“we proceed to examine each of Felker's claims under that pre- 


Act second or successive petition law. 


A. The Cage Claim 

Felker cannot establish, and has not proffered, any valid 
cause for his failure to raise the Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39, 
111 S. Ct. 328 (1990), claim when he filed his first petition. 
Cage was announced years before Felker filed his first petition, 
and Sullivan. vy. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993), 
was announced just before the petition was formally filed and 
certainly well within the time for amending it. See pp. 5 - 6, 
above. Nor has Felker established the fundamental miscarriage of 
justice exception to the cause and prejudice requirement. He has 
not established that it is more likely than not that no reasonable 
juror would have convicted him but for the reasonable doubt jury 
instructions that were given in this case. Accordingly, pre-Act 
second or successive petition doctrine bars the Cage claim. It is 
not necessary to our application of pre-Act second or successive 
petition law to decide whether the claim also lacks merit. 
However, in the interest of completeness we also note that the 
claim, which can be decided based upon the trial record, does lack 
merit. 

Felker argues that the trial court's reasonable doubt 
instruction violated his due procesr rights because the instruction 
allowed the jury to convict him based on less than a standard of 


utmost certainty.” * Felker contends that by equating proof 


*The trial court's instruction is affixed to this opinion as 
Appendix A. 


10 


~~ we ey “me ayy +e BYR wwe (vee 


Fen 24 wi Ne eke DY 


77 £SD DETALME CULL AL 


beyond a reasonable doubt with proof "to a moral certainty” the 


jury was allowed to convict based on less proof than that required 


to convict beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In Cage, the Supreme Court held that a jury instruction that: 


equated a reasonable doubt with a “grave 
uncertainty" and an “actual substantial 
doubt," and stated that what was required was 
a “moral certainty” that the defendant was 
guilty ... suggest{ed) a higher degree of 
doubt than is required for acquittal under the 
reasonable-doubt standard. When those 
statements are then considered with the 
reference to “moral certainty," rather than 
evidentiary certainty, it becomes clear that a 
reasonable juror could have interpreted the 
instruction to allow a finding of guilt based 
on a degree of proof below that required by 
the Due Process Clause. 


498 U.S. at 41, 111 S. Ct. at 329-30. The Supreme Court clarified 
its holding in Cage in Victor v. Nebraska and its companion case, 


Sandoval v. California. _ U.S. __, 114 &. Ct. 1239 (1994). There 
the Court held that although no particular words are required to 


define reasonable doubt, the trial court must correctly explain the 
standard in articulating the prosecution's burden of proof. Id. at 
_, 114 S. Ct. at 1243. 

We described our method of review of a reasonable doubt charge 
in Harvell v. Nagle, 58 F.3d 1541 (llth Cir. 1995), petition for 
cert. filed, __ _U.S.L.W. __ (Jan. 17, 1996) (No. 95-8450): 


“we note that Felker does not challenge the "two inferences" 
language in the jury charge, i.e., that portion of the charge in 
which the court stated that, "if the circumstances in the case are 
subject to equally reasonable constructions, one indicating guilt 
and the other innocence, you are obligated under the law to accept 
that construction indicating innocence.“ (R. 1105). We do not, 
therefore, address this possible contention. 


11 


vada 


When reviewing teasonable-doubt charges, 
we consider the instruction as a whole to 
determine if the instruction misleads the jury 
as to the government's burden of proof. See 

Vv , 6 F.3d 1483, 1492 
(llth Cir. 1993). The Supreme Court has 
phrased the proper constitutional inquiry as 
“whether there is reasonable likelihood that 
the jury understood the instructions to allow 
conviction based on proof insufficient to meet 


the Winship standard.” Victor, U.S. at : 

114 S. Ct. at 1243. aie 
aid. at 1542. In Harvell, the petitioner argued that the 
instruction given equated reasonable doubt with “actual and 
Substantial doubt" and “moral certainty." Id. We held that when 
viewed in the context of the remainder of the jury charge, the 
trial court's references to “actual and substantial doubt” and 
"moral certainly" were eradicated and "did not create a reasonable 
likelihood that the jury understood the instruction to allow 
conviction based on proof insufficient to meet the Winship 
standard." Jd. at 1545. 

In Cage, the Supreme Court addressed three phrases that it 
Geemed to have tainted the charge: “grave uncertainty," “actual 
substantial doubt,” and "moral certainty." 498 U.S. at 41, 111 Ss. 
ct. at 329. In Harvel], we addressed two potentially problematic 
phrases. Harvel], 58 F.3d at 1543. Here, Felker can only point to 
one phrase, used twice in the jury charge, that he argues 
constitutes a constitutional defect, i.@., the use of the term 
"moral certainty." 

The Harvel] charge made the following references to “moral 
certainty”: 


12 


MEAP mate ee nm 


Let's don't forget the central issue that 
we are here about: Are you convinced--and I 
will talk about the measure of proof in just a 


moment, 
that the State has proven Roy 


Avon Harvell intentionally, that is purposely, 
shot and killed Mr. Midgett or shot him for 
the purpose of killing hin. 


ae e 


So, the State, again, has to prove quilt 


* « : . 


The State is not required to convince you of 
Mr. Harvell's guilty beyond a reasonable 
doubt and to the point that you could not 


possibly be mistaken, but simply beyond all 
reasonable doubt and to 9 moral certainty. 


id. at 1545, 1546. 
The jury charge in Felker's case made the following 
references to "moral certainty”: 


In a criminal case, however, the state must 
prove each of its contentions beyond as 


reasonable doubt and to a moral certainty. 


The law does not require the defendant to 
prove that he is innocent. His innocence is 
conclusively presumed until the contrary is 
established by the evidence beyond a 
reasonable doubt. The state, however, is not 
required to prove his guilt beyond all doubt. 


be expected in a legal investigation. 
App. A at 1102 (emphasis added). In FPelker's case, as in Harve)], 
any potential constitutional harm caused by these references to 
"moral certainty" were eradicated by the language in the rest of 
the charge, which grounded the definition of reasonable doubt in 
the evidence. Harvel], 58 F.3d at 1543-44; gee also Victor, __ 
U.S. at __, 114 S. Ct. at 1248. 
13 


In Victor, the Court found that the trial court's reference in 
the charge to "an abiding conviction ... of the guilt of the 
accused" did “much to alleviate any concerns that the phrase moral 
certainty might be misunderstood in the abstract." Victor, _ 
U.S. at __, 114 S. Ct. at 1249, 1250. In Harve)], the trial court 
instructed the jury that reasonable doubt had to be derived from 
the evidence and that reasonable doubt could not be “fanciful, 
vague, whimsical, capricious, conjectural or speculative.” 
Harvell, 58 F.3d at 1543. Likewise, in this case, the trial 
court's definition of reasonable doubt as “doubt which is based on 
the evidence, a lack of evidence or a conflict in the evidence” and 
"doubt which is reasonably entertained as opposed to vague or 
fanciful or farfetched doubt," served to erase any taint created by 
the term "moral certainty” and to thus place it beyond the 
potential for constitutional harn. App. A at 1102. "The 
instruction thus explicitly told the jurors that their conclusion 
had to be based on the evidence in the case." Victor, __ U.S. at 
_.- 134 S. Ct. at 1248. “Accordingly, there is no reasonable 
likelihood that the jury would have understood moral certainty to 
be disassociated from the evidence in the case." Id. In sum, the 
combination of the defining phraseology set out above, together 
with the remainder of the charge, which included other explanations 


and qualifications of the term "reasonable doubt,"* "convinces us 


‘If after you consider all the facts and circumstances in the 
case your minds are wavering, unsettled and unsatisfied, then that 
is the doubt of the law, and you should acquit the defendant." 
App. A at 1103. "No conviction should rest upon suspicion, 
conjecture or the possibility of guilt." id. at 1105-06. 


14 


eee 


vw ve ev oer a” =. + = _— es! wee veav 
-——— —— 


‘~~ % 4244 wi eetAR { -77 2 oO. races VORA 


that it was not reasonably likely that the jury understood the 
instructions to allow conviction based upon proof insufficient to 
meet the Winship standard.” Harvel), 58 F.3d at 1545 (emphasis 
added). 

In addition to contending that the trial court's charge to the 
jury violated his due process right under Cage, Felker also argues 
that the prosecutor's remarks to individual jurors during voir dire 
regarding the state's burden of proof implicate the same concern as 
that addressed by the Supreme Court in Cage. Felker correctly 
points out that, during voir dire, the prosecutor explained to 
several jurors that “moral and reasonable certainty is all that is 
required in a legal investigation." See, @.g., (RR. 215, 265, 314, 
393, 587, 629). 

The purpose of voir dire examination is to allow the 
government and the defendant to evaluate and select an impartial 
jury capable of fairly deciding the issues presented by applying 
the law as instructed by the court to the facts as produced during 
the trial. United States v. Miller, 758 F.2d 570, 571 (11th Cir.) 
(emphasis added), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 994, 106 S. Ct. 406, 88 L. 
Ed. 2d 357 (1985). (emphasis added). We note that, immediately 
following voir dire, the court explicitly instructed the impanelled 
jurors that "(a)]rguments by counsel are not evidence, and you are 


not bound by them.” (R. 4). In light of our conclusion that the 


“(Bjefore you would be authorized to convict on evidence which is 
entirely circumstantial, such evidence must not only prove the 
guilt of the accused beyond ever reasonable doubt, but it must also 
exclude every other reasonable theory except that of guilt." Id. 
at 1105. 


15 


“vad 


~~ Seb Rewme cucnrs 


trial court's jury charge, viewed in its entirety, appropriately 
instructed the jury with respect to its responsibility to find the 
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and therefore did not 
violate Felker's due process right pursuant to Cage, we find that 
the prosecutor's remarks during voir dire to which Felker now 
objects were adequately rectified by the jury charge and the timely 
admonition to the jury discussed above, and did not taint the trial 
or the verdict. 

Therefore, we conclude that even if Felker's claim under Cage 
was not barred under pre-Act second or successive petition law, he 
could not prevail on its merits because the trial court's 
references to “moral certainty,” when viewed in context, as well 
as the admonition of the trial judge to the jury relative to the 
arguments of counsel, the entire charge, and the proximity of the 
charge to the jury's deliberation, did not create a reasonable 
likelihood that the jury was misled as to the proper burden of 
proof or encouraged to arrive at its verdict by applying a standard 


of proof lower than reasonable doubt. 


16 


“vad 


B. Felker's Claim that Permitting a Non-Physician 
Medical Examiner to Testify to the Time of 
Death Violated Due Process and the Eighth 
Amendment 

Felker offers no cause for his failure to raise in his first 
federal habeas petition the claim that it was constitutional error 
te permit Warren Tillman, a non-physician medical examiner, to give 
his opinion concerning the time of the victim's death. Medical 
Examiner Tillman's qualifications, or lack thereof, were fully 
developed during direct and cross-examination at trial. 
Accordingly, the claim that Felker belatedly seeks to raise 
concerning that matter has been fully available to him since the 
trial in 1983. Felker does not proffer any other cause for his 
failure to raise this claim in his first federal habeas proceeding 
in 1993. 

Turning to the fundamental miscarriage of justice exception to 
the cause and prejudice requirement, Felker has not shown that it 
is more likely than not that no reasonable juror would have 
convicted him but for the alleged constitutional error of 
permitting Tillman to offer an opinion as to the tine of death. 
Tillman testified that in his opinion the victim could have been 
killed as many as fourteen days prior to her body being discovered 
on December 8, 1981, which would mean that she could have been 
killed as early as November 24, 1981, the date she was last seen 
alive. Felker had an alibi from 7:00 p.m. November 25, 1981 
forward. He contends that Tillman's testimony was critical to his 
conviction, because he argues, “[tjhe only evidence that the death 
occurred when (Felker) could have caused it was the ‘expert’ 

17 


testimony of a non-physician (Tillman) employed by the prosecutior 
arm of the State of Georgia." Application at 30-31. That simply 
is not true. Dr. James Q. Whitaker, a highly qualified pathologist 
and medical examiner (R. 428-30) also examined the pertinent 
evidence including photographs, the body itself after it was 
disinterred, tissue slides, and so forth, and he reached his own 
opinion concerning the time of death. The Georgia Supreme Court 
summarized Dr. Whitaker's testimony as follows: 
Dr. Whitaker, the medical examiner for 

Houston County, testified for the state in 

rebuttal. His early experience was in 

Baltimore, Maryland, and, perhaps due to the 

proximity of Chesapeake Bay, he had observed 

over "200 drowning or immersion-t cases.” 

Dr. Whitaker testified that--considering the 

air temperatures in the relevant time period; 

the fact that most missing and murdered 

persons die soon after they disappear; the 

fact that when Joy Ludlam was found, she was 

wearing the same clothes as when she was last 

seen alive; and the extent of decomposition-- 

in his opinion, death occurred two weeks prior 

to the discovery of the body. 
Felker v. State, 252 Ga. at 359, 314 So.2d at 631. We have 
reviewed Dr. Whitaker's testimony at trial, and he did testify 
that: "I would say most — in my opinion, the time of death is 
shortly after she became missing, and in my opinion it's more 
likely, with a reasonable degree of medical probability, that the 
death occurred 14 days ago when she was missing, found missing, but 
certainly, with the degree of decomposition that is present, three 
to five days, within that time frame is possible, but I think that 


the time, in my opinion, is older than that." (R. 997-98). 


18 


eT ee ae ( "7" 42 QFAcae Cun 


There is no question that Dr. Whitaker is a qualified 
pathologist. He is a medical doctor, having pursued a study in the 
specialty of pathology, including an internship and residency in 
pathology, and he is a board certified anatomic and clinical 
pathologist. He had taught forensic pathology, and at the time of 
trial was the Chief Pathologist and Director of Laboratories and 
Clinical Pathology at the Houston County Hospital, in Warner 
Robbins, Georgia (R. 428). At the time of his trial testimony, Dr. 
Whitaker had performed over 1500 autopsies (R. 430). 

Moreover, there was other evidence, in addition to Dr. 
Whitaker's expert opinion, that the victim's death occurred 
fourteen days before her body was discovered, making it likely that 
she was killed around November 24, 1981. It was undisputed that 
the victim's car was seen parked in an local bank parking lot on 
the evening of November 24, and the next morning her car was still 
parked there, apparently abandoned. There was also evidence that 
she had placed a call to her employer during the early evening of 
November 24, stating that she would not be working that evening. 
Felker admitted to an officer that the victim had made that 
telephone call from his home. When her body was discovered two 
weeks after she disappeared, it was clothed in the same dress she 
had been wearing when last seen on November 24. When that evidence 
is combined with other evidence of Felker's guilt, including the 
remarkable similarities between this crime and a similar crime he 
had committed and been convicted for earlier, gee Felker v. Thomas, 
S2 F.3d at 908, we readily conclude that Felker has not shown that 


19 


evae 


but for the alleged constitutional violation of permitting Warren 
Tillman to offer his opinion as to the time of death, it is more 
likely than not that no reasonable juror would have convicted hin. 
Although pre-Act law certainly did not restrict the second and 
successive petition bar only to claims that lacked merit, we do 
note, for the sake of completeness, that this claim lacks merit. 
As we have pointed out previously, this claim is based upon the 
false premise that Warren Tillman was the only expert witness who 
testified to an opinion consistent with the victim having been 
killed at a time for which Felker did not have an alibi. But the 
record clearly shows that Dr. Whitaker, who was unquestionably 
qualified to give such an opinion, also testified to the same 
opinion as Tillman. In addition to the expert testimony, there was 
other evidence, which we have already discussed, establishing that 
the victim died as early as November 24, 1981. The standard of 
review for state evidentiary rulings in federal habeas corpus 
proceedings is a narrow one. Only when evidentiary errors "so 
infused the trial with unfairness as to deny due process of law" is 
habeas relief warranted. Lisenba v. California, 314 U.S. 219, 228, 
62 S. Ct. 280, 286 (1941), quoted and applied in, Estelle v. 
McGuire, 502 U.S. 62, 75, 112 S. Ct. 475, 484 (1991); accord Baxter 
Vv. Thomas, 45 F.3d 1501, 1509 (lith Cir.) (evidentiary ruling 
claims reviewed only to determine whether the error "was of such 
magnitude as to deny fundamental fairness"), cert. denied, 116 Ss. 


Ct. 385 (1995); Kight v. Singletary, 50 F.3d 1539, 1546 (llth Cir. 
1995), cert. denied, 116 S. Ct. 785 (1996). Such a determination 


“s" £2 Pei Rhee owes 


is to be made in light of the evidence as a whole. Viewing the 
evidence in this case in its entirety, the introduction of Warren 
Tillman's testimony did not so infuse the trial with unfairness as 


to deny Felker fundamental fairness and due process of law. 


c. Actual Innocence as an Independent 
Constitutional Claim 


Thus far we have discussed actual innocence only in the Schlup 
v. Delo "gateway" procedural, as distinguished from independent 
substantive, sense. See 115 S. Ct. at 860-61. Although not 
entirely clear, it appears from his application that Felker also 
may be seeking to either litigate actual innocence as 4 separate 
constitutional claim, or at least be seeking to challenge the Act 
as unconstitutional on the grounds that it precludes assertion of 
a separate and independent constitutional claim of actual 
innocence. More likely the latter. In regard to that possibility, 
the State has responded that the Act does not modify the law 
involving actual innocence claims. We need not decide whether the 
Act precludes such claims, because even if it did, that 
modification of the law would not affect Felker who does not have 
a valid actual innocence claim, anyway. 

Justice O'Connor joined by Justice Kennedy, both of whose 
votes were necessary to the majority in Herrera v. Collins, 506 
U.S. 390, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993), explained that that decision left 
open the difficult question of whether federal habeas courts may 
entertain convincing claims of actual innocence. jg. at 472, 113 
S. Ct. at 874. Justice O'Connor characterized the Herrera decision 

21 


~ Vee 


as assuming "for the sake of argument that a truly persuasive 
demonstration of actual innocence would render any such execution 
unconstitutional and that federal habeas relief would be warranted 
if no state avenue were open to process the claim." Id. Making 
that same assumption, Felker is not entitled to habeas relief for 
two reasons. First, the Herrera opinion itself noted that, unlike 
Texas, Georgia is a state that not only permits motions for new 
trial on newly discovered evidence grounds, but it also provides 
that the time for filing such motions can be extended. Jd. at 411 
m.11, 113 S. Ct. at 866 n.11; Ga. Code Ann. §§ 5-5-40 and 5-5-41 
(Michie 1995).° Therefore, this is not a case where there is "no 
state avenue ... open to process the claim." Jd. at 472, 113 S. 
Ct. at 874. 

Second, Felker has failed to persuasively demonstrate his 
actual innocence. Justice O'Connor's characterization of the 
habeas petitioner in Herrera is equally applicable to Felker: 

He was tried before a jury of his peers, with 
the full panoply of protections that our 
Constitution affords criminal defendants. At 
the conclusion of that trial, the jury found 
petitioner guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 


Petitioner therefore does not appear before us 
as an innocent man on the verge of execution. 


*at the time of Felker's conviction and sentencing in February 
1983, Georgia law allowed defendants to move for a new trial on the 
basis of newly discovered evidence. §ee Dick v. State, 287 S.E.2d 
11, 13 (1982). While Georgia law generally requires motions for a 
new trial to be made within 30 days of entry of judgment, gee Ga. 
Code Ann. § 5-5-40 (Michie 1995), it also permits "extraordinary" 
motions to be filed after this deadline, gee Ga. Code Ann. § 5-5-41 
(Michie 1995). This was also true back in 1983 at the time of 
Felker's conviction and sentence in Houston County Superior Court. 
See Dick, 287 S.E£.24 at 13 & n.2. 


vw Ve’ ey 40. 406-04 fAe® OY Yvi #18 


£2." 44 WT CCAR 77" £> DLFREME CULL 


He is instea’ a legally guilty wne who, 

refusing to accept the jury's verdict, demands 

a hearing in which to have his culpability 

determined once again. 
Id. at 419-20, 113 S. Ct. at 870. The only evidence Felker offers 
that was not offered at his trial are the affidavits of two medical 
examiners who criticize the qualifications of Medical Examiner 
Tillman and disagree with his opinion about the time of death. 
Neither of Felker's new experts impugn in any way the 
qualifications of Dr. James Whitaker, another medical examiner, who 
testified to the same opinion about the time of death as did 
Tillman. At most, the belated affidavits are cumulative evidence 
in support of Felker's position on the time of death issue. There 
was expert opinion testimony on both sides of that issue at trial, 
as well as other evidence. Considering it all, we do not doubt in 
the least Felker's guilt. 

Moreover, permitting such last minute affidavits to reopen 
guilt issues, absent truly extraordinary circumstances which are 
not present here, would open up virtually any capital case in which 
expert testimony was presented on behalf of the State to 
relitigation on the eve of execution. We do not believe that the 
Constitution or anything in the Herrera decision requires that, 
particularly where, as here, we are convinced that, "(p)etitioner 
is not innocent, in any sense of the word.” Jd. at 419, 113 S. Ct. 
at 870 (concurring opinion of O'Connor, J., joined by Kennedy, J.). 


III. CONCLUSION 
Felker has failed to show substantial grounds upon which 
23 


Gives 


to show sub 
substantial grounds upon which relief might be granted 

re nte 

sofar as any constitutional issues involving the A 

eae ct are 
rned, because he would not be entitled to any reli 

under pre-Act law. Daan 
The request for a stay of execution is DENIED. 


Th 
@ application for an order authorizing the filing of 
a 


second or successive petition is DENIED 


24 


APFERDI® é 


TUE STATE OF GEORGIA Iodictment No- 12405 


) 
) 
) 
ve. > Murder, Age: Sodomy, 
) 
) 
) 


ELLIS “AYE FELKER CHARGE OF THE COURT 


{alee imprisonment. robbery and murder. 


indictment. ° 


was not proved. and the instructions which I 


unless I state otherwise. 


instructions | will now give you: 


represent the method by which the case wes b 


for trisl. 


Rape, et a) 


Members of the jury, oo May 17, 1962. the grand jury 
of this circuit indicted the defendant, Ellis Wayne Felker, 


and charced him with the offenses of rape, sggravates sodor; . 


To that indictment, and to those charges, “r- Felker 
has entered his plea of not guilty. therebdy denyine and 


challenging each and every essential allegation in the 


as 1 previously mentioned to you, the robbery charge is 


no longer before you because as a matter of law such cherce 


will now give 


you will apply to each remaioing charge in the indictment, 


Whether the other charges in the indictment have been 


proves is for you to decide based oF the evidence on the 


The indictment, along with the defendant's pies of 
‘pot guilty. will be ovt with you when you consider the casc- 
and you may refer to thes. They are not evidence, however. 


and you should not consider them 6s euch. They simply 


rought into cour 


In spite of his indictment, the defendant 15 presumed 
to be ianocent until bis guilt 4s established by the 


evidence to the exclusion of and beyond every reasonable 


doubt. ‘The burden ef proof in this case, a6 id e1i criminal. 
cases, rests upoe the state, from the beginaing to the ; 
end of the trial, to esteblist beyond « reasonable doubt 
every fact essential to tbe conviction of the defendant. | 
That is, the state pust prove beyond & reasonable doubt ona 
a crime was io fact committed and that the defendant was ; 
the person who committed the crime. 
The standard of proof ins criminal case is higher char. 
' 


* 


that required in & civil case. In civil cases. ® simple 
preponderance oF greater weight of the evidence is con- 
sidered sufficient to gustaic a contention. In a criminel 
case, however, the state sust prove each of its conten~ 
tions beyood & reasonable doubt ané to @ moral certainty. 

The lew does not require the defendant to prove that 
he is innocent. Kis innocence is conclusively presumed 
until the contrary ie established by the evidence beyond 2 
reasonable doubt. Tbe state, however, is not required to 
prove bis guilt beyond #11 doubt. Moral and reasonable 
certainty is ail thet can be expected in « legel investigs- 
tion. : 

A reasonable doubt 1s defined as s doubt which is base 
on the evidence, © lack of evidence or ® conflict in the 


evidence. it 18 8 doubt which is reasonably entertuined 


ae opposed to a vague oF fanciful or farfetches doubt. 


if after you consider all tbe facts and circumstances 
in the case your winds are wavering, unsettied and unsatis- 
fied, then that is the doubt of the law, sod you shoulé ac- 
quit the defendant. On the otber band, if such doubt sos 
not exist in your aiods as to his guilt. yor ghoulde convict 
bim. 

One of the elements ip every criminal case is the 
matter of venue; thet 16, the state aust prove that the 
crime occurred in the county in which the case is being 
trieé. For example, if ® crime occurs in Uouston County, 
then tbe trial for that crime sball be in Houston County- 

In « guréer case, the trial may be held in the county 
where the cause of death was anflicted or in the county 
where death actually eccurred, if it cannot be determines 
where the cause of éeath occurrec. 

The defendant in this case contends that the state has 
not proved the element of venue. In that respect 1 iostruct 
you that it ts the state's burden, with respect to each chare: 
an the indictment, to prove beyood & reasonable doudt that 
the crime might bave been cogmitted is Bouston County: 1% 
the state fails to éo this, then the defendant is entitled 
to 4 verdict of sot guilty. 

You are tbe sole judges of the credibility of the 
witnesses and of the weight to be given their testmiony- 
in deciding the credit to be given sny witness’ tantimony, 
you may take into account his or ber ability ané opportunits 


to observe the facts; his or her memory i tbe witness’ manne’ 


| 
' 


j 
| 
while testifying: ey interest, bias OF prejudice the atonal | 


may bave. and you may also consider the reasocableness of 


{ 
guch testimony. | 

If there are conflicts in the evidence, it is your ont 
under the law the reconcile thes wherever possible sc as to | 
wake all the witnesses speek the truth and not attribute « | 
false statement to any of them. If you cannot do tbis, 


bowever, then you would believe tbat testimony which is 


most reasonable and credible to you- 


——————_— «ee 


wttness” testimony may de impesched or aiccretittes 
by disprovinog the facts testified to by him «cr ber, oF by 


showing that the fitness oade a previous statement oF etate- 


| 
| 
ments inconsistent with or contradictory to the testimony | 
gives at trial. | 
If you determine that the testimony of any witness has. 
been impeached or discredited in that manner, you are | 
authorized to believe or disbelieve said witness’ testimon) 
in whole or in part. | 
If you find that any witness has «~7° placed under 
hypnosis for the purpose of refreshisg or improving thet 
witness’ recollections, and if you find that such testimony 
is in whole or in part induced by the bypnosis, then to the . 
extent that it was you would disregaré such testimony - 
Ordinarily the court receives the testimony of witness- 
es only as to facts to which the witness hae perticuler and 
direct knowledce- 


ie cortais cases, however, where & 


particclar decree of #kill or knowledge is required to 


understeod tbe situation, the lew receives the opinion of 
those deemed to be expert in certain lines. The opinion 
testimony of ap expert can be based on hypothetica) ques- 
tions or based oD the expert's observations. You should pot 
consider any opinion at all unless the facts upon which it 
ic baeed are found by you to be true. 

Even though you sre permitted to receive the testimony 
of an expert, you are not bouns by such testimony. The law 
allows you to receive it and coosider it, along with all 
the other evidence in the case. 

Evidence: is eitber direct or circumstactial. Direct 
evidence is that «bicb itwel!l speaks to the issue involved. 
Indirect or circumstantial evidence is that which by its 
consistency suggests or implies that a certain claim or 
theory is true. 

Criminal conduct may be proved by circumstantial 
evidence as well as by direct evidence. However, before 
you would be autborizec to convict on evidence which is 
entirely circumstactial, such evidence gust not only prove 
the quilt of the accused beyond every reasonable doubt, but 
4t must also exclude every other reasonable theory except 
that of guilt. 

In other words, if the circumstances in the case are 
eubject to equally reasonable constructions, one indicetioc 
guilt and the other innocence, you are obligated under tbe 
lew to accept that construction tadiesting insocence- 


No conviction should rest upoe euspicics, conjecture 


2st ae 


SS 


or the possibity of guilt. 


| 
| 
: 
{ 
A crime is defined as & violation of a statute of this | 


state io wbich shall be a usion of joint operation of act |; 
; J 


and inteotion. Criminal intent is s necessary element of « ; 


crime, and the state aust prove such intest, just as it must 


| 


prove every otber essential elewent of the crime. | 


No person should be found guilty of any crime which is . 


committed by misfortune or accident, where it satisfactorily 


appears there was no criminal intentioc. 


————_— = 


No one is presumed to act with criminal intention, but 
you may fine euch upon «a consideration of the words, conten, 
demeanor, motive and all otber circumstances connected with 
the offense. You may likewise find u lack of criminal 


intent wpon such s consideration. 


Every person is presumed to be of sound miod aod 


discretion and is presumec to intend the natural and 


probable consequences of his acts. Toe acts of such * 
— are presumed to be intentiossl. These presumptions 
may be rebutted by any evidence to the contrary. 

In this case, the state has contended that the defen- 
dant was involved in « similar offense in 1976, aod evi- 
eence was offered concerning the 1976 occurrence. The 
court eiieved tbat evidence solely for you to decide whether 
it might tend to illustrate the defendant's motive, intent 
or state of wind with respect to the charges for which 4% 
is now of trisl,and for no other purpose. 


Whether the defendant in fact committed such other 


e - . 


4 2 ee ee 


NN 


offense, end if so, whether it illustrates bis state of mind 
in thie case, is & watter for you to decide. 

In order for any crime to bave bees coomitted upon 
the person of the victim io this case, you must find beyond 
a reasonable doubt that such cripe, if any, was committed 
upon her before sbe died. 

In count one of the indictment, the defendant is 
charged with the offense of rape. A person commits rupe 
wheo be bas carnal knowledge of « female forcibly and acain*: 
her will. Carpal kaowledge in rape occurs «hen there is 
any penetration, however slight, of the female sex organ 
by the wale sex organ. For euch careal koowledge to con- 
stitute the offense of rape, the penetration must have Deen 
accomplished by force and agaiost the will aodwithout the 
consent of the female alleged to bave been rapes. The 
offense of rape is not complete if the element of toree is 
lacking in the commission of the sexual act. 

Ie count two of the indictmest, the defendant is charge 
with the offense of aggravated sodomy. A person commits 
the offense of sodomy when be performs or subsite to #ny 
sexual act iovolving the sex organs of one person and the 
anus of apotber. .A persos commits the effense of agere- 
vated sodomy when be commits sodoay with force and against 
the will of the other person. 

le this case, the etate suet prove beyoné a reasoral)c 
doubt that the defendant inserted bis sex organ into the 


anus of Evelyn Joy Ludlem with force and ageinst her wil) 


1107 


~vre 


iS 


vv ewevesnss 8 


4 


in order for there to be « conviction under this count. 

In count three of the indictment, the defendant is 
accused of the offense of falee igprisoament. A person 
commits the offense of false imprisonment when, in violation 
of the personal liberty of another, he detaics euch person 
without legal authority. 

In count five of the indictment, the defendant is 
charceé with the offense of murder. A persoo commits murder 
when be uslaefully and with malice aforetbougmt, eitoer 
express or implied, causes the death of another buman being. 
Express malice is that deliberate istestios to kill which 
is manifested cr sbown by external circumstances capable of 
proof. 

Malice eball be implied where no considerable provoce~ 
tice appears and where all the circumstances of the Killing 
ghow an abandoned and malignant heart. Uarice is an 
essential element of murder, and it must exist before any 
bomicide cao be Gurder. Malice in ite legal sense is fot 
pecesesrily il] will or hatred. It is the unlawful, deliv- 
erate, preconceived intention to kill s buman being without 
juetification or excuse, which intestice sust exist at the 
time of the killing. If euch intention enters the ming of 
the slayer a moment before be commits the fatal act, thet 
is sufficient. 

Members of the jury, you should take the instructiors 
which 1 have given you in this ease and apply them to the 


fects ae you fied the facts to be, and arrive at ® verdict 


— ———Se <-> — 


— 


which speaks the truth. The object of every legal 
investigation is the discovery of the truth. You are not 
concerned with the effect or coasequesce of your verdict. 


You are only coocerned that the epeak the truth. 


As to each count in the indictment, the fo.r remaining 


counts, wembers of the jury, if you believe beyond « reason-. 


able doubt that the defendant is guilty as charged in the 
indictment. it would be your duty to convict bin, and the 
form of your verdict in that eveot would be, “Se fiod the 
defendast guilty.” | 

Oc the other band, if you do not believe that the 
defendant bas committed the offenses with which be's charged 
or aby one of them dealing with each particular count, or 
if you entertain a reasonable doubt as to the defendant's 
guilt, it would be your duty to scquit bis, and in that 
event the Gore of your verdict would be, “We fine the 
defendant sot guilty.” 

Whatever your verdict is, sembers of the jury, one of 
you as foreperson of the jury eboulé write it out seperate!) 
as to each count on the back of the indictment. You should 
thes date it ané sign it. Then you would sotify the beilifi 
that you bave arrived at your werdict, ané you will be asked 
to come back inte the courtroom so that your verdict can de 
published as provided by law. 

t awk et this time, please, that the 12 of you on the 
reqular jury pane) retire to this jury room. I*s going to 


ask the two alternates for the tise being to retire back he: 


1109 


mie t>2A_)1 DP CLERK . 


I believe, to my office. <Any objection to that, for the 
time being? Al) right. 
(The jury thereupon left the courtroom at 2:28 
p.o.) . 
ees 

TWE COURT: Does the state beve any exceptioas to the 
charge? 

WR. FINLAYSOK: No, sir, your Honor. 

THE COURT: Do you at this time, Mr. Hasty or tr. 
Bro«n’? 

UR. BROFX: Judge, the osly thing that, other than 
failure to give our requests to charge, that I would sake 
exception to is the judge charged, like a let of courts dc, 
that the jury gust make the witnesses speak the truth; that 
coupled with the fact that the judge charged the jury thet 
they have a duty to comvict if they find thet there's not 
reasonable doubt, 1 thisk the combination there would tel) 
the jury they have to believe somebody thet they may other- 
wise decide to Gisregaurd entirely, whether or sot the person 
bas been impeached. 

I think ose privilege the jury would bave would be to 
simply disregarc somebody's testimony witbout that person 
being impeached, aad the judge's charge does not give them 
thet option. I would point thet cut sow, but, of course, we 
don’t waive the various other requests. I don’t bave « 
list of all of the requeste that were not given at this tim 


I don"t recall ose on the wavering mind, if the jury 


1130 


we US SUPREME cotRT 2011" 


: 


were to say that -- 


wR. HASTY: Yeah. 
wR. DROWN: Was that gives? We would reserve our 
right to any further objection. 

THE COUNT: I think you may reserve your exceptions. 
I don't thisk under the present law you are required to go. 
inte any detail as to any problews with the charge; anc, 
ac I said, now, we will get a copy of your requests, slong 
with those of the state, marked filed. 

Now, do you want to get togetber and get the evidence 
to go to the jury? 


(The exhibits were thereupon gathered by counse! 


aod the reporter.) 


wees 


(The exhibite were taken to the jury et 2:43 p-@.) 


Now, let me tell you what I have in miad doing with 


reepect to the two alternates, is to cootisue sequestering 


them until such time as this jury reaches « verdict. 


How, my impression is that they cas be called on to 
eerve in connection with thie case up until that time. 
Once thie jury decides the verdict, 1 think their services 
are over, eves if the jury convicts the defendant. 1 ques- 
tion weether they would be permitted to serve in an 
alternate capacity in the sentesce phase sot baving 
participated in the guilt or iasecence. 1 don't think they 


could. 


WR. DANIEL: The law says the same jury shall consider 


the penalty as considered the first. + - 


1111 


