Supreme Court, U.S. 


>étb & D 
“WAY SO 1996 


CLERK | 


No. 95-8836 


In The 


Supreme Court of the Unite 


October Term, 1995 
° 


ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, 


Petitioner, 


TONY TURPIN, Warpen, 


Respondeitt. 
+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 


United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Eleventh Circuit 


® 
JOINT APPENDIX 
S 
Henry P. MONAGHAN *SusANn V. BoLeyNn 
435 W. 116th Street Senior Assistant 
New York, NY 10027 Attorney General 
(212) 854-2644 Micuaet J. Bowers 


oe A Attorney General 
STEPHEN C. Baytiss 

ne Mary BetH WestMorELAND 
Mary EvizasetH WELLS 


101 Marietta Tower Deputy Attorney General 
Pauta K. SmitH 

peditag Senior Assistant Attorn 

Atlanta, GA 30303 ey 


General 
(404) 614-2014 Paice Reese WHITAKER 
Mark Evan Olive Assistant Attorney 
Habeas Assistance Project General 
P.O. Box 506 State Law Department 
Richmond, VA 23218 40 ‘Capitol Square, S.W. 
(804) 643-6848 Atlanta, GA 30334 


(404) 656-3397 


Counsel for Respondent 


Counsel for Petitioner 


*Counsel of Record 


+= --- — ———_—_ — —— -- ——-—- — —. — 
— $$$ —-- 


Petition For Certiorari Filed May 2, 1996 
Certiorari Granted May 3, 1996 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


Chronological List of Relevant Docket Entries and 
GHND TERRI OUS TRUNIID . ons cecvvescccccectcvssees 


Opinion of Court of Appeals, Filed May 2, 1996... 


Order of Supreme Court of the United States grant- 
ing stay of execution of sentence of death, Cer- 
tiorari and leave to proceed in forma pauperis, 
NY Bp SPO seb e ced eceveseresceurecegesasesses 


CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 
AND OTHER RELEVANT MATTERS 


May 1, 1996 


May 1, 1996 


May 2, 1996 


May 2, 1996 


Petitioner's Application for Permission to 
File a Second Habeas Corpus Petition in the 
District Court, and for Stay of Execution 
lodged in the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, along 
with a letter from counsel for Petitioner 
explaining that the Application was 
being lodged prior to the conclusion of 
state court proceedings because of the 
confusion that might be engendered by 
the one-week old Antiterrorism Act. 


Respondent's Response to Application for 
Permission to File a Second Habeas Corpus 
Petition in the District Court, and for a Stay 
of Execution lodged in the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Cir- 
cuit. 


Petitioner's Application for Permission to 
File a Second Habeas Corpus Petition in the 
District Court, and for Stay of Execution 
(Corrected) lodged in the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Cir- 
cuit, along with a letter from counsel for 
Petitioner regarding the corrections. 


Petitioner's Reply to State's Response to 
Application for Permission to File a Second 
Habeas Corpus Petition in the District 
Court, and for Stay of Execution filed in 
the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Eleventh Circuit. 


May 2, 


May 2, 


May 2, 


May 2, 


May 2, 


May 2, 


May 3, 


1996 


1996 


1996 


1996 


1996 


1996 


1996 


Respondent's Reply Brief In Response to 
Application filed in the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Cir- 
cuit. 


Petitioner's Petition for Writ of Habeas 
Corpus, For Appellate or Certiorari Review 
of the Decision Of the United States Circuit 
Court, and for Stay of Execution lodged in 
the United States Supreme Court. 


Panel of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit issued 
opinion denying application for leave to 
file successive habeas corpus petition. 


Respondent's Response in Opposition to 
Motion for Stay of Execution filed in the 
United States Supreme Court. 


Petitioner's Letter supplementing second 
and third questions filed in the United 
States Supreme Court. 


Stay of Execution entered by United 
States Supreme Court Justice Anthony 
M. Kennedy. 


United States Supreme Court granted 
application for stay of execution, motion 
for leave to proceed in forma pauperis, 
and petition for a writ of certiorari. 


[PUBLISH] 
IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 


No. 96-1077 


ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, 


Petitioner, 
versus 
TONY TURPIN, Warden, 
Georgia Diagnostic and 
Classification Center, 
Respondent. 


On Application for Leave to File 
Successive Habeas Corpus Petition 


(Filed May 2, 1996) 
Before BIRCH, BLACK and CARNES, Circuit Judges. 


BY THE COURT: 


In Felker v. Thomas, 52 F.3d 907 (11th Cir.), extended on 
denial of rehearing, 62 F.3d 342 (1995), cert. denied, 116 S. 
Ct. 956 (1996), we affirmed the denial of habeas corpus 
relief as to the murder, rape aggravated sodomy, and 
false imprisonment convictions, as well as the death sen- 
tence of Ellis Wayne Felker. The procedural history, evi- 
dence, and facts in the case are summarized in our prior 
opinions and in the Georgia Supreme Court's decision 
affirming his convictions and sentence on direct appeal, 


Felker v. State, 252 Ga. 351, 314 S.E.2d 621, cert. denied, 469 
U.S. 873, 105 S. Ct. 229 (1984). 


On February 20, 1996, the Supreme Court denied 
Felker’s petition for writ of certiorari seeking review of 
our decision denying his first federal habeas corpus peti- 
tion. On April 17, 1996, the Superior Court of Houston 
County, Georgia, set May 2 through May 9, 1996, as the 
period during which Felker’s execution would be carried 
out. On April 29, 1996, Felker filed a petition for writ of 
habeas corpus in the Superior Court of Butts County, 
Georgia. (It was his second state habeas petition; his first 
had been denied in 1990.) The Superior Court denied 
Felker’s second state habeas petition on May 1, 1996, and 
the Georgia Supreme Court denied his petition for writ of 
certiorari at 11:00 a.m. ET, today. 


Felker is now back before us. Yesterday afternoon, he 
lodged with this Court a request for a stay of execution 
and an application, pursuant to § 106 of the newly 
enacted Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
1996 (“the Act”), for permission to file a second federal 
habeas petition in the district court. He lodged a cor- 
rected application at 9:35 a.m. ET, this morning, and his 
application was formally filed at 11:30 a.m. ET, today. 


Only last month, the Supreme Court emphasized the 
nonautomatic nature of stays of execution in second or 
successive habeas petition cases. Vacating the entry of a 
stay order by the Eighth Circuit in Bowersox v. Williams, 
116 S. Ct. 1312 (1996), the Court reiterated that: “A stay of 
execution pending disposition of a second or successive 
federal habeas petition should be granted only when 
there are substantial grounds upon which relief might be 


granted.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omit- 
ted). The Supreme Court reminded us, in no uncertain 
terms, that: “[e]ntry of a stay on a second or third habeas 
petition is a drastic measure, and we have held that it is 
‘“particularly egregious” ’ to enter a stay absent substan- 
tial grounds for relief.” Id. (quoting Delo v. Blair, 509 U.S. 
823, 113 S. Ct. 2922 (1993)). 


Neither party in the present case contends that the 
standard applicable to stays of execution in second or 
successive petition cases has been changed by the Act.! 
Accordingly, we proceed to determine whether Felker has 
shown substantial grounds upon which relief might be 
granted, thus entitling him to the “drastic measure” of a 
stay of execution in this second petition case. 


Felker requests that we enter a stay of execution “to 
allow full briefing on the many life or death issues cre- 
ated by the Act,” which he contends violates the Fourth, 
Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments, the 
Supremacy Clause, and the Separation of Powers doc- 
trine. Alternatively, he requests a stay “because the 
Applicant has satisfied the provisions of the Act and is 
entitled to a remand.” (footnote omitted). We address the 
second alternative first. 


' Nothing that we say about the Act in this opinion 
concerns § 107, which applies special habeas corpus procedures 
to capital cases arising in those states that qualify under the 
provisions of the newly enacted 28 U.S.C. § 2261. There is no 
contention, yet, that the State of Georgia has shown - or even 
had an opportunity to show - that it qualifies to benefit from the 
special procedures established by § 107 of the Act. Whether it 
does is a question for another day. 


6 7 


I. FELKER’S CONTENTION THAT HE HAS SATISFIED 
THE PROVISIONS OF THE ACT AND IS ENTITLED ' 
TO A REMAND 


Section 106 of the Act amends 28 U.S.C. § 2244(b) to 


an order authorizing the district court to 
consider the application. 


(B) A motion in the court of appeals for an 
order authorizing the district court to consider a 


read, in pertinent part: 


(b)(1) A claim presented in a second or 
successive habeas corpus application under sec- 
tion 2254 that was presented in a prior applica- 
tion shall be dismissed. 


(2) A claim presented in a second or suc- 
cessive habeas corpus application under section 
2254 that was not presented in a prior applica- 
tion shall be dismissed unless - 


(A) the applicant shows that the claim 
relies on a new rule of constitutional law, 
made retroactive to cases on collateral 
review by the Supreme Court, that was pre- 
viously unavailable; or 


(B)(i) the factual predicate for the 
claim could not have been discovered previ- 
ously through the exercise of due diligence; 
and 


(ii) the facts underlying the claim, if 
proven and viewed in light of the evidence 
as a whole, would be sufficient to establish 
by clear and convincing evidence that, but 
for constitutional error, no reasonable fact- 
finder would have found the applicant 
guilty of the underlying offense. 


(3)(A) Before a second or successive 
application permitted by this section is filed 
in the district court, the applicant shall 
move in the appropriate court of appeals for 


second or successive application shall be deter- 
mined by a three-judge panel of the court of 
appeals. 


(C) The court of appeals may authorize the 
filing of a second or successive application only 
if it determines that the application makes a 
prima facie showing that the application satis- 
fies the requirements of this subsection. 


Felker’s application seeks an order from this Court 
authorizing the district court to consider a second or 
successive petition containing two claims. The first is a 
Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39, 111 S. Ct. 328 (1990), claim. 
Felker does not, and could not, contend that this is a 
claim the factual predicate of which “could not have been 
discovered previously through the exercise of diligence,” 
within the meaning of new § 2244(b)(2)(B), because the 
factual predicate of the claim has been available on the 
record since Felker’s trial. 


As for § 2244(b)(2)(A), we have held that the Cage 
rule is retroactively applicable to cases that had com- 
pleted direct review before the Cage decision was 
announced. Nutter v. White, 39 F.3d 1154 (11th Cir. 1994). 
However, we cannot find that Felker’s Cage claim was 
“previously unavailable” to him when he filed his first 
habeas petition in 1993, which was long after Cage was 
decided. Felker argues in his application that the Cage 
claim was not available to him until Sullivan v. Louisiana, 
508 U.S. 275, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993), made it obvious that 


the Cage rule was retroactive. Even assuming for present 
purposes the dubious legal premise that Cage was not 
available to Felker until the Sullivan decision was 
announced, the fact remains that Sullivan was decided on 
June 1, 1993, and Felker’s first habeas petition was not 
formally accepted and placed on the docket until June 2, 
1993.2 And, of course, nothing would have prevented 
Felker from filing a motion to amend his first petition, 
even if the Sullivan decision had been reieased days or 
weeks after, instead of just before, the petition was filed. 
No answer was filed to the petition until August 6, 1993, 
and amendments to habeas petitions are freely permitted. 


The other claim Felker seeks to litigate in a second or 
successive petition is a claim that “it violates the Eighth 
and Fourteenth Amendments for a non-physician, state 
agent to provide sole evidence upon which a jury relied 
to determine the critical issue of time of death.” As we 
explain on pp. 17-19, below, this claim has no basis in the 
record, which contradicts it. However, even assuming for 
present purposes that there was some factual basis for the 
claim, it is not one which “relies on a new rule of consti- 
tutional law, made retroactive to cases on collateral 
review by the Supreme Court, that was previously 
unavailable” as required by newly amended 
§ 2244(b)(2)(A). Not only is there no new decision 


2 Felker attempted to file his first habeas petition on April 
27, 1981, but he did not pay the filing fee, and the magistrate 
judge denied his motion to proceed in forma pauperis. Not until 
Felker paid the filing fee on June 2, 1981, was the petition placed 
on the civil docket. On June 9, 1981, the district court judge 
entered an order granting Felker’s motion to proceed in forma 
pauperis and for appointed counsel. 


announcing a rule of law that has been made retroac- 
tively applicable, Felker does not cite any decisional law 
whatsoever in support of his proposition. 


As for § 2244(b)(2)(B), Felker does not contend that 
the factual predicate for this claim could not have been 
discovered previously through the exercise of due dili- 
gence. The factual predicate, to the extent any exists, is 
apparent on the face of the trial record. The qualifications 
or lack of qualifications of Medical Examiner Warren 
Tillman were brought out on direct and cross-examina- 
tion at the trial. There is no contention that Tillman did 
not testify truthfully concerning his background and 
qualifications. Moreover, as we explain on pp. [18-20] 
17-19, below, the facts underlying this claim if proven and 
viewed in light of the evidence as a whole, would not be 
sufficient to establish by a preponderance of the evi- 
dence, much less by clear and convincing evidence, that 
but for the alleged constitutional error, no reasonable 
factfinder would have found the applicant guilty of the 
underlying offense. Accordingly, under the new Act, Fel- 
ker is not entitled to an order from this Court authorizing 
him to file a second or successive petition raising this 
claim. 


Il. FELKER’S CONTENTION THAT THE ACT IS 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL 


Felker also contends that the Act violates his rights 
under the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth and Fourteenth 
Amendments, as well as the Supremacy Clause and the 
Separation of Powers doctrine. His application provides 
very little discussion and cites no authorities for that 


10 


proposition. However, given the time constraints facing 
us, we choose to analyze this claim not in the abstract, 
but instead in terms of whether the Act makes any differ- 
ence insofar as a second or successive petition raising the 
claims Felker wants to litigate is concerned. Cf. Specter 
Motor Company v. McLaughlin, 323 U.S. 101, 105, 65 S. Ct. 
152, 154 (1944) (“If there is one doctrine more deeply 
rooted than any other in the process of constitutional 
adjudication, it is that we ought not to pass on questions 
of constitutionality . . . unless such adjudication is 
unavoidable.”); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of 
Miami, Florida, 734 F.2d 608, 612 (11th Cir. 1984) (declin- 
ing to address whether a statute was unconstitutional, 
because “[a]ny resolution of this issue would not affect 
the outcome of the case”). If Felker is barred from litigat- 
ing the claims he presents under pre-existing law, then 
the Act’s restrictions can have no unconstitutional effect 
on him. Cf. United States v. Missio, 597 F.2d 60, 61 (5th Cir. 
1979) (affirming a denial of 28 U.S.C. § 2255 relief and 
holding that the district court correctly declined to 
address an issue involving the constitutionality of prior 
convictions where the same sentence would have been 
imposed even if those convictions had not been included 
in the presentencing report). Stated somewhat differently, 
if under pre-existing law Felker’s claims do not present 
substantial grounds upon which relief might be granted, 
then his claim that the Act unconstitutionally restricts his 
presentation of such claims does not present substantial 
grounds for relief, either. 


Under the pre-Act law concerning second or succes- 
sive petitions, Felker would not be able to litigate the 
merits of the claims he presents unless he was able to 


1] 


establish cause and prejudice sufficient to excuse his fail- 
ure to present those claims in his first petition, or failing 
that, unless the constitutional claims he attempts to liti- 
gate fall within the “narrow class of cases . . . implicating 
a fundamental miscarriage of justice.” Schlup v. Delo, 115 
S. Ct. 851, 861 (1995) (quoting McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U.S. 
467, 494, 111 S. Ct. 1454, 1470 (1991)) (alteration in origi- 
nal). As it applies to claims relating to the guilt stage of a 
capital case, the fundamental miscarriage of justice 
exception to the cause and prejudice rule “requires the 
habeas petitioner to show that ‘a constitutional violation 
has probably resulted in the conviction of one who is 
actually innocent.’ ” Id. at 867 (quoting Murray v. Carrier, 
477 U.S. 478, 496, 106 S. Ct. 2639, 2649-50 (1986)). The 
petitioner must show that absent the constitutional viola- 
tion “it is more likely than not that no reasonable juror 
would have convicted him in light of the new evidence.” 
Id. That is a stronger showing than is required to estab- 
lish prejudice, and will be found only in a “truly ‘extraor- 
dinary’” case. Id. 


We proceed to examine each of Felker’s claims under 
that pre-Act second or successive petition law. 


A. The Cage Claim 


Felker cannot establish, and has not proffered, any 
valid cause for his failure to raise the Cage v. Louisiana, 
498 U.S. 39, 111 S. Ct. 328 (1990), claim when he filed his 
first petition. Cage was announced years before Felker 
filed his first petition, and Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 
275, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993), was announced just before the 
petition was formally filed and certainly well within the 


12 


time for amending it. See pp. 5-6, above. Nor has Feiker 
established the fundamental miscarriage of justice excep- 
tion to the cause and prejudice requirement. He has not 
established that it is more likely than not that no reason- 
able juror would have convicted him but for the reason- 
able doubt jury instructions that were given in this case. 
Accordingly, pre-Act second or successive petition doc- 
trine bars the Cage claim. It is not necessary to our appli- 
cation of pre-Act second or successive petition law to 
decide whether the claim also lacks merit. However, in 
the interest of completeness we also note that the claim, 
which can be decided based upon the trial record, does 
lack merit. 


Felker argues that the trial court’s reasonable doubt 
instruction violated his due process rights because the 
instruction allowed the jury to convict him based on less 
than a standard of utmost certainty.* * Felker contends 
that by equating proof beyond a reasonable doubt with 
proof “to a moral certainty” the jury was allowed to 
convict based on less proof than that required to convict 
beyond a reasonable doubt. 


In Cage, the Supreme Court held that a jury instruc- 
tion that: 


3 The trial court’s instruction is affixed to this opinion as 
Appendix A. 


4 We note that Felker does not challenge the “two 
inferences” language in the jury charge, 1.e., that portion of the 
charge in which the court stated that, “if the circumstances in 
the case are subject to equally reasonable constructions, one 
indicating guilt and the other innocence, you are obligated 
under the law to accept that construction indicating innocence.” 
(R. 1105). We do not, therefore, address this possible contention. 


— 


13 


equated a reasonable doubt with a “grave uncer- 
tainty” and an “actual substantial doubt,” and 
stated that what was required was a “moral 
certainty” that the defendant was guilty .. . 
suggest[ed] a higher degree of doubt than is 
required for acquittal under the reasonable- 
doubt standard. When those statements are then 
considered with the reference to “moral cer- 
tainty,” rather than evidentiary certainty, it 
becomes clear that a reasonable juror could have 
interpreted the instruction to allow a finding of 
guilt based on a degree of proof below that 
required by the Due Process Clause. 


498 U.S. at 41, 111 S. Ct. at 329-30. The Supreme Court 
clarified its holding in Cage in Victor v. Nebraska and its 
companion case, Sandoval v. California, ___ U.S. __, 114S. 
Ct. 1239 (1994). There the Court held that although no 
particular words are required to define reasonable doubt, 
the trial court must correctly explain the standard in 


articulating the prosecution’s burden of proof. Id. at ___ 
114 S. Ct. at 1243. 


We described our method of review of a reasonable 
doubt charge in Harvell v. Nagle, 58 F.3d 1541 (11th Cir. 
1995), petition for cert. filed, __ U.S.L.W. ___ (Jan. 17, 1996) 
(No. 95-8450): 


When reviewing reasonable-doubt charges, 
we consider the instruction as a whole to deter- 
mine if the instruction misleads the jury as to 
the government's burden of proof. See United 
States v. Veltmann, 6 F.3d 1483, 1492 (11th Cir. 
1993). The Supreme Court has phrased the 
proper constitutional inquiry as “whether there 
is reasonable likelihood that the jury understood 
the instructions to allow conviction based on 


14 


proof insufficient to meet the Winship standard.” 
Victor, __ U.S. at __, 114 S. Ct. at 1243. 


Id. at 1542. In Harvell, the petitioner argued that the 
instruction given equated reasonable doubt with “actual 
and substantial doubt” and “moral certainty.” Id. We held 
that when viewed in the context of the remainder of the 
jury charge, the trial court’s references to “actual and 
substantial doubt” and “moral certainly” were eradicated 
and “did not create a reasonable likelihood that the jury 
understood the instruction to allow conviction based on 
proof insufficient to meet the Winship standard.” Id. at 
1545. 


In Cage, the Supreme Court addressed three phrases 
that it deemed to have tainted the charge: “grave uncer- 
tainty,” “actual substantial doubt,” and “moral certainty.” 
498 U.S. at 41, 111 S. Ct. at 329. In Harvell, we addressed 
two potentially problematic phrases. Harvell, 58 F.3d at 
1543. Here, Felker can only point to one phrase, used 
twice in the jury charge, that he argues constitutes a 
constitutional defect, i.e., the use of the term “moral 
certainty.” 


The Harvell charge made the following references to 
“moral certainty”: 


15 


. * * 


So, the State, again, has to prove guilt beyond 
a reasonable doubt or to a moral certainty in order to 
overcome the presumption of innocence. 


* . * 


The State is not required to convince you of Mr. 
Harvell’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and 
to the point that you could not possibly be mis- 
taken, but simply beyond all reasonable doubt and to 
a moral certainty. 


Id. at 1545, 1546. 


The jury charge in Felker’s case made the following 
references to “moral certainty”: 


In a criminal case, however, the state must 
prove each of its contentions beyond a reasonable 
doubt and to a moral certainty. 


The law does not require the defendant to 
prove that he is innocent. His innocence is con- 
clusively presumed until the contrary is estab- 
lished by the evidence beyond a reasonable 
doubt. The state, however, is not required to 
prove his guilt beyond all doubt. Moral and rea- 
sonable certainty is all that can be expected in a legal 
investigation. 


Let's don’t forget the central issue that we 
are here about: Are you convinced — and I will 
talk about the measure of proof in just a 
moment, beyond a reasonable doubt and to a moral 
certainty that the State has proven Roy Avon 
Harvell intentionally, that is purposely, shot and 
killed Mr. Midgett or shot him for the purpose 
of killing him. 


App. A at 1102 (emphasis added). In Felker’s case, as in 
Harvell, any potential constitutional harm caused by these 
references to “moral certainty” were eradicated by the 
language in the rest of the charge, which grounded the 
definition of reasonable doubt in the evidence. Harvell, 58 
F.3d at 1543-44; see also, Victor, _ U.S. at __, 114S. Ct. at 
1248. 


16 


In Victor, the Court found that the trial court's refer- 
ence in the charge to “an abiding conviction . . . of the 
guilt of the accused” did “much to alleviate any concerns 
that the phrase moral certainty might be misunderstood 
in the abstract.” Victor, ___ U.S. at __, 114 S. Ct. at 1249, 
1250. In Harvell, the trial court instructed the jury that 
reasonable doubt had to be derived from the evidence 
and that reasonable doubt could not be “fanciful, vague, 
whimsical, capricious, conjectural or speculative.” Har- 
vell, 58 F.3d at 1543. Likewise, in this case, the trial court's 
definition of reasonable doubt as “doubt which is based 
on the evidence, a lack of evidence or a conflict in the 
evidence” and “doubt which is reasonably entertained as 
opposed to vague or fanciful or farfetched doubt,” served 
to erase any taint created by the term “moral certanty” 
and to thus place it beyond the potential for constitu- 
tional harm. App. A at 1102. “The instruction thus explic- 
itly told the jurors that their conclusion had to be based 
on the evidence in the case.” Victor, __ U.S. at __, 114S. 
Ct. at 1248. “Accordingly, there is no reasonable likeli- 
hood that the jury would have understood moral cer- 
tainty to be disassociated from the evidence in the case.” 
Id. In sum, the combination of the defining phraseology 
set out above, together with the remainder of the charge, 
which included other explanations and qualifications of 
the term “reasonable doubt,”> “convinces us that it was 


5 “If after you consider all the facts and circumstances in 
the case your minds are wavering, unsettled and unsatisfied, 
then that is the doubt of the law, and you should acquit the 
defendant.” App. A at 1103. “No conviction should rest upon 
suspicion, conjecture or the possibility of guilt.” Id. at 1105-06. 
“[Bjefore you would be authorized to convict on evidence 


17 


not reasonably likely that the jury understood the instruc- 
tions to allow conviction based upon proof insufficient to 
meet the Winship standard.” Harvell, 58 F.3d at 1545 
(emphasis added). 


In addition to contending that the trial court’s charge 
to the jury violated his due process right under Cage, 
Felker also argues that the prosecutor’s remarks to indi- 
vidual jurors during voir dire regarding the state’s bur- 
den of proof implicate the same concern as that 
addressed by the Supreme Court in Cage. Felker correctly 
points out that, during voir dire, the prosecutor explained 
to several jurors that “moral and reasonable certainty is 
all that is required in a legal investigation.” See, e.g., (R. 
215, 265, 314, 393, 587, 629). 


The purpose of voir dire examination is to allow the 
government and the defendant to evaluate and select an 
impartial jury capable of fairly deciding the issues pre- 
sented by applying the law as instructed by the court to the 
facts as produced during the trial. United States v. Miller, 
758 F.2d 570, 571 (11th Cir.) (emphasis added), cert. denied, 
474 U.S. 994, 106 S. Ct. 406, 88 L. Ed. 2d 357 (1985). 
(emphasis added). We note that, immediately following 
voir dire, the court explicitly instructed the impannelled 
jurors that “[a]rguments by counsel are not evidence, and 
you are not bound by them.” (R. 4). In light of our 
conclusion that the trial court's jury charge, viewed in its 
entirety, appropriately instructed the jury with respect to 


which is entirely circumstantial, such evidence must not only 
prove the guilt of the accused beyond every reasonable doubt, 
but it must also exclude every other reasonable theory except 
that of guilt.” Id. at 1105. 


18 


its responsibility to find the defendant guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt, and therefore did not violate Felker’s 
due process right pursuant to Cage, we find that the 
prosecutor’s remarks during voir dire to which Felker 
now objects were adequately rectified by the jury charge 
and the timely admonition to the jury discussed above, 
and did not taint the trial or the verdict. 


Therefore, we conclude that even if Felker’s claim 
under Cage was not barred under pre-Act second or suc- 
cessive petition law, he could not prevail on its merits 
because the trial court’s references to “moral certainty,” 
when viewed in context, as well as the admonition of the 
trial judge to the jury relative to the arguments of coun- 
sel, the entire charge, and the proximity of the charge to 
the jury’s deliberation, did not create a reasonable likeli- 
hood that the jury was misled as to the proper burden of 
proof or encouraged to arrive at its verdict by applying a 
standard of proof lower than reasonable doubt. 


B. Felker’s Claim that Permitting a Non-Physician 
Medical Examiner to Testify to the Time of Death 
Violated Due Process and the Eighth Amendment 


Felker offers no cause for his failure to raise in his 
first federal habeas petition the claim that it was constitu- 
tional error to permit Warren Tillman, a non-physician 
medical examiner, to give his opinion concerning the time 
of the victim's death. Medical Examiner Tillman's quali- 
fications, or lack thereof, were fully developed during 
direct and cross-examination at trial. Accordingly, the 
claim that Felker belatedly seeks to raise concerning that 
matter has been fully available to him since the trial in 


19 


1983. Felker does not proffer any other cause for his 
failure to raise this claim in his first federal habeas pro- 
ceeding in 1993. 


Turning to the fundamental miscarriage of justice 
exception to the cause and prejudice requirement, Felker 
has not shown that it is more likely than not that no 
reasonable juror would have convicted him but for the 
alleged constitutional error of permitting Tillman to offer 
an opinion as to the time of death. Tillman testified that 
in his opinion the victim could have been killed as many 
as fourteen days prior to her body being discovered on 
December 8, 1981, which would mean that she could have 
been killed as early as November 24, 1981, the date she 
was last seen alive. Felker had an alibi from 7:00 p.m. 
November 25, 1981 forward. He contends that Tillman’s 
testimony was critical to his conviction, because he 
argues, “[t}he only evidence that the death occurred 
when [Felker] could have caused it was the ‘expert’ testi- 
mony of a non-physician [Tillman] employed by the pros- 
ecution arm of the State of Georgia.” Application at 30-31. 
That simply is not true. Dr. James Q. Whitaker, a highly 
qualified pathologist and medical examiner (R. 428-30) 
also examined the pertinent evidence including photo- 
graphs, the body itself after it was disinterred, tissue 
slides, and so forth, and he reached his own opinion 
concerning the time of death. The Georgia Supreme Court 
summarized Dr. Whitaker’s testimony as follows: 


Dr. Whitaker, the medical examiner for 
Houston County, testified for the state in rebut- 
tal. His early experience was in Baltimore, 
Maryland, and, perhaps due to the proximity of 
Chesapeake Bay, he had observed over “200 


20 


drowning or immersion-type cases.” Dr. Whita- 
ker testified that — considering the air tempera- 
tures in the relevant time period; the fact that 
most missing and murdered persons die soon 
after they disappear; the fact that when Joy 
Ludlam was found, she was wearing the same 
clothes as when she was last seen alive; and the 
extent of decomposition — in his opinion, death 
occurred two weeks prior to the discovery of the 


body. 


Felker v. State, 252 Ga. at 359, 314 So.2d at 631. We have 
reviewed Dr. Whitaker’s testimony at trial, and he did 
testify that: “I would say most — in my opinion, the time 
of death is shortly after she became missing, and in my 
opinion it’s more likely, with a reasonable degree of med- 
ical probability, that the death occurred 14 days ago when 
she was missing, found missing, but certainly, with the 
degree of decomposition that is present, three to five days, 
within that time frame is possible, but I think that the 
time, in my opinion, is older than that.” (R. 997-98). 


There is no question that Dr. Whitaker is a qualified 
pathologist. He is a medical doctor, having pursued a 
study in the specialty of pathology, including an intern- 
ship and residency in pathology, and he is a board certi- 
fied anatomic and clinical pathologist. He had taught 
forensic pathology, and at the time of trial was the Chief 
Pathologist and Director of Laboratories and Clinical 
Pathology at the Houston County Hospital, in Warner 
Robbins, Georgia (R. 428). At the time of his trial testi- 
mony, Dr. Whitaker had performed over 1500 autopsies 
(R. 430). 


21 


Moreover, there was other evidence, in addition to 
Dr. Whitaker’s expert opinion, that the victim’s death 
occurred fourteen days before her body was discovered, 
making it likely that she was killed around November 24, 
1981. It was undisputed that the victim’s car was seen 
parked in an local bank parking lot on the evening of 
November 24, and the next morning her car was still 
parked there, apparently abandoned. There was also evi- 
dence that she had placed a call to her employer during 
the early evening of November 24, stating that she would 
not be working that evening. Felker admitted to an officer 
that the victim had made that telephone call from his 
home. When her body was discovered two weeks after 
she disappeared, it was clothed in the same dress she had 
been wearing when last seen on November 24. When that 
evidence is combined with other evidence of Felker’s 
guilt, including the remarkable similarities between this 
crime and a similar crime he had committed and been 
convicted for earlier, see Felker v. Thomas, 52 F.3d at 908, 
we readily conclude that Felker has not shown that but 
for the alleged constitutional violation of permitting War- 
ren Tillman to offer his opinion as to the time of death, it 
is more likely than not that no reasonable juror would 
have convicted him. 


Although pre-Act law certainly did not restrict the 
second and successive petition bar only to claims that 
lacked merit, we do note, for the sake of completeness, 
that this claim lacks merit. As we have pointed out previ- 
ously, this claim is based upon the false premise that 
Warren Tillman was the only expert witness who testified 
to an opinion consistent with the victim having been 
killed at a time for which Felker did not have an alibi. But 


22 


the record clearly shows that Dr. Whitaker, who was 
unquestionably qualified to give such an opinion, also 
testified to the same opinion as Tillman. In addition to the 
expert testimony, there was other evidence, which we 
have already discussed, establishing that the victim died 
as early as November 24, 1981. The standard of review for 
state evidentiary rulings in federal habeas corpus pro- 
ceedings is a narrow one. Only when evidentiary errors 
“so infused the trial with unfairness as to deny due 
process of law” is habeas relief warranted. Lisenba v. 
California, 314 U.S. 219, 228, 62 S. Ct. 280, 286 (1941), 
quoted and applied in, Estelle v. McGuire, 502 U.S. 62, 75, 
112 S. Ct. 475, 484 (1991); accord Baxter v. Thomas, 45 F.3d 
1501, 1509 (11th Cir.) (evidentiary ruling claims reviewed 
only to determine whether the error “was of such magni- 
tude as to deny fundamental fairness”), cert. denied, 116 S. 
Ct. 385 (1995); Kight v. Singletary, 50 F.3d 1539, 1546 (11th 
Cir. 1995), cert. denied, 116 S. Ct. 785 (1996). Such a deter- 
mination is to be made in light of the evidence as a 
whole. Viewing the evidence in this case in its entirety, 
the introduction of Warren Tillman’s testimony did not so 
infuse the trial with unfairness as to deny Felker funda- 
mental fairness and due process of law. 


C. Actual Innocence as an Independent Constitu- 
tional Claim 


Thus far we have discussed actual innocence only in 
the Schlup v. Delo “gateway” procedural, as distinguished 
from independent substantive, sense. See 115 S. Ct. at 
860-61. Although not entirely clear, it appears from his 
application that Felker also may be seeking to either 


23 


litigate actual innocence as a separate constitutional 
ciaim, or at least be seeking to challenge the Act as 
unconstitutional on the grounds that it precludes asser- 
tion of a separate and independent constitutional claim of 
actual innocence. More likely the latter. In regard to that 
possibility, the State has responded that the Act does not 
modify the law involving actual innocence claims. We 
need not decide whether the Act precludes such claims, 
because even if it did, that modification of the law would 
not affect Felker who does not have a valid actual inno- 
cence claim, anyway. 


Justice O’Connor joined by Justice Kennedy, both of 
whose votes were necessary to the majority in Herrera v. 
Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993), explained that 
that decision left open the difficult question of whether 
federal habeas courts may entertain convincing claims of 
actual innocence. Id. at 472, 113 S. Ct. at 874. Justice 
O’Connor characterized the Herrera decision as assuming 
“for the sake of argument that a truly persuasive demon- 
stration of actual innocence would render any such exe- 
cution unconstitutional and that federal habeas relief 
would be warranted if no state avenue were open to 
process the claim.” Id. Making that same assumption, 
Felker is not entitled to habeas relief for two reasons. 
First, the Herrera opinion itself noted that, unlike Texas, 
Georgia is a state that not only permits motions for new 
trial on newly discovered evidence grounds, but it also 
provides that the time for filing such motions can be 
extended. Id. at 411 n.11, 113 S. Ct. at 866 n.11; Ga. Code 
Ann. §§ 5-5-40 and 5-5-41 (Michie 1995).© Therefore, this 


6 At the time of Felker’s conviction and sentencing in 
February 1983, Georgia law allowed defendants to move for a 


24 


is not a case where there is “no state avenue . . . open to 
process the claim.” Id. at 472, 113 S. Ct. at 874. 


Second, Felker has failed to persuasively demon- 
strate his actual innocence. Justice O’Connor’s character- 
ization of the habeas petitioner in Herrera is equally 
applicable to Felker: 


He was tried before a jury of his peers, with the 
full panoply of protections that our Constitution 
affords criminal defendants. At the conclusion 
of that trial, the jury found petitioner guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt. Petitioner therefore 
does not appear before us as an innocent man 
on the verge of execution. He is instead a legally 
guilty one who, refusing to accept the jury’s 
verdict, demands a hearing in which to have his 
culpability determined once again. 


Id. at 419-20, 113 S. Ct. at 870. The only evidence Felker 
offers that was not offered at his trial are the affidavits of 
two medical examiners who criticize the qualifications of 
Medical Examiner Tillman and disagree with his opinion 
about the time of death. Neither of Felker’s new experts 
impugn in any way the qualifications of Dr. James Whita- 
ker, another medical examiner, who testified to the same 
opinion about the time of death as did Tillman. At most, 


new trial on the basis of newly discovered evidence. See Dick v. 
State, 287 S.E.2d 11, 13 (1982). While Georgia law generally 
requires motions for a new trial to be made within 30 days of 
entry of judgment, see Ga. Code Ann. § 5-5-40 (Michie 1995), it 
also permits “extraordinary” motions to be filed after this 
deadline, see Ga. Code Ann. § 5-5-41 (Michie 1995). This was 
also true back in 1983 at the time of Felker’s conviction and 
sentence in Houston County Superior Court. See Dick, 287 
S.E.2d at 13 & n.2. 


25 


the belated affidavits are cumulative evidence in support 
of Felker’s position on the time of death issue. There was 
expert opinion testimony on both sides of that issue at 
trial, as well as other evidence. Considering it all, we do 
not doubt in the least Felker’s guilt. 


Moreover, permitting such last minute affidavits to 
reopen guilt issues, absent truly extraordinary circum- 
stances which are not present here, would open up vir- 
tually any capital case in which expert testimony was 
presented on behalf of the State to relitigation on the eve 
of execution. We do not believe that the Constitution or 
anything in the Herrera decision requires that, partic- 
ularly where, as here, we are convinced that, “[p]etitioner 
is not innocent, in any sense of the word.” Id. at 419, 113 
S. Ct. at 870 (concurring opinion of O’Connor, J., joined 
by Kennedy, J.). 


Il. CONCLUSION 


Felker has failed to show substantial grounds upon 
which relief might be granted under the new Act. Like- 
wise, he has failed to show substantial grounds upon 
which relief might be granted insofar as any constitu- 
tional issues involving the Act are concerned, because he 
would not be entitled to any relief even under pre-Act 
law. 


The request for a stay of execution is DENIED. 


The application for an order authorizing the filing of 
a second or successive petition is DENIED. 


26 


{T. 1101] 
THE STATE OF GEORGIA ) Indictment No. 12405 
vs. ! Murder, Agg. Sodomy, 
ELLIS WAYNE FELKER ) Rape, et al 
) CHARGE OF THE 
) COURT 


Members of the jury, on May 17, 1982, the grand jury 
of this circuit indicted the defendant, Ellis Wayne Felker, 
and charged him with the offenses of rape, aggravated 
sodomy, false imprisonment, robbery and murder. 


To that indictment, and to those charges, Mr. Felker 
has entered his plea of not guilty, thereby denying and 
challenging each and every essential allegation in the 
indictment. 


As I previously mentioned to you, the robbery charge 
is no longer before you because as a matter of law such 
charge was not proved, and the instructions which I will 
now give you will apply to each remaining charge in the 
indictment, unless | state otherwise. 


Whether the other charges in the indictment have 
been proven is for you to decide based on the evidence 
on the instructions I will now give you. 


The indictment, along with the defendant's plea of 
not guilty, will be out with you when you consider the 
case, and you may refer to them. They are not evidence, 
however, and you should not consider them as such. 
They simply represent the method by which the case was 
brought into court for trial. 


27 


[T. 1102] In spite of his indictment, the defendant is 
presumed to be innocent until his guilt is established by 
the evidence to the exclusion of and beyond every rea- 
sonable doubt. The burden of proof in this tase, as in all 
criminal cases, rests upon the state, from the beginning to 
the end of the trial, to establish beyond a reasonable 
doubt every fact essential to the conviction of the defen- 
dant. That is, the state must prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that a crime was in fact committed and that the 
defendant was the person who committed the crime. 


The standard of proof in a criminal case is higher 
than that required in a civil case. In civil cases, a simple 
preponderance or greater weight of the evidence is con- 
sidered sufficient to sustain a contention. In a criminal 
case, however, the state must prove each of its conten- 
tions beyond a reasonable doubt and to a moral certainty. 


The law does not require the defendant to prove that 
he is innocent. His innocence is conclusively presumed 
until the contrary is established by the evidence beyond a 
reasonable doubt. The state, however, is not required to 
prove his guilt beyond all doubt. Moral and reasonable 
certainty is all that can be expected in a legal investiga- 
tion. 


A reasonable doubt is defined as a doubt which is 
based on the evidence, a lack of evidence or a conflict in 
the evidence. It is a doubt which is reasonably enter- 
tained as opposed to a vague or fanciful or farfetched 
doubt. 


[T. 1103] If after you consider all the facts and cir- 
cumstances in the case your minds are wavering, unset- 
tled and unsatisfied, then that is the doubt of the law, and 


28 


you should acquit the defendant. On the other hand, if 
such doubt does not exist in your minds as to his guilt, 
you should convict him. 


One of the elements in every criminal case is the 
matter of venue; that is, the state must prove that the 
crime occurred in the county in which the case is being 
tried. For example, if a crime occurs in Houston County, 
then the trial for that crime shall be in Houston County. 


In a murder case, the trial may be held in the county 
where the cause of death was inflicted or in the county 
where death actually occurred, if it cannot be determined 
where the cause of death occurred. 


The defendant in this case contends that the state has 
not proved the element of venue. In that respect I instruct 
you that it is the state’s burden, with respect to each 
charge in the indictment, to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the crime might have been committed in 
Houston County. If the state fails to do this, then the 
defendant is entitled to a verdict of not guilty. 


You are the sole judges of the credibility of the wit- 
nesses and of the weight to be given their testimony, you 
may take into account his or her ability and opportunity 
to observe the facts; his or her memory; the witness’ 
manner [T. 1104] while testifying; any interest, bias or 
prejudice the witness may have, and you may also con- 
sider the reasonableness of such testimony. 


If there are conflicts in the evidence, it is your duty 
under the law the [sic] reconcile them wherever possible 
so as to make all the witnesses speak the truth and not 
attribute a false statement to any of them. If you cannot 


29 


do this, however, then you would believe that testimony 
which is most reasonable and credible to you. 


A witness’ testimony may be impeached or dis- 
creditied [sic] by disproving the facts testified to by him 
or her, or by showing that the witness made a previous 
statement or statements inconsistent with or contradic- 
tory to the testimony given at trial. 


If you determine that the testimony of any witness 
has been impeached or discredited in that manner, you 
are authorized to believe or disbelieve said witness’ testi- 
mony in whole or in part. 


If you find that any witness has been placed under 
hypnosis for the purpose of refreshing or improving that 
witness’ recollection, and if you find that such testimony 
is in whole or in part induced by the hypnosis, then to the 
extent that it was you would disregard such testimony. 


Ordinarily the court receives the testimony of wit- 
nesses only as to facts to which the witness has particular 
and direct knowledge. In certain cases, however, where a 
particular degree of skill or knowledge is required to [T. 
1105] understand the situation, the law receives the opin- 
ion of those deemed to be expert in certain lines. The 
opinion testimony of an expert can be based on hypo- 
thetical questions or based on the expert's observations. 
You should not consider any opinion at all unless the 
facts upon which it is based on found by you to be true. 


Even though you are permitted to receive the testi- 
mony of an expert, you are not bound by such testimony. 

!aw allows you to receive it and consider it, along 
with all the other evidence in the case. 


30 


Evidence is either direct or circumstantial. Direct evi- 
dence is that which itself speaks to the issue involved. 
Indirect or circumstantial evidence is that which by its 
consistency suggests or implies that a certain claim or 
theory is true. 


Criminal conduct may be proved by circumstantial 
evidence as well as by direct evidence. However, before 
you would be authorized to convict on evidence which is 
entirely circumstantial, such evidence must not only 
prove the guilt of the accused beyond every reasonable 
doubt but it must also exclude every other reasonable 
theory except that of guilt. 


In other words, if the circumstances in the case are 
subject to equally reasonable constructions, one indicat- 
ing guilt and the other innocence, you are obligated 
under the law to accept that construction indicating inno- 
cence. 


No conviction should rest upon suspicion, conjecture 
[T. 1106] or the possibity [sic] of guilt. 


_ A-crime is defined as a violation of a statute of this 
state in which shall be a union of joint operation of act 
and intention. Criminal intent is a necessary element of a 
crime, and the state must prove such interest, just as it 
must prove every other essential element of the crime. 


No person should be found guilty of any crime which 
is committed by misfortune or accident, where it satisfac- 
torily appears there was no criminal intention. 


No one is presumed to act with criminal intention, 
but you may find such upon a consideration of the words, 
conduct, demeanor, motive and all other circumstances 


31 


connected with the offense. You may likewise find a lack 
of criminal intent upon such a consideration. 


Every person is presumed to be of sound mind and 
discretion and is presumed to intend the natural and 
probable consequences of his acts. The acts of such a 
person are presumed to be intentional. These presump- 
tions may be rebutted by any evidence to the contrary. 


In this case, the state has contended that the defen- 
dant was involved is a similar offense in 1976, and evi- 
dence was offered concerning the 1976 occurrence. The 
court allowed that evidence solely for you to decide 
whether it might tend to illustrate the defendant's 
motive, intent or state of mind with respect to the charges 
for which is is now on trial, and for no other purpose. 


Whether the defendant in fact committed such other 
{T. 1107] offense, and if so, whether it illustrates his state 
of mind in this case, is a matter for you to decide. 


In order for any crime to have been committed upon 
the person of the victim in this case, you must find 
beyond a reasonable doubt that such crime, if any, was 
committed upon her before she died. 


In count one of the indictment, the defendant is 
charged with the offense of rape. A person commits rape 
when he has carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and 
against her will. Carnal knowledge in rape occurs when 
there is any penetration, however slight, of the female sex 
organ by the male sex organ. For such carnal knowledge 
to constitute the offense of rape, the penetration must 
have been accomplished by force and against the will and 
without the consent of the female alleged to have been 


32 


raped. The offense of rape is not complete if the element 
of force is lacking in the commission of the sexual act. 


In count two of the indictment, the defendant is 
charged with the offense of aggravated sodomy. A person 
commits the offense of sodomy when he performs or 
submits to any sexual act involving the sex organs of one 
person and the anus of another. A person commits the 
offense of aggravated sodomy when he commits sodomy 
with force and against the will of the other person. 


In this case, the state must prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the defendant inserted his sex organ into the 
anus of Evelyn Joy Ludlam with force and against her 
will [T. 1108] in order for there to be a conviction under 
this count. 


In count three of the indictment, the defendant is 
accused of the offense of false imprisonment. A person 
commits the offense of false imprisonment when, in vio- 
lation of the personal liberty of another, he detains such 
person without legal authority. 


In court five of the indictment, the defendant is 
charged with the offense of murder. A person commits 
murder when he unlawfully and with malice 
aforethought, either express or implied, causes the death 
of another human being. Express malice is that deliberate 
intention to kill which is manifested or shown by external 
circumstances capable of proof. 


Malice shall be implied where no considerable provo- 
cation appears and where all the circumstances of the 
killing show an abandoned and malignant heart. Malice 
is an essential element of murder, and it must exist before 
any homicide can be murder. Malice in its legal sense is 


iy ip Rb EI hay a 


33 


not necessarily ill will or hatred. It is the unlawful, delib- 
erate, preconceived intention to kill a human being with- 
out justification or excuse, which intention must exist at 
the time of the killing. If such intention enters the mind 
of the slayer a moment before he commits the fatal act, 
that is sufficient. 


Members of the jury, you should take the instructions 
which I have given you in this case and apply them to the 
facts as you find the facts to be, and arrive at a verdict [T. 
1109] which speaks the truth. The object of every legal 
investigation is the discovery of the truth. You are not 
concerned with the effect or consequence of your verdict. 
You are only concerned that the speak the truth. 


As to each count in the indictment, the four remain- 
ing counts, members of the jury, if you believe beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty as charged 
in the indictment, it would be your duty to convict him, 
and the form of your verdict in that event would be, “We 
find the defendant guilty.” 


On the other hand, if you do not believe that the 
defendant has committed the offense with which he’s 
charged or any one of them dealing with each particular 
count, or if you entertain a reasonable doubt as to the 
defendant's guilt, it would be your duty to acquit him, 
and in that event the form of your verdict would be, “We 
find the defendant not guilty.” 


Whatever your verdict is, members of the jury, one of 
you as foreperson of the jury should write it out sep- 
arately as to each count on the back of the indictment. 
You should then date it and sign it. Then you would 
notify the bailiff that you have arrived at your verdict, 


34 


and you will be asked te come back into the courtroom so 
that your verdict can be published as provided by law. 


I ask at this time, please, that the 12 of you on the 
regular jury panel retire to this jury room. I’m going to 
ask the two alternates for the time being to retire back 
here [T. 1110] believe, I believe to my office. Any objec- 
tion to that, for the time being? All right. 


(The jury thereupon left the courtroom at 2:28 
p.m.) 


* * * 


THE COURT: Does the state have any excep- 
tions to the charge? 


MR. FINLAYSON: No, sir, your Honor. 


THE COURT: Do you at this time, Mr. Hasty or 
Mr. Brown? 


MR BROWN: Judge, the only thing that, other 
than failure to give our requests to charge, that I would 
make exception to is the judge charged, like a lot of 
courts do, that the jury must make the witnesses speak 
the truth; that coupled with the fact that the judge 
charged the jury that they have a duty to convict if they 
find that there’s not reasonable doubt, I think the combi- 
nation there would tell the jury they have to believe 
somebody that they may otherwise decide to disregard 
entirely, whether or not the person has been impeached. 


I think one privilege the jury would have would be to 
simply disregard somebody’s testimony without that per- 
son being impeached, and the judge’s charge does not 
give them that option. I would point that out now, but, of 


35 


course, we don’t waive the various other requests. I don’t 
have a list of all of the requests that were not given at this 
time. 


I don’t recall one on the wavering mind, if the jury 
[T. 1111] were to say that - 


MR. HASTY: Yeah. 


MR. BROWN: Was that given? We would 
reserve our right to any further objection. 


I think you may reserve your exceptions. I don’t 
think under the present law you are required to go into 
any detail as to any problems with the charge; and, as | 
said, now, we will get a copy of your requests, along with 
those of the state, marked filed. 


Now, do you want to get together and get the evi- 
dence to go to the jury? 


(The exhibits were thereupon gathered by coun- 
sel and the reporter.) 


(The exhibits were taken to the jury at 2:43 p.m.) 


Now, let me tell you what I have in mind doing with 
respect to the two alternates, is to continue sequestering 
them until such time as this jury reaches a verdict. 


Now, my impression is that they can be called on to 
serve in connection with this case up until that time. 
Once this jury decides the verdict, I think their services 
are over, even if the jury convicts the defendant. I ques- 
tion whether they would be permitted to serve in an 
alternate capacity in the sentence phase not having par- 
ticipated in the guilt or innocence. I don’t think they 
could. 


36 


MR. DANIEL: The law says the same jury shall 
consider the penalty as considered the first. . . 


aes atute ne eam 


an 


ee ae 


37 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


No. 95-8836 (A-890) 


ELLIS WAYNE FELKER, PETITIONER v. 
TONY TURPIN, WARDEN 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE 
ELEVENTH CIRCUIT AND PETITION 
FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS 


[May 3, 1996] 


The application for stay of execution of sentence of 
death presented to Justice Kennedy and by him referred 
to the Court is granted. The motion for leave to proceed 
in forma pauperis is granted. The petition for a writ of 
certiorari is granted. The parties shall submit briefs lim- 
ited to the following questions: (1) Whether Title I of the 
Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 
(the Act), and in particular Section 106(b)(3)(E), 28 U.S.C. 
§ 2244(b)(3)(E), is an unconstitutional restriction of the 
jurisdiction of this Court. (2) Whether and to what extent 
the provisions of Title I of the Act apply to petitions for 
habeas corpus filed as original matters in this Court 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2241. (3) Whether application of 
the Act in this case is a suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus in violation of Art. I, § 9, clause 2 of the Constitu- 
tion. 


The parties’ briefs are to be filed with the Clerk of 
this Court and served upon opposing counsel on or 
before 2 p.m., Friday, May 17, 1996. Reply briefs, if any, 
may be filed with the Clerk of the Court and served upon 


38 


opposing counsel on or before 2 p.m., Tuesday, May 28, 
1996. The Solicitor General is invited to file a brief expres- 
sing the views of the United States. Briefs may be submit- 
ted in compliance with Rule 33.2 to be replaced as soon as 
possible with briefs prepared under Rule 33.1. Rule 29.2 
does not apply. Oral argument is set for Monday, June 3, 
1996, at 10 a.m. 


Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter, Justice GIn- 
sBURG, and Justice Breyer join, dissenting. 


In my opinion, it is both unnecessary and profoundly 
unwise for the Court to order expedited briefing of the 
important questions raised by the petition for certiorari 
and application for a writ of habeas corpus. Even if the 
majority were right that this petition squarely presents 
substantial constitutional questions about the power of 
Congress to limit this Court's jurisdiction, our consider- 
ation of them surely should be undertaken with the 
utmost deliberation, rather than unseemly haste. Accord- 
ingly, | respectfully dissent from the entry of the forego- 
ing order. 


