Supreme Court, U.S. 


7itss 
NO. 95-1738 JUN 9 1996 
IN THE oe 


- 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
October Term, 1995 


COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, 
Petitioner 
V. 


RANDY LEE KILGORE, 
Respondent 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania 


REPLY TO BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 
TO PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


H. STANLEY REBERT 

District Attorney 

CHRISTY H. FAWCETT 

Chief Deputy Prosecutor 
RONALD EISENBERG 

Special Assistant District Attorney 
(Counsel of Record) 

JOAN WEINER 

Special Assistant District Attorney 
CATHERINE MARSHALL 
Special Assistant District Attorney 


York County District Attorney’s Office 
c/o Ronald Eisenberg, Esquire 

1421 Arch Street 

Philadelphia, Pa. 19102 

(215) 686-5700 


~) iaegge— tig a 
ee ie by 


i 


Table of Authorities 
Statement of the Case 
Reply to Brief in Opposition 


Conclusion 


FEDE AS 


Almeida-Sanchez v. United 
States, 413 U.S. 266 (1973) 


California v. Carney, 471 
U.S. 386 (1985) 


Chimel v. California, 395 
U.S. 752 (1969) 


Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 
730 (1983) 


Texas v. White, 423 U.S. 
67 (1975) 


United States v. Jeffers, 
342 U.S. 48 (1951) 


United States v. Johns, 
469 U.S. 478 (1985) 


United States v. Ross, 
456 U.S. 798 (1982) 


Warden v. Hayden, 387 
U.S. 294 (1967) 


Zap v. United States, 
328 U.S. 624 (1946) 


2,4 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In his counterstatement of the facts, respondent 
raises various cavils about the events leading up to the 
search (¢.g., respondent walked “toward” the truck where 
the contraband was found, not “to” it). The implicit 
point appears to be that the police may have lacked 
probable cause for the search. The state court, however, 
found probable cause, and respondent does not argue to 
the contrary. The only issue at this stage is whether 
police needed a warrant to search the vehicle. 


REPLY TO BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 


In its certiorari petition, petitioner explained that 
this case warrants review because the Pennsylvania 
Supreme Court impermissibly grafted on to this Court's 
Fourth Amendment jurisprudence the requirement that 
the police, acting with probable cause, must first secure 
a motor vehicle and send other officers to obtain a 
warrant before searching it. 


in response, respondent attempts to downplay the 
significance of the case by characterizing it as one of 
“unique facts” falling outside the automobile exception. 
He does so, however, by arguing that the automobile 
exception applies only in cases involving such extra 
factors as "a consent search,” “plain view,” “sudden 
encounter and stop," or “search incident to arrest." 


This, however, is a fundamentally mistaken view 
of the automobile exception, which is the whole point of 
the certiorari petition. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court 
has held in this and a series of cases that the automobile 
exception requires something more than a showing of 
probable cause -- that it requires, in effect, an indepen- 
dent exception to the warrant requirement, such as an 


exigent circumstance beyond the inherent mobility of the 
vehicle. 


Respondent's argument, brief as it is, epitomizes 
exactly this erroneous understanding « “ourth 
Amendment law. The “automobile exception” ts one gf 
several distinct exceptions to the warrant requirement. 
Because owners have a diminished expectation of 
privacy in their automobiles, as long as the police have 
probable cause to search a car, they may do so without a 
warrant. United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798 (1982). 


If, as respondent and the Pennsylvama Supreme 
Court believe, the automobile exception instead requires 
the presence of some additional factor, such as exigent 
circumstances or consent, then it ceases to exist. A 
consensual search, for example, is valid without a 
warrant whether or not an automobile is involved. 
Under the analysis of respondent and the Pennsylvania 
Supreme Court, the automobile exception is swallowed 
up. 


The cases cited by respondent make the point 
even clearer. Respondent states, for example, that the 
automobile exception was applied in California v. 
Carney, 471 U.S. 386 (1985), only because there were 


| Other exceptions to the warrant requirement 
include “hot pursuit,” see Warden v. Hayden, 387 U.S. 
294, (1967); “exigent circumstances," see United States 
v. Jeffers, 342 U.S. 48 (1951); “search incident to 
arrest,” see Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969), 
border searches, see Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, 
413 U.S. 266 (1973); consent searches, see Zap v. 
United States, 328 U.S. 624 (1946); and "plain view" 
searches, see Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730 (1983). 


2 


exigent circumstances beyond the inherent mobility of 
the vehicle. The opposite is true. In Carney, 
government agents received information that marijuana 
was being exchanged for sex inside a certain motor 
home. On-site surveillance corroborated the allegation 
and the police entered the motor home without a 
warrant. 


This Court did not uphold the warrantless search 
because of any exigencies beyond the inherent mobility 
of the vehicle. Indeed, there were none. Rather, the 
search was allowed under the “automobile exception” 
because, as with all motor vehicles, the accused had a 
diminished expectation of privacy in his trailer, and the 
agents had probable cause. No additional showing was 
necessary. 


Respondent also points to Texas v. White, 423 
U.S. 67 (1975), in which the automobile exception was 
supposedly applied only because probable cause resulted 
from a “plain view" discovery. That is not the case. In 
White, the police were informed that a man had just 
tried to negotiate four fraudulent checks at a nearby 
bank. They located the described car and driver and 
ordered him to stop on the road. As they did so, they 
noticed that the driver was trying to hide something 
between his legs, but they could not make out what it 
was. However, based on the description of the culprit 
and the car, they arrested the driver, drove the car to 
headquarters and searched it without a warrant. 


scene, their right to search the car did not abate simply 
because they drove the car to police headquarters before 
searching it. Respondent's contrary assertion notwith- 

standing, plain view played no role in White. 


3 


Finally, respondent suggests that the automobile 
exception applies only where a vehicle is suddenly 
encountered and stopped on the highway -- presumably, 
in respondent's thinking, a form of exigency. In 
support, he points to United States v. Johns, 469 U.S. 
478 (1985), and United States v. Ross, supra. Respon- 
dent again mischaracterizes the case law. 


In Johns, United States Customs officers devel- 
oped information about a drug operation at a remote 
airstrip. Upon further investigation, they approached a 
truck near the airstrip and smelled a strong odor of 
marijuana. Although the officers had probable cause to 
search the truck at that point, they decided instead to 
drive it to a government warehouse and question the 
driver. Three days later, they searched the truck without 
a warrant. This Court upheld that delayed search not 
because of any “sudden encounter or stop" on the high- 
way. The search was permitted because probable cause 
existed, and it did not disappear with the passage of 
time. 


The application of the automobile exception in 
United States v. Ross likewise was not determined by 
assessing the circumstances under which the police first 
encountered the car. In Ross, a reliable informant told 
the police that a particular person was dealing drugs out 
of the trunk of a car at a described location. The police 
went to the scene to investigate, saw the person and car 
in question, and searched the car trunk. Later, the 
police again searched the car at headquarters. This 
Court upheld the searches both at the scene and at 
headquarters, regardless of whether any "sudden encoun- 
ter or stop” or stop occurred. The searches were permit- 
ted because the police had probable cause and that was 
all the automobile exception required. 


Actually, respondent's “sudden encounter" theory 
is inconsistent not just with precedent, but with his own 
argument. Once a car is stopped and the suspect is 
removed, the vehicle is unlikely to drive away by itself. 
Under the Fourth Amendment notions of respondent and 
the state court, the police should be required to secure a 
warrant at that point; the fact that the “encounter” began 
"suddenly" would not impair the ability to contact a 
magistrate after the stop has been made. Such reason- 
ing, indeed, is exactly why the state court held in this 
case that the police should have guarded the vehicle and 
sent other officers off to track down a magistrate before 
conducting a search. 


The problem with this rationale is that the ease 
of obtaining a warrant is simply not a question under the 
automobile exception. The existence of probable cause, 
in light of the reduced expectation of privacy in motor 
vehicles, is sufficient to support the exception. Respon- 
dent makes precisely the same error as the Pennsylvania 
Supreme Court: they have confused the conditions for 
the automobile exception with the conditions for other 
exceptions to the warrant requirement, such as exigent 
circumstances. 


As a result, federal law is not applied in Pennsyl- 
vania in the same manner as in other states. The 
certiorari petition should be granted to address this 
divergence. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, as well as those stated in the 
petition for writ of certiorari, petitioner respectfully 
requests that a writ of certiorari issue to review the 


decision below. 
ie 
H. STANLEY ERT 


District Attorney 

CHRISTY H. FAWCETT 

Chief Deputy Prosecutor 
RONALD EISENBERG 

Special Assistant District Attorney 
(Counsel of Record) 

JOAN WEINER 

Special Assistant District Attorney 
CATHERINE MARSHALL 
Special Assistant District Attorney 


York County District Attorney’s Office 
c/o Ronald Eisenberg, Esquire 

1421 Arch Street 

Philadelphia, Pa. 19102 

(215) 686-5700 

June 1996 


