su-seinne Court, U.S 


aie & 
4 JUN 9 1996 
NO. 95-1691 
CLERK 
IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNIF®D STATES 
October Term, 1995 


COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, 
Petitioner 
Vv. 


EDWIN LABRON, 
Respondent 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania 


REPLY TO BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 
TO PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


RONALD EISENBERG 
Deputy District Attorney 
(Counsel of Record) 

JOAN WEINER 

Assistant District Attorney 
CATHERINE MARSHALL 
Chief, Appeals Unit 
ARNOLD GORDON 

First Assistant District Attorney 
LYNNE ABRAHAM 
District Attorney 


Philadelphia District Attorney's Office 
1421 Arch Street 

Philadelphia, PA 19102 

(215) 686-5700 


ee ee oe 


. 
yo 
) on 
2 
‘ 
eu om 2 
: 7 * a a , « c 
; . , 
“ 4 : : : ; 
; . e . nef 
: = ) -@ ‘ ; 
7 ar? ¢ Pe > . 
$a - —~> enn 
— 
Yen 
s: ° 7 : 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


PAGE 

Federal Cases 

Arizona v. Evans, 115 S. Ct. 1185 4 
(1995) 

Cardwell v. Lewis, 417 U.S. 583 3 
(1974) 

Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032 4,5,6 
(1983) 

State Cases 

Commonwealth v. Baker, 518 Pa. 5 
145, 541 A.2d 1381 (1988) 

Commonwealth v. Edmunds, 526 Pa. 6 
374, 586 A.2d 887 (1991) 

Commonwealth v. Kilgore, 1995 WL 6 
790060 (Pa. Dec. 26, 1995), 
petition for cert. filed, 64 
U.S.L.W. 3741 (No. 95-1738) 

Commonwealth v. Rodriguez, 526 Pa. 5 


268, 585 A.2d 988 (1991) 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The facts material to the question presented have 
heen set forth in the Petition for Writ of Certiorart. 
Petitioner files this Reply Brief in response to 
respondent's Brief in Opposition. 


REPLY TO BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 


In its petition for writ of certiorari, petitioner 
argued that this case warrants review because the 
Pennsylvania Supreme Court, here and in a series of 
other decisions, has fundamentally misconstrued the 
automobile exception to the warrant requirement of the 
Fourth Amendment. The state court believes that 
police, acting with probable cause, must show 
additional, particular exigent circumstances beyond the 
inherent mobility of the vehicle before they may search 
it. This notion erroneously confuses the automobile 
exception to the warrant requirement with the more 
general exigent circumstances exception. 


Respondent does not attempt to contest that the 
state court so held. Instead, he tries to make the case 


appear unworthy of certiorari review by mislabeling the 
legal dispute here as a factual one, and by redressing 
the plainly federal ruling below in new state law 
clothes. Respondent's efforts to evade review should be 
rejected. 


Respondent first contends that the Court should 
“inaccurately” states the facts. Yet respondent fails to 
identify a single factual dispute between the parties. let 
alone any inaccuracies. Instead, the promised 
discussion of facts turns out to be a legal argument 
concerning the point at which probable cause arose. 


l 


Respondent contends that the police already had 
probable cause, based on various tips and previous 
surveillance, even before they saw respondent put drugs 
in the trunk of a car. Therefore, he maintains, 
petitioner is wrong in “suggesting” that probable cause 
to search the car arose only after the police 
corroborated their prior information with actual 
observation. 


But this legal dispute, far from supporting 
respondent's position here, instead proves the necessity 
for review. The whole point of the certiorari petition is 
that it does not matter when probable cause vests, 
because it does not matter whether the police had 


I Despite respondent's current position, it is 
understandable that the police would have been 
uncertain as to the exact point at which probable cause 
arose. So was respondent. 


In his suppression motion, respondent asserted 
affirmatively that the search was conducted without 
probable cause -- that is, that the information available 
to the police never rose to the necessary level. In his 
memorandum of law in support of that motion, 
however, he argued that probable cause had existed all 
along, yet agreed that the police had no reliable or 
corroborated information about the car before they went 
to the scene to investigate. 


Such uncertainty buttresses the need for the 
automobile exception. The police did not act 
unreasonably in choosing to conduct further surveillance 
-- during which they saw respondent sell drugs and 
store his inventory in the trunk -- rather than guessing 
wrong about whether they already had probable cause. 


2 


contrast, respondent 's entire argument | 
aa in his assertion that the automobile exception 


and opportunity to obtain a warrant to search @ Car. 


ine whether -- as in 
ourt should grant review to determine W mn 
he ciate court's view of the Fourth Amendment the 


2see, e.g. Cardwell v. Lewis, 417 US. vers “y 
(1974) (defendant argued that probable caus® © 


determination of state law. If respondent were correct, 
however, he would not need any extended discussion of 
the issue; he would simply be able to point to a plain 
Statement by the court that its decision was exclusively 
state law based. 


Where, as here, a state court refers to federal 
law, and an “adequate and independent state ground" is 
not “plainly stated" in the court’s opinion, there is a 
"conclusive presumption" that the state court decided 
the case the way it did because it believed federal law 
required it to do so. Arizona vy. Evans, 115 S.Ct. 
1185, 1186 (1995); Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032 
(1983). The purpose of this conclusive presumption is 
to free this Court from the necessity of conducting 
exactly the sort of extended analysis in which 
respondent engages. It is not this Court's function to 
figure out whether the state court really meant 
something other than what it said. 


Yet respondent does not claim a “plain 
statement"; in fact, he carefully avoids mention of any 
form of those words. Respondent's failure to identify 
the necessary statement (or even to acknowledge the 
requirement for one) is hardly accidental. There is no 
Statement, plain or otherwise, placing the state court’s 
holding on independent state grounds. 


Respondent's argument is based instead on the. 
assertion that the state court "reach[{ed] the same result 
under the federal and state constitutions,” and that the 
court did not explicitly label the state ruling as 
contingent on the federal. Brief in Opposition at 13-14. 
In other words, says respondent, if the state court does 
not make a plain statement that its decision is 
exclusively federal, then it must be presumed to be one 


of state law. This argument simply reverses the 


conclusive presumption of Michigan v. Long. 


Moreover, even if the Court accepted 
respondent's invitation to search the record for a 
clandestine independent state ground, there would be 
nothing to find. Respondent did not argue to the 
suppression court that state law entitled him to a 
broader protection regarding the "automobile 
exception." Nor did the suppression court make any 
such distinction in its ruling. In fact, the suppression 
court clearly stated that the resolution of the motion 
depended on a Fourth Amendment analysis, and it 
relied in its written opinion on two state court 
decisions -- Commonwealth v. Rodriguez, 526 Pa. 268, 
585 A.2d 988 (1991), and Commonwealth v. Baker, 
518 Pa. 145, 541 A.2d 1381 (1988) -- both of which 


were explicitly based on federal law. The intermediate 
appellate court did the same. 


When the case reached the state supreme court, 
it mentioned the state constitution only to explain that 
the state provision was coterminous with the Fourth 
Amendment on the "automobile exception" question. 
The court then conducted a Fourth Amendment 
analysis. In doing so, the court referred to several 
Pennsylvania cases, but each and every one of them 
interpreted the "automobile exception" under this cs 
Court’s decisions, not the state constitution (see Petition 
for Writ of Certiorari, at 11 n.6; 12 n.7). 


3Rather than address these federal references, 
respondent spends the bulk of his argument (Brief in 
Opposition at 15-20) discussing Pennsylvania cases that 
were not even cited here. He claims that these cases 
(continued. ..) 


The last word on the nature of the ruling below 
comes from the Pennsylvania Supreme Court itself. In 
a companion case to this one, filed twelve days after the 
decision here, the court cited this case as controlling 
precedent for warrantless vehicle searches. 


Commonwealth v. Kilgore, 1995 WL 790060 at *3 (Pa. 
Dec. 26, 1995), petition for cert. filed, 64 U.S.L.W. 
3741 (No. 95-1738). The court concluded that the 


search in question "was conducted in a manner which 
violated [the appellant's] rights under the Fourth 
Amendment"). Obviously, the court would not have 
relied on this case to support a Fourth Amendment 
ruling unless it considered this case to be a Fourth 
Amendment ruling. Respondent’s Michigan v. Long 


argument is meritless. 


This case, the cases decided with it, and the 
cases cited in those decisions, demonstrate that the 
Pennsylvania Supreme Court has a long and deeply 


3 .. continued) 
show that the Pennsylvania Supreme Court often decides 
search and seizure issues on independent state grounds. 


Indeed it does. But when it does, it says so. 
See, ¢.g., Commonwealth y, Edmunds, 526 Pa. 374, 
411, 586 A.2d 887, 906 (1991) ("We base our decision 
strictly upon the Pennsylvania Constitution; any 
reference to the United States Constitution is merely for 
guidance and does not compel our decision. See 
Michigan v. Long [citation omitted}"). 

The Pennsylvania Supreme Court knows how to 
make a plain statement of an independent state ground. 


It did not make one here because it believed that its 
ruling was one of federal constitutional law. 


6 


entrenched view of the automobile exception to the | 
Fourth Amendment warrant requirement. That view is 


at odds with this Court's precedent. It is time to 
correct the erroneous Pennsylvania interpretation of 


federal law on the automobile exception. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, as well as those stated in the 


petition for writ of certiorari, petitioner respectfully 
requests that a writ of certiorari issue to review the 


decision below. 


Respectfull¥ submitted, 


kb 


RONALD NBERG 


t Attorney 

(Counsel of Record) 
JOAN WEINER 
Assistant District Attorney 
CATHERINE MARSHALL 
Chief, Appeals Unit 
ARNOLD GORDON 
First Assistant District Attorney 
LYNNE ABRAHAM 
District Attorney 

Philadelphia District Attorney's Office 

1421 Arch Street 

Philadelphia, Pa. 19102 

(215) 686-5700 

June 1996 


