IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


li 


COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, 
Petitioner 
v. 


EDWIN LABRON 


On Petition for Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania 


EDITOR'S NOTE 


THE FOLLOWING PAGES WERE POOR HARD COPY 


AT THE TIME OF FILMING. IF AND WHEN A APPENDIX - VOLUME II 


RONALD EISENBERG 
Deputy District Attorney 
(Counsel of Record) 

JOAN WEINER 

Assistant District Attorney 
CATHERINE MARSHALL 
Chief, Appeals Unit 
ARNOLD GORDON 

First Assistant District Attorney 
LYNNE ABRAHAM 
District Attorney 


BETTER COPY CAN BE OBTAINED, A NEW FICHE 


WILL BE ISSUED. 


Philadelphia District Attorney’s Office 
1421 Arch Street 

Philadelphia, PA 19102 

(215) 686-5700 


= Ae et. ewe 


TABLE OF CONTENTS TO APPENDIX 


Volume I 

Opinion of the Supreme Court of 
Pennsylvania, Dated December 29. 
1995, Entered January 12, 1996 


Opinion of the Superior Court of 
Pennsylvania 


Suppression Opinion of the Court 


of Common Pleas of Philadelphia 
County 


Volume II 


Notes of Testimony, Suppression 
Hearing: 


November 20, 199] 
November 21, 199] 
December 5, 199] 


March 5, 1992 


App. 1-34 


App. 35-43 


App. 44-53 


App. 54-189 
App. 190-240 
App. 241-255 


App. 256-266 


IN THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS OF 


PHILADELPHIA COUNTY 


FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


CRIMINAL TRIAL DIVISION 


COMMONWEALTH 

EDWIN LABRON ' No, 9009-2318 
RICHARD RAMOS - No. 9009-2300 
LUIS coaaina : No. 9009-2314 


Courtroom 254 City Hall 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Wednesday, November 20, 1991 


BEFORE: HONORABLE G. CRAIG LORD, J. 


APPEARANCES: 


GINO MECOLI, ESQ. 
Assistant District Attorney 
Counsel for the Commonwealth 


VINCENT CORRIGAN, ESQ. 
Defender Association 
Counsel for Defendant Labron 


ALLAN SAGOT, ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Ramos 


ANDREW GAY, ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Lajara 


PRETRIAL MOTIONS 
(VOLUME 1) 


App. 54 


INDEX 
SOMMONWEALTH’S EVIDENCE 
Officer Gerald Nimmo im 
[App. 58] 
—RDR._ 
[App. 161] 
EXHIBITS 
NO. 
C-1 Officer Nimmo’s 
handwritten notes 
D-2 Police form 75-49 
App. 55 


[App. 77] 


[App. 171] 


IDENT. 


[App. 108} 


[App. 150] 


PROCEEDINGS. 
THE COURT: Is Nimmo here yet? 
MR. MECOLI: No, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Is there any testimony that you 
can put on before he gets here? 


MR. MECOLI: No, your Honor. He’s the wit- 
ness in this case. The officers are just for confiscations. 
He did all the other work on the case. 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | have some good 
news. Nimmo’s here. 


THE COURT: Are you ready to proceed? 
MR. MECOLI: Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Could counsel for the defendant 
please state what it is, what the motion is and what's the 
legal basis for it, what's sought to be suppressed? 


MR. GAY: May it please the Court. With 
respect to Mr. Lajara, for whom I have filed this pretrial 
motion including the motion to suppress physical evi- 
dence, | move to suppress certain United States currency 
that was allegedly found upon Mr. Lajara’s person as a 
result of an illegal arrest. 


THE COURT: Without probable cause; is that 
correct? 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir, without probable cause, and 
without reasonable suspicion to believe that the defen- 
dant was armed and dangerous and about to commit a 


THE COURT: Is this an arrest that occurred on 
the street, in a house? What are we talking about? 


MR. GAY: It occurred while Mr. Lajara was in 
a motor vehicle, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Ina car. All right. 


Now, | assume that some of the other counsel are 
seeking to suppress something else? 


MR. SAGOT: May it please the Court, Your 
Honor, on behalf of the record, Your Honor. We also 
move to suppress any physical evidence based upon an 
illegal arrest at the scene. He’s also the occupant of the 
vehicle. 


THE COURT: Okay. Mr. Corrigan? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, I’m appearing 
on behalf of Edwin Labron. | would join in counsel's 
motion and I would also add that in addition to this 
being an illegal arrest, there was also a search conducted 
at the scene with, there was no, it was committed with- 
out a warrant. 


THE COURT: Search of what? 
MR. CORRIGAN: It was a parked motor vehi- 


cle and that the search took place without a warrant, and 
again without reasonable suspicion or probable cause. | 


App. 57 


would add that my motion would be based on both the 
Pennsylvania state and United States Constitutions. 


MR. GAY: As is mine, as the motion says, Your 
Honor. 


MR. SAGOT: And I would join in the addition 
that counsel has made regarding my own motion as well, 
Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Is that adequate for the Common- 
wealth’s purposes? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, it is, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Who would be the first Com- 
monwealth witness on the motion? 


MR. MECOLI: Officer Nimmo, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: I'll direct that all other Com- 
monwealth and defense witnesses be sequestered. 


COURT CRIER: Place your right hand on the 
Bible. State your full name. Spell the last name. 
Badge number, district or division. 


THE WITNESS: That’s officer Gerald Nimmo. 
N-I-M-M-O. 9638, Philadelphia Police Narcotics Unit. 


OFFICER GERALD NIMMO, after having been 
duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows... 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Officer, I'd like to direct your attention back to 
August twenty-fourth, 1990, at approximately 2:18 p.m., 
in the vicinity of the 900 block of West Auburn Street 
in the City of Philadelphia. Were you at that location 
and on duty as a Philadelphia police officer at that date 
and time? 

A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And at that date and time and location, did you 
observe anyone you see here today? 


A. Three males behind defense counsel: The one in the 
purple, the one in the plaid. I can’t see his shirt. 


Q. Officer, are you familiar with the location of 900 
block of West Auburn Street? 


A. Yes, sir. I'd made numerous arrests there. 
Q. Numerous arrests for what, Officer? 
A. Narcotics. 
Q. Could you tell us how many, approximately? 
MR. SAGOT: Objection. 
MR. GAY: Objection. 
MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 
THE COURT: What grounds? 


MR. SAGOT: Irrelevant. Absolutely irrelevant, 
Your Honor. 


App. 59 


THE COURT: Well, it may be relevant to his 
observations. I'll overrule the objection. How many 


arrests? 


THE WITNESS: In that block? Had to be at 
least five on that block. 


MR. SAGOT: I'm sorry. 


THE WITNESS: At least five on that block. 
That's just low. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. And what time period are we talking about, those 
five arrests? 


A. Six weeks. 
THE COURT: Six weeks when? 
THE WITNESS: Prior to this. 
THE COURT: Thank you. 

. BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Could you tell us what you observed at that date, 
time and location that brings you here to court today. 


A. If Your Honor please, on that date and time, I was 
assigned to Narcotic: Unit working plainclothes. I was 
at a confidential surveillance location, at which time it 
was approximately 12:18 I initiated the surveillance. | 
observed defendant on the far right, I believe with the 
interpreter, and another male, an older hispanic male. 


App. 60 


THE COURT: ‘.<*’s just clarify this. When you 
say you observed defendara on the far right, are you 
pointing to the defendant who's sitting next to the 
female interpreter’? 

THE WITNESS: Neat to the female, yes, sir. 

THE COURT: Can we agree that for the record 
he is identifying Mr. Corrigan’s client, Mr. Labron? Is 
that correct? Fine. So you observed Mr. Labron do 
what? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. Him and another his- 
panic male, he was older, I believe his name was Santi- 
ago, they were out on the highway and they were being 
approached by black and hispanic males and exchanges 
were being made between them. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 

Q. Describe what you mean by exchanges. 

A. They would accept US currency. In return, they 
would give the males small clear plastic packets which 
had white powder inside. 

Q. Have you ever seen packets like this before? 


A. I had made arrests with, in that block with identical 
type packets taken as evidence. 


Q. At the time you saw, how many times have you 
seen packets like this before? 


A. Again, | would say at least, at least five times. 
THE COURT: How many times? 


App. 61 


THE WITNESS: At least five times. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. How long, up to this date how long had you been a 
narcotics officer? 


A. I’m with Narcotics 1981. 


Q. And based on you experience and your knowledge 
of these packets, what did you believe they contained 
when you saw them? 

A. I believe that they -- 


MR. SAGOT: I'd object, to this, Your Honor. 
There’s no sufficient basis for the identification upon his 


expertise. I think a better description should be upon 
the record so Your Honor can decide it. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I’m not offering his exper- 
tise. The question is what’s in his mind. 


THE COURT: I'll sustain it. 


MR. GAY: Judge, his personal belief not based on 
expertise is of no consequence. 


THE COURT: I'll give the testimony it’s proper 
weight. I’m going to overrule the objection. 


What did you believe to be in the packets? 
THE WITNESS: I believed it to be cocaine. 
BY MR. MECOLI: 


App. 62 


* ip dln, diatighet ttl yt. 
Pg Ne Peet adnate ee 


ee 


oy Po ee ee ee ee ey . 


Q. What happened next? 


A. A hispanic male that’s not here, who was later 
identified as Raphael Melendez -- 


THE COURT: Wait a second. Santiago, you 
mentioned Labron and Santiago. Do you see Santiago 
here? 

THE WITNESS: No, sir. 


THE COURT: All right. So now you're talking 
about a third male, right? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, Sir. 

THE COURT: What’s the third male’s name? 

THE WITNESS: I believe his name is Raphael 
Melendez. He had an address of 913 West Auburn 
Street. 


THE COURT: What did you see him do? 


THE WITNESS: He came into view, had a con- 
versation with the two males, Santiago and I believe it’s 
Labron, Labaron, whatever. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 
Q. Do you see either of those people here today? 


A. The one, yes, sir. He’s speaking with the female 
interpreter. 


THE COURT: We've already agreed that’s Mr. 
Labron. 


App. 63 


THE WITNESS: All right. Melendez talked 
with them, went over to a blue Buick that was parked 
on the south side of the street. 


THE COURT: Who goes over to the blue 
Buick? 


THE WITNESS: Melendez, Raphael Melendez. 
And tag number on the Buick was SNE349. It was a 
1977 blue Lincoln. At this time, he opened the trunk of 
the Lincoln with a key. 

THE COURT: Melendez does. 


THE WITNESS: Melendez, yes sir. He reached 
in to the right quarter panel. 


MR. SAGOT: I'm sorry, Judge. I got lost. It 
went from a Buick to a Lincoln. Maybe I didn’t hear 
the testimony. 


THE COURT: You did hear the testimony. 
THE WITNESS: I couldn’t hear you, counselor. 
THE COURT: What kind of car was this? 

THE WITNESS: It was a blue 1977 Lincoln. 


THE COURT: So there was no Buick involved 
in this case. 


THE WITNESS: No. Lincoln. 
THE COURT: Originally you said Buick. 
THE WITNESS: I’m sorry. 


App. 64 


CO nt Oe SU Te 


~~ a 


Rte Cel eR STN os ete Ate + Ge mm ee sR yt ae 


THE COURT: Okay. So Melendez opens the 
trunk with a key? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. He reached into the 
right rear quarter panel of the trunk. Inside was a 
plastic bag. He retrieved other plastic bags from inside 
that, brought them out, gave them to Santiago and 
Labaron or Labron, received US currency, and he 
walked out of -- 


THE COURT? From who? 

THE WITNESS: From both males. : He walked 
out of my view, out of my sight, at which time 
numerous Spanish and black males walked up to the 
two, Santiago and Labaron. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. These items that Mr. Melendez handed to them, 
could you describe them? 


A. They would fit in the palm of your hand. They 
were clear plastic baggies containing small plastic, clear 
plastic packets inside. 

Q. Have you seen those type packets before? 

A. Numerous times, yes, sir. 

Q. And based on your knowledge of seeing them 
before, what did you believe them to contain at this 
time? 


A. I believed they, the baggies, contained packets of 
cocaine. 


App. 65 


Q. What happened next? 
A. Numerous males come up to him. 


THE COURT: To who? 


THE WITNESS: Santiago and Labaron. They 
received money. Santiago and Labaron received money 
and gave out plastic packets from the plastic baggies. 
Within a few minutes, they sold out. Melendez walked 
over to the blue Buick, blue Lincoln again, opened the 
trunk up, repeated the same thing, went to the right rear 
quarter panel, retrieved more baggies, come out, gave 
them to Santiago and Labaron again. They gave him 
US Currency, paper currency. Excuse me. They started 
to sell again. Within two minutes, three minutes, 
Melendez walked back to Santiago. He gave Santiago a 
set of keys. Melendez then walked to a blue Ford 
station wagon, I believe it was, a dark blue. He got in 
the station wagon and he went west on Auburn to -- 


THE COURT: Melendez does this? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 

THE COURT: He gets in what kind of car? 

THE WITNESS: A blue Ford station wagon. 

THE COURT: All right. 

THE WITNESS: He goes west on Auburn. I’m 
sorry. East on Auburn and south on 9th Street out of 
my sight. The two males who were left at the location, 
Santiago and Labaron, continued exchanging paper cur- 
rency for the packets that they had and approximately 
ten minutes after Melendez left, a blue Toyota pulled up, 


App. 66 


wre a LE i A CG tte lt HO PAA EE Ae ARTI na 


on a 


Pennsylvania tag XZB583. It was a light blue Toyota 
with two hispanic males. The male with the purple shirt 
behind the defense counsel -- 


THE COURT: Indicating | think we can agree 
Mr. Ramos. 


MR. MECOLI: I believe that’s correct, Your 
Honor. 


THE WITNESS: And the male in the white and 
gray longsleeved shirt. 


THE COURT: Indicating Mr. Lajara. 


THE WITNESS: Lajara, I believe. At which 
time they pulled up, I believe it was in front of the 
Lincoln. The one on the right in the white and gray, he 
was wearing a, like a gold shirt and pants. 


THE COURT: Indicating Mr. Lajara. 
THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: What was he wearing? 


THE WITNESS: A gold, it was a gold tee 
irt and . I’m not. | remember it was go 
ameaie 1 Both males got out of the vehicle. They 
walked up, talked to Santiago, the taller, older hispanic 
male, at which time the younger male Labaron walked 
over to him. Santiago gave him the keys. Labaron 
went over, opened the trunk. 


THE COURT: Slow down. Labaron walked 
over to Santiago? 


App. 67 


THE WITNESS: Received keys from Santiago. 
THE COURT: All right. 


THE WITNESS: Labaron went over, opened the 
trunk of the Lincoln with the keys that he had just 
received from Santiago. The male in the, Lajara, | 


believe his name is, the white and gray long-sleeved 
shirt. 


THE COURT: Today. You mean what he’s 
wearing today. 


THE WITNESS: Yes, Sir. 

THE COURT: Again indicating Mr. Lajara. 

THE WITNESS: After the conversation, he 
walked back to the Toyota. He went in the passenger 
side and reached in the back of the passenger side. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Did you see at this point what Mr. Ramos was 
doing? 


A. Ramos was standing by the driver’s side of the auto- 
mobile. He was looking up and down the street just 
looking back and forth, and he was talking to Lajara. | 
don’t know what they were saying. They were speaking 
Spanish. 


THE COURT: But did you say Ramos was by 
the driver’s side of the Toyota? 


THE WITNESS: Correct. He was looking up 
and down the street and talking to Lajara. 


App. 68 


a 


—_ apesme, — 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. What happened next? 


A. Lajara reached in, come out with a plastic bag, 
turned around, closed the door, walked to Labaron, 
Labron. 


Q. Which person are you indicating now? 

A. I'm sorry? 

Q. Which person did he walk to”? 

A. The male talking with the female interpreter. 
Q. Indicating Labron for the record. 


THE COURT: All right. So let me just get this 
right. Lajara got a plastic bag. He did then what? 


THE WITNESS: Walked back to, towards the 
Lincoln, gave that bag to Labaron or Labron. He placed 
it in the right rear quarter of the trunk of the Lincoln. 
He closed the trunk of the Lincoln. He gave Santiago 


the keys. 
THE COURT: Labron closed the Lincoln trunk? 


THE WITNESS: Correct, and returned the keys 
to Santiago. 
BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Could you describe this plastic bag’ 


App. 69 


A. I believe it was like an opaque, like a white where 
you can see through. 


THE COURT: You could or could not? 
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry, Your Honor? 


THE COURT: You could see through the bag or 
you could not? 


THE WITNESS: It was like an opaque. You 
know, you could tell there’s items inside. 


THE COURT: But you couldn't see what they 
were? 


THE WITNESS: I couldn't see exactly what 
they were, no, sir. 


THE COURT: All right. 


THE WITNESS: At this time, the two hispanic 
males, Ramos and Lajara, got into the Toyota, went east 
on Auburn and south on 9th Street. I radioed backup 
officers, gave them the information, description of the 
car and the males along with the tag number. And this 
is over radio. | was informed over radio that they had 
picked them up. There was other backup officers. | 
informed, gave a description of Santiago and Labaron. 
They came directly on to Auburn Street. The apprehen- 
sions were made of Labaron and Santiago. A few min- 
utes later, the blue Toyota was brought back and a 
wagon. These defendants were identified by myself in 
the 900 block of Auburn Street. 


After Santiago and Labaron were arrested on 
Auburn Street, I directed Officer Scarpato to the blue 


App. 70 


incoln parked on the south side of Auburn Street. | 
eontad then 09 tv eau: tinned tien at ates 80d 
observed in the trunk from Melendez, the items Melen- 
dez had retrieved that were left in the car and what was 
placed in the car by Labaron, the item that he had 
received from Lajara. The trunk was opened and confis- 
cated from the trunk, the right rear quarter panel where | 
had seen it placed, was retrieved was a plastic bag and it 
was, | was informed at that time that -- 


MR. GAY: Objection, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Sustained. You can tell us what 
you saw and observed but not what somebody else said. 


THE WITNESS: I observed him bring out two 

plastic bags containing a white powder. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 

Q. I also want to back you up, Officer. The first time 
you saw Mr. Lajara bring a bag over to Mr. Labron, 

based on the area you were in and what you observed, 
what did you believe to be in that bag? 

A. I believed it to be delivery of -- 

MR. GAY: Objection. 

THE COURT: I'll overrule the objection and 
give it its proper weight. I don’t know what they 
believed without a foundation has any weight. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Now, Officer, you described this area before. How 
would you describe this area? 


App. 71 


A. On the north side of Auburn Street, from 9th Street 
going west approximately half the block is, you know, a 
head-start program for preschoolers. Directly behind it 
is the rectory and the church of Saint Bonafice. There’s 
approximately maybe eight houses, six or eight houses 
on the north side. At the end of the street, at Hutch- 


inson, is the grade school for the church. I’m sorry. On 


the south side you have maybe another ten or twelve 
row homes. 


Q. Now, how long did you observe this going on from 
when you started observing until the arrests were made? 


A. From my first observations of Santiago and Labron, 
it was approximately two hours. 


Q. And based on what you observed being handed out 
of the trunk and sold, what did you believe? 


A. I'm sorry, counselor. I can’t hear you. 


Q. Based on what you observed being taken out of the 
trunk and being sold to individuals on the street in 
exchange for US currency, what did you believe was 
occurring? 


A. I believed it to be illegal sales of cocaine. 

Q. What do you base that on? 

A. Ten years experience, the arrests that I’ve been 
involved in in that block, prior surveillances. I’ve 
walked through the area. I’ve observed previous trans- 
actions in that area. I’ve been involved with other 
officers that have made purchases in that block, identical 
items. 


App. 72 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, I'd object to 
that and move to strike. He saw what he saw. This is 
merely bolstering his testimony. 


THE COURT: Well, I think there’s been a chal- 
lenge to his ability to come to the conclusions he came 
to, so I think it’s appropriate for him to set forth his 
experience and what he bases his conclusions on. So 
I'll overrule the objection. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. And, Officer, based on the, based on what you saw 
of the plastic bags taken out, what do you base your 
decision that they, your belief that they contained 
cocaine on? 


A. At which point, counselor? 


Q. At the point where you saw Lajara bring a bag to 
Labron. 


A. Why I believed it? After the meeting that they 

had -- let me back up. Melendez gave Santiago the 

keys. These two males pulled up and talked to Santi- 
ago. Santiago at that time gave the keys to the other 
male. The trunk was opened. To me it indicated that 
they were going to be putting, you know, a package, 
cocaine, in there for further distribution. After Lajara 
went back to his Toyota and come back up and I saw 
the plastic baggie, I believed that it was a stash that they 
were going to put in the vehicle. 


Q. What could you see when you looked at this plastic 
bag? 


App. 73 


A. From my location? Are you talking about from 
Lajara? 


Q. Yes. 
A. Lajara, T could see that it was like an opaque plastic 


bag. It-was rolled up. And it was placed in the exact 
area -- 


MR. GAY: Judge, I’m having extreme difficulty 
understanding this witness. 

THE COURT:- Hearing him, you mean. 

MR. GAY: No, ing him. His voice is 
loud enough but he, his mouth apparently is at such an 
approximation -- 

THE COURT: Actually, there’s a dead spot 
right where you are sitting in this courtroom between the 
witness. Officer, pull the microphone a little closer and 
just keep your voice up a little but louder. 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: Now, let me just get back to the 
question. The question is -- 


MR. GAY: I’ve been sitting here in a dead spot 
all the time? sta - 


THE COURT: I thought you could hear. 


MR. SAGOT: We selected that position for him, 
Your Honor. 


App. 74 


THE COURT: I thought you could hear. In 
fact, you spent quite a bit of time in this courtroom, Mr. 
Gay. You know the acoustics better than me. 


MR. GAY: No. Apparently not, Judge. 


THE COURT: In aky event, I think the question 
was as to what you were able to observe about the plas- 
tic bag that you testified was given by Mr. Lajara to Mr. 
Labron. Now, could you tell us again what you were 
able to see about that bag? 


THE WITNESS: I could see that it was not a 
firm object. 


THE COURT: Not what? 


THE WITNESS: It was not a firm object. | 
mean, you know, to me the bag had the consistency tha, 
you know, when you're confiscating cocaine from the 
street -- 


MR. SAGOT: Objection. 
MR. GAY: Objection. 


THE COURT: Well, overruled. I think he can 
testify as to the nature of the bag. Go ahead. 


THE WITNESS: When I confiscated cocaine 
from the street, you got the c-asistency of the bag when 
you hold it. You could see if it’s limp, if it’s hard, if 
it’s stuffed. This wasn’t stuffed and it was laid out to 
where, to me, to me it had powder in it. 


App. 75 


THE COURT: It was not a hard. You didn’t 
believe it was a hard object from what you were able to 
observe. 


THE WITNESS: No, sir. 
THE COURT: Or a firm object. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Officer, in your years at Narcotics, have you ever 
seen items packaged like this before? 


A. Yes, sir. You know, in over ten years, | don’t have 
a number, you know. 


Q. Could you tell us what you've seen packaged like 
this? 


THE COURT: Well, counsel, I don’t understand 
your question at all. Are you talking about the bag that 
he couldn’t see through or are you talking about the 
packets that he saw delivered, the baggies that he saw, 
or what are you talking about? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I’m talking about 
the bag, the large bag that he’s describing that Lajara 
passed to Labron. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, I'd object to 
that. It’s an opaque bag. The officer has already said 
that he couldn’t see through it. What did it look like? 
It’s a ridiculous question, Judge, but | withdraw my 
objection. 


THE COURT: The question is, have you seen 
narcotics packaged like that before? Have you? 


App. 76 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


MR. MECOLI: You Honor. I have nothing 
further of this officer. 


THE COURT; All right. Who's going to lead 
off? Mr. Sagot? 


MR SAGOT: May I, Your Honor? 
THE COURT: Yes. 
CROSS EXAMINATION 

BY MR. SAGOT: 

Q. Officer Nimmo, is it, or Nimmo? 

A. Nimmo. 


Q. Officer, at what distance did you observe this 


opaque bag? 

A. It was less than fifty feet. 

Q. Less than fifty feet. With the aid of binoculars? 
A. No, sir. 

Q. Okay. Now, you described this bag as being 
opaque. And based on your experience as a narcotics 
officer, because the bag was not firm, you believe it to 


be some sort of controlled substance. Is that your tes- 
timony. 


App. 77 


A. My testimony is along with what I observed prior to 
it, in the actions and reactions of the defendants, | 
believe it, yes, sir. 

Q. Well, you never saw -- strike that. This bag itself, 
if the bag had let’s say sait in it, how would it differ in 
texture and feel? 


A. I’ve never confiscated salt. 


Q. I didn’t ask you what you confiscated, Officer. I 
said if it contained salt. 


A. I don’t know. 
Q. How would it be different? 


A. I don’t know. I’ve never confiscated, handled salt. 
I buy salt in a box. 


Q. I see. And if it had flour in it, Officer, how would 
it differ then? 


A. If the flour is loose, it would probably be consistent 
with it. I don’t know, counselor. 


Q. You don’t know. 
A. I don’t mess with flour. 
Q. You don’t mess with flour. 
MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, I really think the 


officer is being evasive in his answers. If you'd direct 
him to answer the questions, I’d appreciate that. 


App. 78 


THE COURT: Well, I think the point is, the 
testimony was that the bag was not firm. You couldn't 
see through it. He couldn't see what was in it. I heard 
that. I’m not sure how much further we can go on that 


- ~point. 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you, Your Honor. 
BY MR. SAGOT: 
Q. Now, this multitude of what you thought were drug 
transactions occurring, did you see them from the same 
distance that you observed this bag from the trunk? 
A. No, sir. The defendants would be walking up and 
down the street. The most they were from me would be 
seventy-five feet, at the most. 
And the closest was fifty feet. 
No, sir. 
Closer than that. 
Yes, sir. 


But the furthest is seventy-five feet. 


That would be maximum. 


eee 2 ee 


Now, do you recall testifying at a preliminary 
hearing at front and Westmoreland Streets back on or 
about September twelfth of 1990? 


A. I remember | testified. I don’t remember what date. 


(. You remember you testified. All right. Page four- 
teen. And the following questions were asked of you, 
page fourteen: How far from the two individuals were 
you when you made the observations? 

The witness, meaning you. 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. The first time | saw them? 


The Court: Yes. 


The witness: First time | saw them, less than a 
hundred and fifty feet. 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Okay. So is it closer to a hundred and fifty feet or 
closer to fifty feet which you suggested today? 


A. The first time I saw them? 
Q. Yeah. 


A. I would say the first time I saw them would be in 
that area, within a hundred and fifty feet. The first time 


| would see them is when they first come into the block. 


Q. So your suggesting that seventy-five feet would be 
the furthest that they were ever from you would be 
inaccurate, then. 

A. No, sir. When they were doing the transactions -- 


Q. So the transactions were being done at about 
seventy-five feet. 


App. 80 


A. At most. 


Q. And how many transactions are you suggesting 
occurred? 


THE COURT: When we're talking about trans- 
actions -- 


MR. SAGOT: The original transactions with the 
people coming up and buying drugs. 


THE COURT; You're talking about retail pur- 
chase transactions? 


MR. SAGOT: Yes, sir, as opposed to wholesale. 
Yes, sir. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. At that time, they were occurring at about seventy- 
five feet; is that right? 


A. No, sir. That was the maximum. Most of them 
were well within that. 


Q. So that was within about a hundred and fifty feet. 
That was at about a hundred and fifty feet? 


A. No, sir. The first time I saw them, the maximum 
distance would be a hundred and fifty feet, when I first 
got on location. 


Q. Okay. Now, as His Honor suggested, the retail 


transactions which you say that you believed were 
occurring, at what distance were these observed? 


App. 81 


A. They were, | would say, within twenty feet to a 
maximum of fifty to seventy-five. 


(). How many of these sales are you suggesting 
occurred during this two-hour period prior to the arrest 
of these defendants? 

A. It was approximately close to a hundred. 


A. A hundred. And you had a radio with you at that 
time? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Were any of these retail purchasers arrested during 
the course of this surveillance? 


A. Counselor, are you talking about packets being 
distributed or persons coming up? 


THE COURT: The little packets. 


THE WITNESS: Just the packets being 
distributed? 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. These hundred or so sales that you're talking about. 


It was at least a hundred or so packets. 
Were any of the buyers of these packets arrested? 


No, sir. 


27. 2 


You had backup available to you at that time? 


App. 82 


A. Yes, sir. 


{). Did you ask any of your backup to arrest any of 
these buyers? 


A. No, sir. 


Q. Was there anyone observing what you suggest are 
these hundred transactions other than yourself? 


A. No, sir. 

Q. You were the sole surveillance at that point. 

A. Correct. 

Q. Now, -- 

A. Counselor, on other locations, as different males 
would leave the area, the people may have been seen but 
not the subjects that | was looking at. 


Q. I'm talking about for that immediate area that you 
were surveilling. 


A. No, sir. I was the only one there. 


Q. you were surveilling an area, not necessarily sub- 
jects; is that correct? 


A. Auburn Street and a location. 


MR. SAGOT: Okay. Now, would you indulge 
me just for one second, Your Honor? 


THE COURT: Yes. 


App. 83 


BY MR. SAGOT: 

(). Now, of these five or six previous, five arrests that 
you say that you participated in during the previous six 
weeks, these were arrests where you either participated 
in or were in fact the arresting officer? 


A. 1 did a surveillance previous where | was the arrest- 
ing officer or | was the processing officer involved in it. 


Q. Of all the jefendants arrested in that time frame, my 
client was not one of them, is that correct? 


A. No, sir. I don’t believe so. 

Q. Okay. Now, this hundred or so drug transactions 
that occurred, they occurred in your testimony between 
whoever was passing by and purchasing narcotics and 
Mr. Santiago and Mr. Labron or Labaron, as you 
referred to him; is that correct? 

A. Labron as the male? 

Q. Yeah. 

A. Yes, sir. 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you. No further questions 
of this officer. 


THE COURT: Who would be next? Mr. Gay, 
do you wish to go, or Mr. Corrigan? 


MR GAY: Yeah. May I please, Your Honor? 


THE COURT: Sure. 


App. 84 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Officer, between 9th and 10th Streets on Auburn, is 
there a smaller street that goes north and south? 


A. There is Hutchinson Street there, sir. 


Q. And where between 9th and | 0th Street does 
Hutchinson Street fall in terms of a fraction of the 
distance between the two numbered streets? 


A. It's 9th Street. Then it’s Hutchinson. 


Q. Is Hutchinson approximately equidistant from 9th 
Street and | 0th Street or is it closer to one or the other? 


A. There’s no 10th Street at the corner. I'm not even 
sure right there, counselor. Because at Cambria, there's 
the cemetery there and there is no 10th. I’m not sure if 
10th Street comes in down there or not. [I'm not posi- 
tive. 


Q. Then how far is Hutchinson Street from 9th Street? 


A. Hutchinson is, it’s a very small block. Auburn is a 
very small block. 


Q. Now, is the distance between 9th Street and Hutch- 
inson Street taken up with the head-start program that 
you ve told us about? 

A. You lost me, counselor. 

Q. Is the distance between 9th Street and Hutchinson 


Street taken up with the head-start program that you 
talked about? 


App. 85 


A. If I recall, at the corner of 9th and Hutchinson on 
the north side, it would be the northwest corner, is the 
building, the church building. 


THE COURT: The church building is at the 
corner of what? 


THE WITNESS: 9th and Auburn. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. That's on the northwest corner. 
A. Northwest. It goes from Cambria to Auburn street 
on 9th. And it goes back. I'd say close to a third of 
the block down. 


Q. Okay. Where within that block was the Lincoln that 
you told us about? 


A. Directly across from the head-start program on, it 
would be on the south side. 


Q. And how many feet would that be from 9th Street as 
you observed it at the time? 


A. From 9th Street? From here, at most from here to 
the corner, or to the water cooler, at most. 


THE COURT: To the water cooler. 
THE WITNESS: Yes. 


THE COURT: From 9th? 


THE WITNESS: Where the Lincoln would be 
parked, the most it would be would be from here to the 
corner, or to the cooler. 


THE COURT: Well, from where you are to the 
cooler is about sixty feet. 


MR. GAY: Sixty feet. 

BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Now, as you were watching that car, were you look- 
ing at the front of the car or the back of the car or were 
you looking at one of its sides? 

A. I had access to the side and the rear. 

Q. Which side? Driver or passenger? 

A. The driver's side of the automobile. 


Q. So you were someplace then on the north side of 
Auburn Street at the time, were you not? 


THE COURT: Well, let’s clarify one thing. 
Which way was the Lincoln facing when it was parked? 


THE WITNESS: The Lincoln was facing toward 
Sth Street, which would be east. 


THE COURT: Okay. so can you restate your 
question again, Mr. Gay? 


BY MR. GAY: 


App. 87 


Q. You were positioned somewhere on the north side of 
%h Street while you were making your observations, 
were you not? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. Were you in a van or same other location? 


A. | was in another location, ves, sir. 


Q. Were you in some location that’s secret, that needs 
to be protected at this time for some reason? 


A. | believe so, yes, sir. 

MR. GAY: Well, may we have an in camera 
determination, Your Honor, as to whether or not there is 
a need to keep that location secret? 


THE COURT: Let me ask a few generic 
questions and maybe that will save the in camera. 


BY THE COURT: 


Q. Officer, was the location that you were in a location 
that required someone else’s permission to use? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. All right. And by that I mean, I don’t mean a 
government official. I mean a citizen of some sort. 


A. No government official. 


Q. All right. Do you have any personal knowledge of 
whether, well, when was the last time you went back to 


that block from today, the most recent time? 


App. 88 


A. Probably October of that year. 
Q. Of that year. 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. You haven't been back since. 
A. I haven’t, no, sir. 


THE COURT: Are there any other generic 
questions you'd like to ask in this regard, Mr. Gay? 


MR. GAY: Yes. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Do you have any reason to believe that the person 
who granted you permission to use the location that you 
were in -- 
A. Counselor, I can’t hear you. 
Q. There’s a dead spot. 
A. No. It’s the train. 
Q. Do you have any reason to believe that the person 
who granted you permission to use that location lives 
there any longer? 
A. I’m not positive that person lives there now or not. 
Q. The fact is, you’re not only not positive but you 


have no reason to know that that person continues to 
live at that location, do you? 


App. 89 


A. Do I have a reason to know? 


Q. Do you know whether the person lives there or not 
now? 


A. I am not positive that that person lives there now. 


Q. Of course you're not positive. But the fact is, you 
also just do not know; is that right? Yes or no. 


A. I do not know. 


MR. GAY: If Your Honor please, I don’t know 
that the Commonwealth can establish at this point that 
there’s a further need for secrecy or to protect anyone if 
the individual is no longer there. 


THE COURT: Counsel, do you have a comment 
on that? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | would ask to hear 
the officer perhaps in camera and make that determina- 
tion yourself. 


THE COURT: Well, I don’t know what else he 
can tell us at this point. I mean, he’s told us that he 
needed someone’s consent. He’s told us that he doesn’t 
know. 


Let me ask you this. Do you have any reason to 
know if that person doesn’t live there any more? 


THE WITNESS: Your Honor, I’m not necessar- 


ily concerned about that person. If I could tell you what 
the situation is. 


App. 90 


THE COURT: Well, let’s put it this way. | 
don’t particularly want to hear any information about, 
well, | don’t want to hear any information about this 
defendant, these defendants. 


THE WITNESS: No, sir. It has nothing to do 
with the defendants. 


THE COURT: Then why don’t you tell me why 
it is that you believe that the confidentiality of this 
location should be preserved? 

THE WITNESS: Why? 

THE COURT: Yeah. 


THE WITNESS: The location could possibly be 
used again and for the safety of the location, I felt. 


THE COURT: For the safety of what? 
THE WITNESS: Of the location. 

THE COURT: By that you mean what? 
THE WITNESS: The structure. 


THE COURT: You mean someone would do 
something do it. 


THE WITNESS: Yeah. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, I'd have to join 
in with Mr. Gay’s. 


THE COURT: Okay. | just have a couple of 
other questions. 


App. 91 


Did | understand you to say that between 9th 
Street and Hutchinson Street, in addition to the head- 
start program, on the north side of Auburn Street are 
also some houses? 


THE WITNESS: On the north side of Auburn 
Street, there’s, | would say at most eight houses, I 
believe. 


THE COURT: Between 9th and Hutchinson; is 
that right? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: Now, and there’s houses on the 
south side of Auburn Street; is that right? 


THE WITNESS: Yes. 

THE COURT: Between 9th and Hutchinson. 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 

THE COURT: Were you able to observe any 
abandoned or unoccupied houses on the north or south 
sides of that block back when you made these observa- 


tions? 


THE WITNESS: Did I observe any? 


THE COURT: I mean, some blocks you go on, 


there are houses that are abandoned. 


THE WITNESS: There is several. I believe 
there is several on the north side. I believe there’s, at 
the time I believe there was one on the south side. 
There was one. 


App. 92 


THE COURT: So that the rest of the houses so 
far as you knew were occupied; is that correct? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: Can you tell us whether the 
location that you used on this date to make these 
observations was an occupied location on that date? 


THE WITNESS: On that date, there was other 
people in the structure. 


THE COURT: Occupied. 
THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, for clarification. 
Could you inquire as to whether or not these people 
were residents of that structure? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | object to that. 


THE COURT: Well, let me put it this way. 
Were the people who occupied that residence the same 
people whose permission you needed to obtain or was it, 
were they different? 


THE WITNESS: One of them was, yes, sir. 


THE COURT: All right. Well, what I’m going 
to do is this. I am going to rule that I’m not going to 
require the officer to give the precise location of his 
observation point in view of the fact that he needed to 
obtain the cooperation of someone to make those obser- 
vations and in view of the general level of violence that 
even the courts have taken notice of that attends drug 
activity. 


App. 93 


However, I think there are certain questions that 
can be asked to give the defense an adequate opportunity 
to determine what the ability of the officer was to 
observe short of revealing that location. 


Now, officer, I’m going to ask you some of 
those. Were you making your observations at street 
level or at some different level? 


THE WITNESS: I was at different levels, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: Different levels at different 
times? 


THE WITNESS: On this date, it was basically 
on one level. 


THE COURT: Was that level street level or 
some other level. 


THE WITNESS: That was some other level. 


THE COURT: All right. Are the structures on 
the, the structures on, the houses let’s say on the north 
and south side of Auburn Street between 9th and Hutch- 
inson, are they all basically the same height? 


THE WITNESS: I believe they are except for 
the end buildings. 


THE COURT: How many levels above the 
street were you? 


THE WITNESS: I was, I would be on the 
second floor. 


App. 94 


THE COURT: Was there anything between you 
and the, your line of observation? Were there any 
objects between you? Was there a window? Was there 
shutters? Were there trees? 


THE WITNESS: There were windows that were 
open. | don’t believe there was any trees on that street. 


THE COURT: What I will do at this point is I'll 
permit counsel to ask certain questions and I'll just rule 
on the individual questions. 

MR. GAY: Thank you. 

BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Were you in your same point of observation at the 
time that you first observed the two individuals come 
into the block, as you have described it? 


THE COURT: Are you talking about in the 
Toyota? 


MR. GAY: No, sir. I beg your pardon. Labron 
and Santiago. 


THE WITNESS: Was I at the same location 
when | observed them? 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 
THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


BY MR. GAY: 


App. 95 


Q. And at that time when you first observed them, they 
were about a hundred and fifty feet away from you, is 
that right? 


A. That would be the maximum it would be. 


Q. And that’s when you were where you were and they 
rounded the corner of 9th Street to come into that block; 
is that correct? 


A. No. I didn’t say that, counselor. 
Q. Well, where were they when you first saw them? 
A. They were in the 900 block of Auburn Street. 


Q.- Where were they when you first observed them at 
that distance of a hundred and fifty feet? 


A. When I first observed them, they were | guess it 
would be halfway between Hutchinson and 9th Street 
when I first observed them. 


Q. And at that point they were a hundred and fifty feet 
away from you. 


A. That’s my guesstimate. That would be the 
maximum, yes, sir. 


Q. Okay. Now, the Lincoln that you have described for 
us was about sixty feet from 9th Street as it was parked 
on the south side, was it not? 


A. Yes, sir. If | could. It would be maybe, the 


Lincoln would be maybe three car lengths from the 
corner, you know, if that would be a better help. 


App. 96 


(. So at the time that you first observed Santiago and 
Labron, they were then or the Lincoln was then between 
them and 9th Street, was it not? 


A. When I first observed Santiago and Labron, the 
Lincoln was between them. 


Q. The Lincoln was between Santiago and Labron and 
9th Street. 


A. No, sit. The first time I observed them, I took 
notice of them, they would be, it would be west of. If 
you want to use the Lincoln as a point, they would be 
west of the Lincoln. 


Q. By how far? 
A. From my point to -- 
Q. Yes. 


THE COURT: No. How far west of the Lin- 
coln? 


THE WITNESS: West of the Lincoln? Again, 
the maximum would be at that point, | believe the 
maximum would be a hundred fifty feet. 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. So they were a hundred fifty feet west of the 
Lincoln at the time that you first observed them, 


approximately. 


A. That would be the most, counselor. 


App. 97 


Q. And since, and they were approximately a hundred 
and fifty feet east of you at that time also; is that 
correct? 


A. When we're talking distances, you're talking from 
me to them? 


Q. Yes. 

A. Correct? Yes, sir. 

Q. Okay. So at the time that you observed the Lincoln, 
it was about one hundred and fifty feet plus ninety feet 
away from you, was it not? 


A. The Lincoln was, within thirty feet of me. 


Q. Well, wasn't the Lincoln, as you say, three car 
lengths from the corner? 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Of 9th Street, right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And when you observed Santiago and Labron, they 
were west of the Lincoln and a hundred and fifty feet 
east of you. 

THE COURT: East or west? 

MR. GAY: East is what his testimony was. 


THE WITNESS: You're talking about Santiago. 


App. 98 


MR. GAY: And Labron when they first came 
into the block. 


THE WITNESS: You said they turned around 
the corner from 9th Street. I never said that. I didn’t 
see them at that point. 

BY MR. GAY: 
Q. We're past that point. You corrected us about that. 


A. I saw them in the middle of Auburn Street, middle 
of the block. 


Q. So they were in the middle of the block of Auburn 
Street between 9th and Hutchinson; is that right? 


A. Correct. Yes, sir. 


Q. And at that time, they were a hundred and fifty feet 
east of you. 


A. Maximum. No. That would be west of me. 
Q. West of you? 


A. That would be west of me, yes, sir. If they went 
east, they'd be past 9th Street. 


Q. Well, were you in the 900 block of Auburn Street at 
the time that you were making your observations? 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Well, as you were looking toward 9th Street at that 
time, then you were looking east, were you not? 


App. 99 


A. If I looked at 9th Street, I'm looking east. If I look 
at Hutchinson Street, I'm looking west. 


Q. Okay. But you were looking toward 9th Street at 
the time that you first observed Labron and Santiago 
come onto the block, were you not? 
A. The first time | observed them? 

. Yes, sir. 

. | saw they were west of me. 


Q 

A 

Q. They were west of you. 
A. West of me, yes, sir. 

Q 


And they were a hundred fifty feet west of you at 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, from that same location as you viewed the 
Lincoln, how far was it from you? 


A. Within thirty feet. 


Q. So it was almost directly across the street, was it 
not? 


A. It was within thirty feet of me, yes. 


Q. How long did you remain in that location before the 
blue Toyota came into the block? 


A. From about 12:15 to, it was approximately two 
hours, I guess. 


App. 100 


Q. And when it came into the block, did it park in front 
of the Lincoln or behind it? 


A. I believe it was in front of the Lincoln. 

Q. Well, is there anything that you can think of now 
that would prevent your remembering whether it was in 
front of the Lincoln or behind the Lincoln? 

MR. MECOLI: Objection. 

THE COURT: Overruled. 

THE WITNESS: Answer it? 

THE COURT: Yeah. 

THE WITNESS: Thinking back where the Lin- 
coln was and for me to get the tag number of the 
vehicle, I believe it would have to be in front of the 
Lincoln. 

BY MR. GAY: 


Q. But you don’t have a clear reccliection of that at 
A. Like I said, I believe it is. I remember him coming 
back to the Lincoln. 


Q. You have reconstructed the location of the Toyota 
by believing that you would not have been able to write 
down the tag had the Toyota not been parked in front of 
the Lincoln rather than behind it; is that right? 


App. 101 


A. No, sir. What I recall is the male getting out of the 
car and walking back to the Lincoln. That’s what | 
recall. I recall writing down the tag. 


Q. You do remember testifying at the preliminary hear- 
ing in this case on September the twelfth, 1990, at page 
seven, do you not? 


Q. Okay. You recall that specifically, do you not? A. I remember testifying, yes, sir, in this case. 
A. Writing the tag down? Q. Do you remember on that date being asked the 
following question and giving the following answer? 
Q. Right. 
Answer: On that date and time, | was conduct- 
A. Yes, sir. ing a surveillance in the 900 block. Skipping an entire 


page six, going to the top of the page seven. Approxi- 
mately 2:18, a blue Toyota pulled up in the 900 block of 
Auburn, parked behind the blue Lincoln. 


Q. And you recall the males getting out of the car and 
walking back toward the front of the Lincoln from the 
Toyota; is that right? 

Do you remember giving that answer on that 
A. I recall, I believe that is, yes, sir. date? 

A. I don’t remember the exact. I remember testifying, 
counsel. 


Q. Well, look back into the recesses of your memory as 
well as you have to at this time and be as careful as you 
can as to whether that was the case or not. 
MR. GAY: May | approach the witness, please, 
MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. Your Honor? 
THE COURT: Overruled. I guess the real ques- 
tion is how sure are you, is that recollection? How clear 
is that recollection? 


THE COURT: Let me just ask you this. | 
assume there’s no dispute as to the accuracy of the 
transcript, is there? 


THE WITNESS: The recollection that I have, 
like I said, is that the male went from the Toyota to the 
Lincoln and placed the objects in the trunk and | recall 
writing the tag down. 


MR. MECOLI: No, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: I mean if you read it in and 
there’s no dispute. 


MR. GAY: It’s important, Judge, if I can, to 
refresh the recollection of this witness. 


BY MR. GAY: 


THE COURT: Go ahead. 


App. 102 App. 103 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Would you please, Officer, examine the contents of 
the transcript of that preliminary hearing between page 
five and to the top of page seven and tell whether that 
refreshes your recollection or not? 
A. Just the top of seven. 
Q. Yeah. 


THE COURT: I didn’t hear what you said, Offi- 
cer. 


THE WITNESS: No. I asked him just to the 
top of page seven. 


THE COURT: Yes. 


THE WITNESS: Where you have it circled? 


MR. GAY: Yes. 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. That’s as far as I 
read. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Now, is your recollection refreshed at this time, 
Officer, that the blue Toyota was parked behind the blue 
Lincoln rather than ahead of it? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. | 
believe it’s been asked and answered. 


App. 104 


THE COURT: Overruled. You can answer it. 

THE WITNESS: My recollection is what I testi- 
fied to today. If I testified then, testified then, | would 
go with that testimony. I would believe that testimony. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. So your recollection still is that the blue Toyota was 
parked ahead of the Lincoln. 


A. That’s what I recall. If I was to recall the tes- 
timony, that would be fresher in my mind at that point. 


Q. Which would be fresher in your mind? 
A. What I testified there, sir. 
Q. Oh, okay. So what you're saying is that the -- 


A. I may be wrong on the location in what I’m saying 
today. 


Q. What you’re saying is that it is more likely that the 
testimony that you gave at the preliminary hearing with 
respect to the location of the Toyota and the Lincoln 
was more accurate then than your testimony is now. 
MR. MECOLI: Objection. 
THE WITNESS: It may be, yes, sir. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Well, if that is indeed the case -- 


App. 105 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, could I ask you this? | 
was actually enjoying this so much that I didn’t notice 
the clock. I see it’s 1:15. Why don’t we take a break 
now until 2:15 and then we'll finish up. 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, before we take a 
break, would you indulge me for one moment, Your 
Honor? 


THE COURT: Yes. 


MR. SAGOT: With Your Honor’s permission, if 
we could. I don’t think cross-examination of this officer 
is going to be much longer. May we please finish this 
cross-examination prior to the luncheon break? 


THE COURT: Is there some reason? 


MR. SAGOT: Yeah. We'd like to get him all 
done now and then we don’t have to reconstruct any- 
thing later. It will probably take more of the Court’s 


time to figure out where we were when we left on cross 
than to finish it up. 


THE COURT: I'm going to break now because 
I have some specific things to do at this time. 


MR. GAY: Your Honor, given that we’re break- 
ing in the middle of this officer’s cross-examination, 
would you please instruct him not to discuss this matter 
with anyone nor at this point to use any documents to 
refresh his recollection’ 


THE COURT: I think that’s a fair instruction. 
Any problems with that, Officer? 


App. 106 


THE WITNESS: I have notes written down, 
Your Honor, property receipts and stuff like that. 


THE COURT: Pardon me? 


THE WITNESS: I have notes on property 
receipts. 


THE COURT: There’s notes he can certainly 
look at. That’s not a problem. But other than that, 
you're not to discuss this case. 


THE WITNESS: No. 

MR. GAY: As long as the notes are identified at 
this time so that we can use them for the purpose of 
cross-examination and be able to -- 

THE COURT: Is that just what you have there? 

THE WITNESS: Just this. 


THE COURT: Just the card. Is that what you're 
referring to? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: He can keep that. I’m satisfied. 


MR. GAY: May we know, Judge, whether that 


was something that was prepared today for the purpose 
or recently for the purpose of testimony or whether or 


not it’s something that was prepared contemporane- 
ously? 


THE COURT: I couldn’t hear what you said 
because you talked while Mr. Gay was talking. 


App. 107 


MR. MECOLI: That’s all right, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: When did you prepare it, 
Officer? 


THE WITNESS: Tag numbers, property receipt 
numbers. 


THE COURT: No. I say when did you prepare 
it. Today? 


THE WITNESS: I think it was, I had it 
yesterday. | think yesterday, | believe. 


THE COURT: Yesterday. 


MR. GAY: Judge, that’s not something that he 
could properly use to refresh his recollection. 


THE COURT: Well, if he’s going to use it, then 
I think that the District Attorney has an obligation to lay 
a foundation if he chooses to use it. But I don’t think 
that there’s anything that prevents a man from using his 
own notes, not on the witness stand, though. 


MR. GAY: May we just have that marked as an 
exhibit and left with the stenographer during the recess? 


THE COURT: Sure. We'll just mark it as C-1. 
COURT CRIER: C-1, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Well, C-1, yeah. 

MR. GAY: D-l1. 


COURT CRIER: They’re saying D-1. 


App. 108 


THE COURT: C-1 it’s going to be. 


MR. SAGOT: And he will not be permitted to 
have access to the 49 or anything like that. 


THE COURT: No. He's not going to look at 
anything over lunch. 


COURT CRIER: The Court will take a recess 
until 2:15. 


(A luncheon recess was taken.) 


THE COURT: Let’s have Officer Nimmo come 
back up on the stand. All right. Mr. Gay, please pro- 
ceed. 


COURT CRIER: Judge, where is our 
interpreter? 


MR. GAY: Yeah. We do need the interpreter. 


THE COURT: Oh, for God’s sake. They knew 
that they were supposed to be here at 2:15. Let's give 
them a call. Tell them we're all sitting here at the bar 
of the court waiting for them. 


COURT CRIER: They’re both on their way, 
Judge. 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


THE COURT: All right. We can start with one. 
Where is Iris, do you know? 


COURT CRIER: She’s on the way also. 


App. 109 


MR. GAY: Your Honor, we'll need to distribute 
the interpreter so that he can translate. 


THE COURT: Why don’t you just talk real loud 
until Iris gets here. He can move over. All right. Mr. 
Gay? 

MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 

BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Officer, you do remember testifying at that pre- 
liminary hearing at Front Street and Westmoreland on 
September the twelfth, 1990, as you've said before, do 
you not? 

A. | remember testifying on the case. 

Q. Do you remember on that date, the date being Sep- 
tember the twelfth, 1990, being asked the following 
questions and giving the following answers? 


Question: Where were the two males in relation 
to the Lincoln when you first saw them? 


Answer: Which two? 
Question: Mr. Santiago and Mr. Labron. 
Answer: Yes. 


When I first observed them, they were at 9th and 
Auburn. 


THE COURT: 9th and? 
MR. GAY: Auburn. 


App. 110 


BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Do you remember those questions and answers? 


A. I don’t, no, sir. | remember testifying. I don't 
remember that. 


Q. May I show you the notes of testimony? 
A. Yeah. 

MR. GAY: If I can please do so, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Yes. 

MR. GAY: Please start at the bottom of page 
fifteen, Officer, and read through and including the 
highlighted sentence, the first one you reach, top of page 
sixteen. 


THE WITNESS: Out loud or to myself. 


MR. GAY: To yourself, for the purpose of 
refreshing your recollection, if you can. 


SY MR. GAY: 
Have you done that? 
Down to here, right? 


Yes. Have you done that? 


Having read those notes of testimony from that 


Q. 
A. 
Q. 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. 
preliminary hearing, Officer, is your recollection 


App. 111 


refreshed as to the location where you first observed Mr. 
Santiago and Mr. Labron? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I have an objection 
at this point. What he’s doing is impeaching the 
witness, not refreshing his recollection. The officer 
hasn't stated he doesn’t recall anything at all. He’s not 
really refreshing his recollection at all. 


THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objec- 
tion. You can answer it, Officer. 


THE WITNESS: I'm sorry. Could you give me 
the question again, counsel? 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Having read the notes of testimony from that hear- 
ing with respect to the portions that your attention was 
drawn to, is your recollection refreshed as to where you 
that day? 

A. I recall seeing them in the middie of the block. 
Now, if they're referring in that testimony to is that the 
first time | saw them make a transaction, I don’t recall, 
or if that was what | was referring to. 


Q. Well, the question was where were the two males in 
relation to the Lincoln when you first saw them. 


A. Well, what I recall is seeing them in the middle of 
the block. 


Q. Okay. 
A. Initially. 


App. 112 


Q. The middle of the block was where with respect to 
you? 


A. That would be west of me. 
Q. And how far west? 
A. Middle of the block. 


Q. No. How many feet west of you were they then 
when you first saw them? 


A. Again, it would be within a hundred and fifty feet, 
less. 


Q. | beg your pardon? 
A. It would be less than a hundred and fifty feet. 


Q. Okay. Going further, following your answer, which 
was when I first observed them they were at 9th and 
Auburn. They were in front of it, thirty or forty feet. 


Question: So I| take it the two men were walking 
toward you; is that correct? 


Answer: When I first saw them, standing on the 
corner. 


Do you remember that question and answer? 
A. I don’t remember the question, no, sir. 


Q. I beg your pardon? 
A. I don’t recall the question. 


App. 113 


Q. Do you remember the answer, that they were stand- 
ing on the corner when you first saw them? 


A. During the course of the surveillance they were 
standing on the corner. They were standing in front and 
beside the vehicles. They were standing different loca- 
tions. 


Q. Do you remember your answer, when | first saw 
them, standing on the corner? Yes or no. 


A. I do not recall. 
Q. You don’t remember testifying that way. 


A. I remember testifying. I don’t remember the indi- 
vidual questions and the individual answers, no, sir. 


THE COURT: I have to step off the bench for 
one moment. 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


App. 114 


THE COURT: My apologies, Mr. Gay. Please 
proceed. 


MR. GAY: Not at all, Judge. If Your Honor 
please, in view of the questions that were asked of this 
officer, | ask at this time that the Commonwealth pro- 
duce the evidence being the plastic bags in question, as 
they will be needed for the purpose of examination. 
Incidentally, | requested the District Attorney to order 
that a short while ago to save the Court some time. 


THE COURT: Do you mean today? 
MR. GAY: Yes. Perhaps he has. 


THE COURT: Well, can you tell me where the 
items are? 


MR. MECOLI: Well, counsel is incorrect in 
assuming that we can go upstairs and get them. They 
would be kept at the chemist lab, Your Honor. They 
wouldn't be kept upstairs. 


THE COURT: Well, | assume what you're 
particularly interested in is the bags themselves. 


MR. GAY: The bags. 


THE COURT: When you say the bag, the 
opaque bag that has been testified to? 


MR. GAY: Well, that’s it, yes. 
THE COURT: Yeah. Well, let me just ask you 


this question. Is that opaque bag listed on the property 
receipt? 


App. 115 oe 


MR. GAY: It is listed on the property receipt, 
Your Honor. Let me just say, let me just say, is the 
property receipt in question 291304, the one with respect 
to the bag? 


MR. MECOLI: I believe so. 


MR. GAY: Yes. Well, that property receipt, 
Your Honor, itemizes three plastic bags all of which are 
described as clear. 


THE COURT: It doesn’t list an opaque bag. 
MR. GAY: It does not. 


MR. SAGOT: It does not, nor does it list it on 
any of the remaining property receipts that have been 
supplied to us. 


THE COURT: The only thing is this. You 
know, we can certainly get the physical evidence up 
here but from the listing that you've described to me, 
that is not going to include an opaque bag. 


MR. GAY: Well, that’s correct, sir. 


THE COURT: So I’m not quite sure what | 
would have to bring up if that’s the point to be made. | 
mean, if there’s no, | mean, from what’s been presented 
to me, if the testimony is going to be that these are the 
property receipts that are prepared, you know, then | 
don’t think they’re going to bring anything like that up. 
Now, maybe what we can do is when we take a break, 
you can call down to the Chem Lab, have them take it 
out and have them tell you whether in fact there’s any- 
thing there. 


App. 116 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | don’t think that’s 
going to satisfy counsel. 


MR. SAGOT: I think what the issue is, Your 
Honor -- 


THE COURT: Wait. One at a time, please. 


MR. MECOLI: May I finish? I have no objec- 
tion to them bringing it, Your Honor, but understand 
that an officer is going to have to go down and get it. | 
myelf can’t do it. No one else can do it. 


THE COURT: The chemist can bring it up. 


MR. MECOLI: No, they can’t, Your Honor. 
They’re under a directive not to. | 


THE COURT: All right. The whole point is if 
the effort is to ascertain whether there was a bag that 
was supplied to the Chem Lab when the officer turned 
them in, if the chemist says that there isn’t, would that 
end the inquiry, Mr. Gay? 


MR. GAY: I don’t have any problem with that. 
Contrary to what counsel says, I can speak for myself 
and if the Court makes a reasonable suggestion, | can 
accept it. 


MR. SAGOT: Judge, | just think that, I have no 
requirement that the evidence be here provided the 
District Attorney will not argue to Your Honor anything 
contra to the property receipt. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I'd like to have my 
case presented my way. If they'd like to have the evi- 
dence presented, we'll present the evidence. 


App. 117 


THE COURT: That’s a broad request. Do you 
have some other concern as to whether there’s an 


opaque bag there? 


MR. SAGOT: Judge, there’s a genuine issue as 
to whether or not the bag is clear or the bag is opaque. 
The property receipt says clear, that there were three 
clear bags. If the District Attorney is going to suggest 
to Your Honor that this is inaccurate, then I think that 
Your Honor must see these bags. 


THE COURT: The first thing I want to do is 
when we take the next break, before I decide this issue, 
we will have the DA call the Chem Lab and they’l! pull 
the items out and tell you what’s there. 

MR. MECOLI: Very well, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Please proceed. 

BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Officer, when you say you saw Mr. Lajara reach 
into the back seat of the Toyota and take out the objects 
that you have described as being, one of which was an 
opaque plastic bag or were both of them opaque? 

A. There was one bag that was taken out. 

Q. Okay. There was not more than one? 

A. There was one bag taken out. 


Q. And what size was it as you observed it at the time 
that you say he took it out? 


App. 118 


A. Maybe a foot, you know. It was folded and rolled 
up. 


Q. Folded and rolled up. 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Well, I want you, if you would, please, to describe 
the dimensions of it as you observed them at the time 
that you say he took it out of the car, not what may 
have been at some later time when you came into pos- 
session of something, then unrolled it and did whatever 
you had to do. 


A. When I saw, we're talking about the male in the 
white and gray long-sleeved shirt, mght? 


THE COURT: We're talking about the person 
who took the bag out of the Toyota. 


THE WITNESS: He mentioned a name. 

MR. GAY: Whoever that was. 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. He took the bag out. 
It was approximately eight to twelve inches, maybe 
several inches round. It was folded. It appeared to be 
folded. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Officer, do you remember again testifying at that 
same preliminary hearing and when asked to describe 


the size of the bag that you say you saw and when you 
were questioned as follows, what size were they? 


App. 119 


Answer: Approximately maybe six inches, about 
an inch and a half, two inches or two inches by two 
inches. 


Do you remember that question and answer? 


A. Counselor, | don’t remember any of the questions or 
the answers. I remember testifying at it, yeah. 


Q. Okay. Well, let me just ask you this. Is your 
recollection of the incident in question more clear at the 
time of your testimony at that preliminary hearing or 
now? 


A. I would say it would be more clear then. 


Q. Well, is what you're saying then today that your 
testimony insofar as it is inconsistent with the prelim- 
inary hearing testimony is incorrect and that the preli. 
inary hearing testimony is correct? 


A. Well, what I’m testifying to is what I recall. What I 
recall is what I believe. Now, if I have a choice to pick 
between September of last year and now, you know, 
more than likely my mind would be more fresh at that 


point. 


Q. Weil, knowing that your testimony at the prelimi- 
nary hearing was that the bag in question was about six 
inches by about an inch and your testimony here today 
was that it was about eight to twelve inches by some 
other dimensions, which of those versions of your 
observations with respect to the size of the bag do you 
choose? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. 


App. 120 


THE COURT: Overruled. 


THE WITNESS: What I recall is what I testified 
today. | don’t remember the answer on that date. 


MR. GAY: Objection, move to strike. 


THE COURT: Well, | don’t think it’s 
responsive. 

Are you saying, officer, that if I said to you 
which do you think is more accurate, your recollection 
today or your recollection back then when you testified 


at the preliminary hearing, which one of those would 
you choose? 


THE WITNESS: I would choose September of 
last year. 


BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Now, at the time that you observed the person take 
that bag from the back seat of the car, that car was 
parked some distance in front of the Lincoln, was it not? 
A. It was parked not -- it was in front of the Lincoln. 
Q. | beg your pardon? 

A. It was in front of the Lincoln, not far. 

Q 


. How many feet separated the back of the Toyota 
from the front of the Lincoln? 


A. There wasn’t that much separation between them. It 
was five, ten feet. 


App. 121 


Q. Now, when the individual reached into the back seat 
of the Toyota and took out the, what you've described 
as being an opaque bag, did he after doing so walk 
directly to the rear of the Lincoln? 


A. Did the male walk directly to the rear of the 
Lincoln? 


Q. Yes. 


A. He walked on the side of the Lincoln, the passenger 
side, and gave it to Labaron, the male here, Labaron. 


Q. So if I’m not wrong, or if I've understood you cor- 
rectly, he took it out of the passenger side of the 
Toyota, walked along the south footway of Auburn 
Street? 

A. I’m sorry. I'm sorry. 

Q. Don’t be sorry. Just tell us what happened. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, would counsel 
retrain from that? 


THE COURT: It’s harmless. He’s being courte- 
ous to the officer. 


Officer, what do you recall? 


THE WITNESS: Mr. Ramos, the male with the 
beard, I believe he walked over at the time. 


THE COURT: Walked over where? 


THE WITNESS: Between the vehicles. And the 
package was given to Labaron at that point and placed 


App. 122 


in the right rear quarter panel. The one male changed 
his location, I recall. 


THE COURT: Go over that again from the time 
that somebody took something out of the Toyota. Who 
took something out of the Toyota? 


THE WITNESS: Lajara, the gray and white 
long-sleeved shirt, took it out. He’s going back to -- 


THE COURT: Took it from what side of the 
Toyota? 


THE WITNESS: The passenger side rear. 

THE COURT: Right. 

THE WITNESS: Going back towards the 
Lincoln. The other male had walked, I believe, over to 
him, close to him. And then it was given to Labaron. 

THE COURT: Well I assume that you're saying 
that Mr. Lajara took it out of the Toyota. What did he 
do with the package? 

THE WITNESS: I believe he’s the one that -- 
both of them were there. I believe he’s the one that 
gave it to Labaron. 

MR. GAY: Are you finished with your answer? 

THE COURT: Yes. 

THE WITNESS: I’m waiting. 


BY MR. GAY: 


App. 123 


Q. Now, over what distance was it that you say Mr. 
Lajara walked with that opaque bag before whoever it 
was that he gave it to took it? 

A. Half the length of the Toyota, the separation 
between the vehicles, and I guess it would be the length 
of the Lincoln. 


Q. So he had it then for a matter of maybe a second or 
two, didn’t he? 


A. I’m sorry? 


Q. He had it in his hand for maybe a second or two, 
didn’t he? 


A. No. It was more than that, sir. He was in no rush. 
Q. Three seconds? 

A. Three, five seconds. I, you know. 

Q. Okay. Some small amount of time. 

A. A sufficient time for me to observe him, yes, sir. 
Q. And when you made your observations of it, did 
you observe that the package was being held in his left 
or his right hand? 


A. I had full view of it. I believe it was his right hand, 
it would be. 


Q. Do you have a recollection at this time of which 
hand you say he held the package in? 


App. 124 


A. Do I have a recollection of seeing the package? No, 
sir. 


Q. You can’t remember now whether it was in his left 
hand or his right hand. 


A. | would believe it to be in his right hand. 


Q. When you say you believe, | would like you if you 
possibly can, if you do recall the incident, to go back 
and see if you can picture in your mind at this time that 
event and see whether you can see which of his hands 
you say he held the packet in. 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, asked and answered. 


THE COURT: Overruled. | don’t understand 
the level of the officer’s recollection. I mean, do you 
have any degree of certainty of your recollection as to 
what hand it was in? 


THE WITNESS: The only thing | would 
believe, it had to be in his right hand, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: But you don’t recall? 
THE WITNESS: | don’t recall specifically. 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Now, after Mr. Lajara, as you say, took the package 
and handed it off to someone else, what did Mr. Lajara 
then do? 


A. What did who do? 


App. 125 


Q. What did Mr. Lajara do after he then handed the 
package off to someone else? 


A. | believe he went back to the car. He got in the car 
and he drove off. | was watching the Lincoln at this 


time. | know both males got in the car. They drove 
east on Auburn and south on 9th Street. 


Q. Now, with respect to this opaque package that you 
saw, did you see whether within the Lincoln that 
package was placed by the person who placed it there? 
A. Exactly, yes, sir. 

Q. You did. 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And where was that? 

A. It was in the right rear quarter panel of the trunk. 


Q. And incidentally, you were certain that the packet 
that you saw was an opaque one, aren't you? 


A. I believe so, yes, sir. 


Q. Were you present at the time that that Lincoln was 
searched” 


A. | observed the officers open the Lincoln, yes, sir. 
Q. Were you there? 
A. I wasn’t at their location. | had stayed at my loca- 


tion. 


App. 126 


Q. Well, you observed them open the trunk of the 
Lincoln; is that it? 


A. You're fading, counsel. 


Q. When you observed them open the trunk of the Lin- 


_coln, from your advantage point, were you able to see 


them go to the place where you say that packet was 
placed? 


A. Before they opened the vehicle, | directed them to 
the vehicle. They opened the vehicle. Prior to them 
opening it, | directed them to the vehicle and exactly 
where in the trunk. It was opened. The officer, officers 
were around it. They opened it and retrieved it, 
informed me. | don’t know if they knew I could see or 
not. But they informed me over radio that they recov- 
ered it and I was there. 


Q. Did they go to the location that you said the packet 
was placed in? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Yes. And after they went to that location, did they 
exit the trunk of the vehicle? 


A. I'm talking about the location inside the vehicle. 
I am too. 
Yes, sir. 


. Go ahead. 


> 2 - & 


. They went directly to the vehicle. It was opened 
and they retrieved it from the right rear quarter panel. 


App. 127 


Q. And how long were they in the trunk of that vehicle 
for that purpose? 


A. They opened it and went right to it. I don’t recail 
the trunk being closed afterwards, no. 


Q. You don't. 
A. No, sir. 

Q. Well, -- 

A. They didn’t open the trunk and close it right away. 
Q. They left the trunk opened. 

A. They could have. I don’t recall. 

Q 


. You don’t remember whether it was opened or 
closed. 


A. No, sir. They retrieved the items and that’s all | 
recall. 


Q. They retrieved the items that they got from the 
trunk; is that right? 


A. They retrieved the one bag and I| believe the baggie 
that Melendez had placed in there. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Objection to what he 
believes. 


THE COURT: Well, I'll sustain the objection. 


BY MR. GAY: 


App. 128 


Q. Did you see any of the officers who were retrieving 
whatever it was that was retrieved from the trunk of the 
Lincoln retrieve an opaque bag? 

A. What was placed in there they retrieved, yes, sir. 


Q. Listen to my question, please. Did you see any of 
the officers retrieve an opaque bag? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection. 


THE COURT: Overruled. | don’t understand 
his answer yet. 


THE WITNESS: They retrieved what | told 
them and it was the opaque bag. 


THE COURT: Officer, it’s very simple. When 
they came out of the trunk did you see them have an 
opaque bag in their hand? Do you recall whether you 
did or you didn’t? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 

THE COURT: Okay. 

THE WITNESS: They, you know. 

BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Did you see which of the officers retrieved that 
opaque bag? 


A. I believe Officer Scarpato. He opened the trunk and 
retrieved the items. 


Q. Did you ever see that opaque bag again? 
App. 129 


A. | saw the items that were confiscated inside. | don’t 
recall if | saw the bag again or not inside. The items 
were taken out and field tested and packaged for pro- 
cessing to the Chem Lab. 


Q. Incidentally, what was your purpose in going to that 
surveillance point that day? 

A. The information | had that cocaine was being sold at 
that location. I had further information that the one 
male received large quantities of cocaine. My intention 
was to try to take off what was being delivered. 


Q. All right. So the one male was the male who left in 
the Buick with the money; is that right? 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Okay. 
A. It wasn’t a Buick. It was a Ford. 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. That 
misstates the facts. It was a Ford. 


THE WITNESS: It was a Ford, Ford station 
wagon. 


MR. GAY: It was a Ford. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. At some point before that male left how many trans- 
actions had you observed? 


A. It was, it was, you know, I lost count, truly. 


App. 130 


How may people were on your backup team? 
I'm sorry. Excuse me, counselor? 

How many people were in your backup team? 
Six, maybe eight, | believe. 


And were they located nearby? 


id ee ees ek el 


I don’t know exactly where they were located. 
They were supposed to be located strategically where, 
whatever location, if pursuit or if we had to follow 
somebody, you know. 

Q. When the individual in the station wagon left, did 
you order the members of your backup team to arrest 
him? 

A. No, sir. 


Q. Well, how many transactions occurred before the 
individual that left in the station wagon went to the 

Buick or Lincoln, got out more packets and gave them 
to the two men who were working the street? 

A. The contents of several bundles were sold. 

Q. Okay. 

A. You know. 

Q. How many transactions were there? 

A. Between then, it must have been fifteen, maybe 

twenty. 


App. 131 


Q. Okay. When the individual went to the trunk and 
got out his supply. 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And distributed it to the other two men on the street. 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Was there some reason that you did not order their 
arrest at that time? 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. What was that? 


A. I was waiting for a delivery. The information I had, 
I'd be able to take off people delivering the items, deliv- 
ering the product. 


Q. Well, what information did you have about the 
delivery taking place? 


A. I had information that Raphael Melendez lived at 
913 Auburn Street. He was the one that had the 
workers on the street and that he had received, he would 
receive his cocaine. It would be delivered on Auburn 
Street and he used several cars to store the stuff. One 
was a Lincoln. There was another car on the north side 
of the street. I don’t recall what that was now. It was 
an abandoned car. There was no tags on that. 


Q. And when did you get that information? 
MR. MECOLI: Objection. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 


App. 132 


THE WITNESS: | had gotten that information 
from numerous, from several places, from my own 
investigation, from other people that had been arrested, 
from people that called from the neighborhood. 

BY MR. GAY: 


And how long had you had that information 
before you went to make your surveillance that day? 


A. I had been doing surveillance on that street. 
Q. I beg your pardon? 


A. I had been doing surveillance on that street and I 
had made several arrests, other arrests. 


Q. Had you ever seen a delivery made to Ralpa 
Melendez before from your surveillance point? 


A. To him? No, sir. 

Q. Well, when you got there that day and you saw the 
two men come into the block, regardless of whether they 
were at 9th Street or at some other location. 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And you saw Mr. Melendez start up his operation 

for the day by distributing the first set of bundles to the 
two men on the street, did you not then know that Mr. 

Melendez had a supply of cocaine coming in? 


A. I knew he had a supply. I knew the supply 
wouldn't -- a quantity supply. It wasn’t -- 


Q. It was what? 
App. 133 


A. It was not ounces. 


Q. Okay. Where did you get the information that it 
wasn t ounces? 


A. That I saw. I saw into the trunk. I saw ~hat he 
had. | saw what he took out. 


Q. You saw what he took out but you didn’t know 
what else was in there, did you? 


A. No, sir. 
Q. Okay. 


A. When the defendant, when Melendez, Raphael 
Melendez, when he gave the keys to Santiago and left 
the area, | was under the impression that hopefully he 
would be going, possibly getting the drugs, be coming 
back. 


THE COURT: He never did come back that 
day; is that right? 


THE WITNESS: Not while we were there, sir. 
He came back to that location -- 


THE COURT: But! mean he did not come back 
during -- 


THE WITNESS: No, sir. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Now, did you ever see the two men who were 
working the street? 


App. 134 


A. I couldn't hear you, counselor. 


Q. Did you ever see the two men that were working the 
street near the corner of 9th and Auburn? 


A. They were on 9th, on the corner of 9th Street and 
Auburn. They were on the north and south side of 
Auburn Street. They would, sometimes they'd go out of 
my sight on the north side. They were at 9th and 
Auburn, Auburn and 9th Street, yes, sir. 


Q. Now, were you present at the time that Mr. Lajara 
was searched? 


A. I had stayed in my location. | observed, -- do you 
mean searched on the street? Frisked? 


Q. Yes. 


A. When he was stopped at another location, I was not 
there, no, sir. When he was brought back, he was iden- 
tified. I identified him. 

Q. And what was it about him that you observed at the 
lume that he was brought back that caused you to be 
able to identify him? 

A. His appearance, his clothing, you know, and himself 
| made a point of recognizing him and the clothing he 
had was not hard to recognize. 

Q. What kind of clothing was it? 


A. i remember gold, gold shirt and gold pants, | 
believe. 


THE COURT: Excuse me for just a moment. 


App. 135 


MR. GAY: Yes. 
(Discussion held off the record.) 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. What you're saying is Mr. Lajara had on gold pants 
and a gold shirt? 


A. Gold design on. One of them was gold and the 
other had designs on it. I’m not sure exactly how it 
was, you know. I'm not a fashion plate. I know he had 
gold pants and some goldish -- 


THE COURT: You could have fooled us, Offi- 
cer. 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Do you remember which was gold and which had 
the design? 


A. To be truthful, counselor, no. I remember they were 
baggie. 


Q. I beg your pardon? 
A. They were baggie, I remember that. 
Q. They were large. 


A. No. I think the style was baggie at the time. Large, 
whatever. 


Q. Okay. You don’t remember whether the shirt was 
gold or not? 


App. 136 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, asked and answered. 

THE COURT: Overruled. 

THE WITNESS: To be truthful, I don’t recall. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Well, let me ask you this. Are you testifying today 
from what you have read about this case or can you 
actually go back in time and picture the events as they 
occurred? 
A. I went over the case. | could not remember the 
case, you know. It’s a year, fourteen months old. | 
remember basically the case. | reviewed it several days 
ago to refresh my mind. I looked over the notes of tes- 
timony in the beginning. That’s what I looked over. 
Q. Okay. And after looking over the notes of testi- 
mony, you still could not picture in your mind the 
events of the day, could you? 


A. I remember basically, yeah. Yes, sir. 


Q. Can you do that right now? 
A. Yeah. I can run it down to you in a minute, sir. 


Q. Sir? 


App. 137 


A. Tll run it down to you, you know. 


(). Well, if you can really make that kind of mental 
picture in your mind of the events of the day, focus on 
the time when you first saw Mr. Lajara get out of that 
car and tell us whether he had on a gold top or a gold 
bottom. 


A. I don’t recall, sir. It didn’t strike me as, didn’t 
strike me as a point of identification at the time. It 
didn’t stick with me. I couldn't tell you what it was. 


Q. Well, haven't you just told us that the reason that 
you were able to identify him, namely point of identifi- 
cation, was that he was wearing gold? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, argumentative. 

THE WITNESS: No, sir. 

MR. MECOLI: Judge, he answered the question. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 

MR. MECOLI: He’s testified. 


-THE WITNESS: No, sir. | saw the defendant. 
He was there. | got full face view. I got side view. 
Got him walking away. | saw their clothing. I gave a 
description of the vehicle and the car, the tag number. | 
believe I described when the defendants got out of their 
cars. I believe I described to the other officers what 


was going on and the descriptions of the persons. When 


the vehicle was stopped, they were brought back to me. 
I didn’t see the vehicle. You know, they brought the 
defendants back and | identified them. It was within 


App. 138 


five minutes of them leaving the scene. they were 
returned. Ten minutes, maybe 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Now, the car that you say they were iN was not 
brought back. 


A. | didn’t see it brought back to the scene 


Q. That car never came back into the block of Auburn 
Street where you were. 


A. I didn’t see it, counselor 


Q. Now, with respect to the other defendant who was in 
the vehicle, how was he dressed when you observed him 
that day? 


A. To be truthful, | don’t recall. | remember Lajara 
was in my opinion dressed more expensive than the 
other guy. That's the only impression [ had. 

Q. Were there any particular features about Mr. Lajara 


that you observed at the time that you say you saw him 
get out of the Toyota that you can now recall. 


A. Any additional information? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Not that I could recall at this point, no, sir No. 
Not without reading over, you know, going further into 
the notes. 


Q. Well, we're asking for your recollection now. 


App. 139 


A. Nothing. 

Q. Was there something about him other than perhaps a 
gold top or a gold bottom and some other design on his 
clothing that you observed at the time that you saw him 
outside the Toyota that enabled you to identify him as 
the person that you had seen earlier when he was 
brought back to Auburn Street and when you saw him 
and made your identification to the police? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, asked and answered. 
THE COURT: Are you talking about Lajara. 
MR. GAY: Yes. 


THE COURT: I’ll sustain the objection. I think 
we've been through that. 


THE WITNESS: I -- 
THE COURT: I’ve sustained the objection. 
MR. MECOLI: It’s sustained, Officer. 

BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Was there anything else about Lajara that you could 
observe other than his clothing? 


THE COURT: Yeah. | think he’s gone through 
this. I think he stated his facial features or his view of 
his face. 


App. 140 


BY MR. GAY: 


Fy nat was it about his face that caused you to recall 


A. Me seeing him up to, less than ten minutes from the 
one point to the next. I saw him. I observed him. | 
recelled him. 


MR. GAY: Thank you. I have no further ques- 
tions. 

THE COURT: All right. Mr. Corrigan? 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 
Q. Officer Nimmo, from beginning to end, from when 
this surveillance started until it finished, you did not 
A. I was in several locations on the one level. 
Q. Now, when you say you were at several locations on 
ole level, you mean, do you not, that you were looking 


tially at the same height in the same building? 


A. Same structure, yes, sir. 


Q. During that period of time, entire period of time. 
And that would be up to and including when everybody 
was brought back onto Auburn Street. You remained in 
radio; is that right? 


A. Over surveillance frequency we had, yes, sir. 


App. 141 


Q. And now, you said that this operation involved six 
to eight officers. 


A. You know, what I recall. It was basically the squad 
that | worked with. I think we had maybe ten people. 


Q. So you're not sure now. There could have been as 
many as ten police officers including yourself involved 


in this operation. 

A. It could be. I guess, yes, sir. 

Q. And you don’t exactly where the individuals were 
positioned but you would have had four or five cars in 


various locations around the area. Hutchinson Street, 9th 
Street, 10th Street, Auburn Street. Correct? 


A. Yes, sir. They weren’t on Auburn Street and they 
weren't on Hutchinson Street. I know that. 


Q. Well, but some on 9th, some on 10th. 

A. Yes, sir. In that area. 

Q. In that general area. Now, you said that during the 
time that you were watching the retail sales take place 
on the street, that this was over a period of approxi- 
mately two hours; is that right? 


A. From the time I got there till, yes, sir, until the 
apprehensions were made. 


Q. And during that time, approximately how many sales 


were made? 


A. That I observed? 


App. 142 


Q. Yes. 


A. Guesstimating, it would be over fifty, you know. 
Q. Now, when you say sales that you observed, do you 
mean by that that you were not in surveillance of the 
900 block of West Auburn Street for the entire two 
hours that you were positioned there? It’s possible that 
sales could have taxen place in areas where you weren't 
able to see? 


A. I'm sorry? 
MR. SAGOT: I'd object to that question. 
THE COURT: Well, I'll overrule the objection. 
MR. SAGOT: Thank you. 
MR. MECOLI: They're getting along so well. 
MR. SAGOT: You stay out of it. 


THE COURT: Do you want to ,restate the ques- 
tion, Mr. Corrigan? It’s the subway going by. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, you said that there were over fifty sales that 
you observed. 


A. | would guesstimate, yes, sir. 
Q. During this period. Now, you were observing the 


900 block of Auburn Street for the entire time; is that 
right? 


App. 143 


A. The whole block? No, sir. 


Q. Well, you were observing the Lincoln and the 
individuals around that for the entire time, correct? 


A. Yes, sir. In the area of 913, in that area. 

Q. Now, while these sales were taking place was the 
gentleman Melendez, the one who drove away, was he 
positioned by the trunk of the Lincoln for the entire 
time? 

A. Was he positioned by the Lincoln? 

Right. 

No, sir. Most of the time he was out of my sight. 


I’m sorry. I couldn’t hear you. 


> @ PP ¢ 


Most of the time he was out of my sight. 


Q. Now, when you say he was out of your sight, he 
was just not on the street, in a building, or you just 
don’t know where he was? 


A. I remember he went into several houses on the south 
side. On the north side, he went to a point where he 
was out of my sight. He went up to the corner at 9th 
Street and he was out of my sight. 


Q. And now, while this was going on, it’s your testi- 
mony that Mr. Labron and Mr. Santiago were conduct- 
ing street sales at various locations, correct? 


A. In the immediate area, yes, sir. 


App. 144 


Q. And it was your testimony previously that while you 
were making these observations, the street vendors Mr. 
Santiago and Mr. Labron ran out of product several 
times, correct? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And now, when that occurred, Mr. Melendez would 
reappear and go to the trunk of the Lincoln? 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And Mr. Melendez was the individual who had the 
key to the trunk of the Lincoln at this time as far as you 
knew; is that right? 


A. He opened the key. He opened the trunk with a 
key. Yes, sir. 


Q. And now, during the time when you were observing 
these sales taking place, you never saw anyone other 
than Mr. Melendez open the trunk of the Lincoln while 
he was present; is that right? 

MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, | apologize for 
interrupting counsel. May | impose upon the Court for 
the a five-minute recess? 


THE COURT: We'll take a five-minute recess. 
Why don’t you make the call. 


MR. MECOLI: Sure. 
MR. SAGOT: Thank you, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: We'll take five. 


App. 145 


COURT CRIER: Very well, Your Honor. The 
Court will take a five-minute recess. 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


THE COURT: Mr. Mecoli, our court staff will 
hold for you if you can't get through. 


MR. MECOLI: I'm on the phone right now, 
Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Before you hang up, tell me what 
you found out. Did they pull the stuff out? 


MR. MECOLI: That's what's going to take 
some time, to pull it out. It’s locked from the bin. 


THE COURT: Have them pull it out and give 
them the courtroom number and let’s have them call us 
and tell us what's there. If we have to prove it, we'll 
prove it. But let’s have them call us and see if we can 
agree upon it. I'll tell you what. I don’t want to wait 
for him to do that. Just let’s have Mr. Clark hang on 
the phone. He's very experienced in these matters. He 
can convey the message. 


Mr. Corrigan, please proceed. 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 
Q. Officer, after the Toyota arrived on the scene -- 
A. Counselor, could you? 
Q. After the Toyota arrived on the scene and you called 
for your backup to make arrests, Mr. Santiago and Mr. 


App. 146 


Labron were still in the area of the 900 block of Auburn 
Street; is that right? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And if you can recall, how many officers responded 
immediately to your request into the 900 block of West 
Auburn Street? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. How 
does this go to the motion? 


THE COURT: Well, | would hope you would 
know. So I’m overruling the objection. Go ahead, Mr. 
Corrigan. 

THE WITNESS: How many officers responded? 

MR. CORRIGAN: Immediately. 

THE WITNESS: Onto Auburn Street? 

MR. CORRIGAN: Yes. 


THE WITNESS: There was at least four of 
them there, at least four. ‘ 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. And this was just to arrest Mr. Santiago and Mr 
Labron. Other officers took Mr. Lajara and Mr. Ramos 
into custody; is that right? 


A. Yes, sir. 


App. 147 


Q. Now, Mr. Labron and Mr. Santiago were arrested 
approximately 2:15, 2:20, something like that; is that 
right? 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. In the afternoon? 
A. Two, yes. 


Q. And there was testimony earlier today that this 
surveillance lasted for approximately two hours; is that 


right? 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, you recall testifying at a preliminary hearing 
with respect to this case, correct? 


A. I recall testifying, yes, sir. 


Q. Now, at that time, directing your attention to page 
thirteen, you responded to the following questions the 
following way. 


Question: How long before you first saw the 
two individuals wearing red shirts when you set up your 
surveillance? 


Answer: Immediately. 


Question: At what time of day did you set up 
your surveillance? 


Answer: Just about two. Just prior to two. 


App. 148 


pone Do you recall that being your testimony on that 
ate’ 


A. No, I don’t, sir. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, may | approach 
the witness? Jabsco 


THE COURT: Yes. 
THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, do you recall making those responses to those 
questions? 


A. No. I remember testifying. I don’t recall the 
questions, no, sir. 


Q. But if I understand your testimony today, what 
you're saying is that your testimony at this time with 
respect to when this surveillance commenced is incorrect 
and the surveillance actually commenced sometime 
around twelve noon; is that right? 

A. It was after twelve when I started, yes, sir. 


Q. When you say it was after twelve, does that mean it 
was five o’clock in the afternoon or does that mean it 
was five after twelve? 

A. No. It was ten after, quarter after, [ believe. 

Q. Ten after or quarter after twelve noon: is that right? 
A. I believe so. 


App. 149 


Q. Now, Officer Nimmo, you were the assigned officer 
in this arrest; is that right? 


“A. I believe. | haven't seen the 49. I believe I was. 


Q. Well, if 1 show you the 49, would you be able to 
determine from that whether or not you were in fact the 
assigned officer? 


A. My name should be on the bottom, yes, sir. 


Q. I guess that would be D-1 for identification pur- 
poses. 


A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You are the assigned officer, are you not? 


A. Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: Let’s just have it marked. 
Sylvester, will you mark this 49 D-1? 


MR. SAGOT: Judge, that’s my copy and I have 
no problem with that. If I could just take from the -- 


THE COURT: It doesn’t have to be submitted. 
We can just mark it. 


COURT CRIER: We can mark it D-2, Your 
Honor. If you'll recall, we had the slip of paper marked 
before. 


THE COURT: Okay. D-2. 


MR. SAGOT: That’s my copy of the 49. 


App. 150 


THE COURT: We'll give it back to you. 
MR. SAGOT: Thank you, sir. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, Officer, you signed this and you repared it; j 
that right? abiate trdeates 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, I'd just like you to look at section two, inter- 
views and interrogation. It says complaint. Now, the 
first sentence of that document reads as follows, does it 
not? On Friday, 8/24/90, I started a surveillance of the 
900 block of West Auburn Street at approximately two 
p.m. 


Now, that’s what it says, does it not? 
A. Yes sir. 
Q. And you prepared this yourself, did you not, sir? 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, about halfway down the paragraph here, it 
States: At approximately 2:10 p.m., Raphael Melendez 
gave Jose Santiago keys and then Raphael Melendez 
drove off in a Ford station wagon; is that correct? If 
you would look at it. 


A. Yeah. I believe that’s what’s on here. Yes, sir. 
Yes, sir. 


App. 151 


Q. And again further down there, it says at approxi- 
mately 2:18 p.m., a blue Toyota parked behind the blue 
Lincoln and, et cetera, et cetera. 


Now, that’s also in the body, is it not? 


A. I believe, yes, sir. 


Q. And a transaction which you characterized as taking 
a few seconds transpired and then you called for your 
backup and people were arrested; is that correct? 


A. The transaction took place. When the Toyota 
moved, drove away you're talking about at this time? 


Q. That's correct. 
A. Yeah. It didn’t take long. 


Q. Now, that makes a total of less than twenty minutes, 
doesn't it, Officer? 


A. No, sir. If I could read the first, beginning of it 
again. On Friday, 8/24/90, | started the surveillance at 
900 block of West Auburn Street. At approximately 
two p.m., I observed hispanic male later identified as 
Labaron. 


Q. Now, okay. 


A. Yeah. 


Q. But surely you're not saying approximately two p.m. 


actually means about 12:05, are you? 


A. No, sir. 


App. 152 


THE COURT: Does any counsel have. since we 
seem to be at a question of punctuation here. does 
anybody have an objection to my looking at the exhibit? 

MR. SAGOT: No, Your Honor. 

MR. GAY: No, sir. 

MR. CORRIGAN: Certainly not, Your Honor 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


(2. Now, also in naragraph one where it : igi 
details of complaint. bi ca a 


A. I'm sorry. Okay. Yes, sir. 
Q. Paragraph A. It also states here on Friday 8/24/90 


at approximately two p.m., the following hispanic males 
did conspire, et cetera, et cetera. 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Now, you wrote that also, did you not, Officer? 
A. Yes, sir. If I can. 

Q. Well, I haven't asked a question, Officer. 


THE COURT: Weil, yeah. Were 
explain the last answer? nea dati 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: Go ahead. 


App. 153 


THE WITNESS: The other officers you're talk- 
ing about being set up on the surveillance -- 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, I'd object. This 
is totally unresponsive to any of my questions. 


THE COURT: Okay. I'll sustain the objection. 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, you were in your surveillance position when, 
when Mr. Labron and Mr. Santiago were arrested, right’ 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And it was your testimony that there was at least 
four. could have been more officers participating in that 
arrest. 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, there came a time when the trunk of the Lin- 
coln was searched by, I believe you testified it was 
Officer Scarpati; is that right? 


A. Scarpato. 
Q. Scarpato. 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, did that take place immediately after Mr. 

Labron and Mr. Santiago were arrested in the 900 block 
of West Auburn Street or were the other males brought 
back and identified by you first and then other officers 
came back with them? If you can recall. Do you know 


when that took place? 


App. 154 


A. I believe as soon as the area was secured, they 


a I don’t recall if the other two were back 
yet. 


Q. You don't recall. 


A. No, sir. 


Q. Now, do you recall seeing Officer Scarpato? 

, : ? Y 
testified you could see directly into the trunk: is that 
right? : 

A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And you were able to 
forth | ‘a see a key passed back and 


A. I'm sorry? 

Q. You were able to see the key to this trunk 

from Mr. Melendez to Mr. Santi preety 
that > Santiago and around about: is 
A. Yes, sir. 


COURT CRIER: Judge, the chemist i 
phone. is on the 


THE COURT: All ri We’ 
Soetiem right. We'll let the DA take 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


THE COURT: First of all, let's find out, is there 
an opaque bag there that’s not listed on the report? 


App. 155 


Pes 


MR. MECOLI: The chemist reports the bags as 
clear, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Pardon me? 


MR. MECOLI: The chemist reports the bags as 


clear. 

THE COURT: There is no opaque bag. Are 
you willing to stipulate that if called, he would testify to 
that effect? 


MR. MECOLI: That the chemist would testify 
to that? Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Yeah. Is that satisfactory to 
counsel? 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 

MR. SAGOT: Yes, Your Honor. 

MR. CORRIGAN: Yes, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Please proceed, Mr. Corrigan. 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 
Q. Now, so you observed Officer Scarpato open the 
trunk of the Lincoln with a key in order to go into it; is 
that right? 
A. No, sir. I don’t think he opened it with a key. 
Q. Can you recall how he opened it? 
A. | believe the trunk was forced. 


App. 156 


Q. Now, from your position were you able to see Mr 
Labron searched in any way? 


A. | saw them, yeah, make apprehension on him. | 
didn’t watch them to see. They were frisked, I know, | 
imagine. I didn’t take notice of that. 

Q. I'm not asking you what you imagined, Officer. 
A. They were placed under arrest and | paid no mind to 
them. 

Q. There was a big crowd of people around and I want 
to know what you could see. Now, it’s your testimony 
at this time, is it not, Officer, that you don’t know 
whether or not a key was recovered, in fact? 

A. I don’t know. I didn’t see a key. 

Q. Now, so you would not know whether or not any 
money or drugs or anything like that was found on the 
person of my client; is that right? 

A. | know there was money confiscated and put on 
Property receipts. Confiscated from who, I don’t recall. 
I have it written down if you want. 


Q. Well, no. I just want to know if you knew specif- 
ically with respect. If you don’t know, you don’t know. 


A. I dou’t know, sir. 


MR. CORRIGAN: I have no further questions 
for the officer. 


App. 157 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, before you return to 
the District Attorney, could | ask just a couple of more 
questions? 


THE COURT: Yeah, sure. That will make it 
easier for the District Attorney to do his redirect if he 
has any. 


MR. SAGOT: With Your Honor’s permission. 


THE COURT: Go ahead. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. Officer, the Toyota vehicle i question that you 
mentioned the tag number on, as part of the your inves- 
tigation were you able to determine the ownership of 


that vehicle? 


A. I don’t recall. | imagine | ran it through. | don’t 
recall specifically at this point. 


Q. And would it be the same response for the Lincoln? 


A. The Lincoln I believe came back to Melendez. | 
believe it did. 


Q. Came back. Did you radio that tag number in 
during the course of your surveillance? 


A. No. I think it was run in on the computer after | 
got in, if I recall. 


MR. SAGOT: And if I may approach the wit- 


ness only because he has my copy of the 49, Your 
Honor. 


App. 158 


THE COURT: Yes. 
BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. That reference to Melendez’s ownership of the Lin- 
coln In question, does that appear anywhere in your 49. 
if you recall? 


A. I don’t recall. I haven't seen the 49 since it was 
done. 


Q. Okay. And the Toyota, you don’t know if you ran 
that or not as to who might be the owner of that 
vehicle? 


A. Procedure, I normally would. I believe | did. 


Q. But the end result of that procedure, assuming you 
did perform it, is not recalled by you and is unknown at 
this time. 

A. I don’t recall, no, sir. 

Q. Now, in direct response to my question earlier, | 
asked you how many retail drug transactions went down 
during the course of your surveillance and you said 
approximately one hundred. To Mr. Corrigan’s question 


as to the same period of time, you answered i. 
mately fifty. ‘ _— 


A. No, sir. One I referred to as I guesstimated packets. 
I remember specifically stating I believe it would be a 
guesstimate on packets, not persons. 

Q. Which would be the guesstimate on packets” 

A. At least a hundred. 


App. 159 


Q. So you're saying that there were at least fifty two- 
bag buys. 


A. I'm sorry. 
Q. At least fifty two-bag purchases. 
A. I would say, yes, sir. 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you. | have no further 
questions. 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, anything further? 


MR. GAY: Judge, it’s just repetitious, really. 
What I would rather do if it’s necessary would be to call 
the stenographer, Mr. Natale, who’s up on duty in Room 
675 today, unless we can come to an agreement on some 
of the excerpts. 


THE COURT: You mean the ones that you dealt 
with previously? 


MR. GAY: Well, there are those and I think 
there’s one other passage, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Is there any objection to my 
reading portions of the recorded testimony. 


MR. MECOLI: I have no problem, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: I'll read the whole thing if you 
want. 


MR. GAY: And I have no further questions of 
the officer. 


App. 160 


THE COURT: Let’s go to the District Attorney 
and see if you have any redirect. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. The person who you were investigatin 
g at that block 
was Raphael Melendez; is that correct? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. You didn’t got in immediately and arrest him when 
you saw these packets being handed out; is that correct? 


MR. GAY: I can’t hear. 
THE COURT: Restate the question. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. When you originally saw these i 
packets being handed 
out when Mr. Melendez was there, you didn’t direct 
backup officers or yourself, you didn’t go down and 
arrest him immediately; is that correct? 
MR. GAY: Objection, leading. 


THE COURT: Overruled. He’s alread 
to that effect. diaeaes 


THE WITNESS: That is correct. 
BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Was he eventually arrested? 


App. 161 


A. Yes, sir. 


MR. SAGOT: I'd object to that, move to strike. 


THE COURT: Ill sustain the objection. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. In connection with this case, was Mr. Melendez ever 
apprehended? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 


MR. SAGOT: I again object. It’s outside the 
record. 


THE COURT: Yeah. | think that the point is 
this. The officer has already testified that the reason he 
didn’t have his people stop Melendez was because he 
thought Melendez was going to pick up some drugs. 
That was his testimony. Now, | don’t know how much 
further you want to develop the point. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, the only point I’m 
developing is counsel has raised an inference that the 
officer was supposedly investigating this male but he 
didn’t go in and arrest him when he had the chance, and 
what I’m doing is bringing out what the officer did do 
as to Mr. Melendez. It goes to his credibility. 


THE COURT: But the question as properly 
stated is this: Officer, do you to your personal knowl- 
edge know whether Mr. Melendez was arrested as a 
result of the observations that you made of him on this 
date of August twenty-fourth, 1990? 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. He was arrested. 


App. 162 


et) tee Fae ipa CRP ee eg 


r 
¥ 
Ps 
ie 
; 
s 
z 
e 
’ 
¥ 
: 
} 
- 


THE COURT: Thank you. I think we need go 
no further on that point. 


MR. MECOLI: Thank you, Your Honor. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Now, referring you back to the notes of the 
preliminary hearing held on September twelfth, 1990. 
You stated before you didn’t recall any of the specific 
questions and answers that day; is that correct? 


A. That’s correct, sir. 
Q. Do you remember them now? 


A. Not really. I remember testifying. The specific 
questions | don’t recall. 


MR. MECOLI: I'd ask you to look, if I could 
approach the witness, Your Honor. 


ae THE COURT: The only question | would ask is 
just like Mr. Gay wants me to read portions, do you 
want me to read certain portions too? Would that be 
easier? In a non-jury trial, sometimes, unless there’s a 
specific point that needs to be made, I can just read it. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, in this case I 
would ask if the witness could see this. 


THE COURT: Okay, all right. What page? 
MR. MECOLI: This is on page five. It’s the 


second question down. Could you look at the question 
and answer, second one down? 


App. 163 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 
MR. MECOLI: Doesn’t that state -- 


MR. SAGOT: I would object, Your Honor. 
This is the District Attorney testifying, not the officer. 


THE COURT: Why don’t you read the question 
and answer that you're referring to. Mr. Sagot has a set 
of the notes right here. Just read it into the record. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Could you read the part where it says question, I'd 
like to direct your attention to August twenty-fourth, 
1990, at 12:18 p.m. Could you read that part? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now, is 12:18 p.m., is that when you began your 
surveillance that stay? 


MR. SAGOT: I would renew my objection. 
These are not the witness’s words. These are the 
District Attorney’s words. 


MR. GAY: Judge, I object to it. This is not a 
prior consonant statement. 


MR. SAGOT: Of this witness. 


THE COURT: Let’s put it this way. I’m going 
to ask some questions on this particular issue which are 
not related to the notes of testimony because I have a 
question about this which I was going to ask anyway 
and I might as well ask it now. 


App. 164 


Now, Officer, you've been referred to the por- 
tions of your 49 and you referred to certain portions of 
the preliminary hearing notes which suggest that you set 
up your surveillance at two o'clock, not 12:15. Now, 
today, can you tell me with certainty what time it was 
that you set up your surveillance? 


THE WITNESS: If Your Honor pleases, | 
started after noon, quarter after twelve, in that area. | 
set up prior to the other officers getting out there. 
There's certain things | had to do. I did that prior to 
them coming out. 


THE COURT: Why does your 49 say that you 
set up the surveillance at two? 


THE WITNESS: If that’s, I’m not sure if that’s 
the time that I started informing them that what was 
going on and who | had. I don’t recall. 


MR. SAGOT: Judge, and the notes of testimony. 


THE COURT: Well, wait, wait, wait. If there’s 
a question to be asked, we'll do it in order now. Now, I 
asked that question without regard to the previous state- 
ment. It’s the District Attorney’s turn to finish his 
redirect. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Based on your recollection of the events of that day, 
what did you have to do prior to your brother officers 
coming on the scene? 


A. I had to get to that location and set up the surveil- 


lance, get permission and set up the surveillance, be 
ready for when they were there. 


App. 165 


Q. And what time was it when you originally saw the 
defendants? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 


THE COURT: Which defendants are you refer- 
ring to? 


MR. SAGOT: The first defendants he saw. 


MR. MECOLI: The first defendants. Excuse 
me. That would not be the two that were in the Toyota. 
That would be the other defendants. 


THE WITNESS: That was shortly after | set up, 
I believe. I don’t know if I had the time written down. 
It would be shortly after. It would be by one. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. What time was it that you called in your other 
officers to make arrests? 


A. To make the arrests? They come in. Everything 
went down at 2:18. I believe that’s the time | went out 
on radio with the information to stop the car and going 
into Auburn Street. 


Q. And what did you do between the time when you set 
up your surveillance and the time when the officers 
came in? 


A. What did I do? I had to talk with the people, you 
know, for the surveillance, for permission for the 
surveillance. I went up. I set up for the surveillance. 
And, you know, I waited for the officers to be in posi- 
tion. 


App. 166 


Q. Now, Officer, Mr. Sagot brought out that you were 
surveying this area. 


MR. SAGOT: Surveilling. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Excuse me. Surveilling this area. When you were 
surveilli this area, what was the reason that you were 
surveilling this area as opposed to another? 


A. For, to investigate Raphael Melendez. But | 
ee there was drug traffic initiated by him at that 
ocation. 


Q. Could you tell us all the information that you pos- 
sessed at the time when you set up this surveillance? 


MR. SAGOT: Objection, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: On what grounds, Mr. Sagot? 


MR. SAGOT: Number one, it’s been asked and 
answered on at least three separate occasions and it’s 
improper redirect. The grounds that he had have no 
bearing. He said that he had information on Melendez. 
He said that he talked to several people who live in the 
area. He said he talked to several other people in the 
investigation. 


THE COURT: I heard his testimony. I’m going 
to overrule the objection. You can answer, Officer. 


THE WITNESS: I'm sorry. Could you repeat 
your question? ‘ 


App. 167 


THE COURT: What information did you have 
about Mr. Melendez before you went out there that day? 

THE WITNESS: | had information that Mr. 
Melendez lived in 913 Auburn, that on the eastern half 
of Auburn Street he was the one that was selling. He 
had the people employed selling his cocaine out there. 
He had a heavy foot traffic and that they were storing 
cocaine when it was brought in. It was stored in either 
the abandoned car. It was a dark color. f don’t recall. 
Or the Lincoln that was parked on the curb. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 
Q. Now, where exactly was the Lincoln parked? 
MR. SAGOT: Objection. 


THE COURT: Do you mean on this day when it 
was out there? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes. On this date where was 
that Lincoln parked? 


THE COURT: I think he’s already testified to 
that. I'll sustain the objection. Sixty feet from the 
corner of 9th and Auburn, the south side facing east. 
Correct, Officer? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 
Q. Was the Lincoln parked on the street? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 


App. 168 


THE COURT: Overruled. 


THE WITNESS: No, sir. I believe it was on 
the pavement, on the curb. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. When you saw the Toyota pull up, was the Toyota 
on the street or on the pavement? 


THE COURT: Do you mean the street or the 
sidewalk? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes. 


THE WITNESS: Sidewalk. | believe it pulled 
up directly in front of it on the pavement. 


THE COURT: On the pavement. By that do 
you mean the sidewalk. 


THE WITNESS: I believe. Yes, sir. I believe. 
BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Now, after Mr. Melendez hands out the packets to 
Santiago and Labron from the trunk, you say you 
observed them involved in various transactions; is that 


MR. GAY: Judge, I object. 
THE COURT: Sustained. I mean, he’s already 


testified to that. It’s asked and answered repeatedly. So 
I'll sustain the objection. 


App. 169 


MR. MECOLI: I'm sorry, Your Honor. I'm 
leading up to another question. 


THE COURT: All right. Then just ask the other 
question, please. 


BY MR. MECOLIL: 

Q. At the time you saw Labron and Santiago engaged 
in what you call transactions, were they always together 
or did they separate? 

A. They were walking. They were separated. They 
walked back together. They were, you know. They 
would walk up to the customers as they would come. 


The customers would walk up to them. They would be 
together. 


Q. Do you remember what you were wearing this day? 
MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 
THE COURT: Sustained. 

BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Do you have any doubt that these are the two 
individuals that you saw in the Toyota that day? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Objection. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 
THE WITNESS: None whatsoever. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


App. 170 


(. Do you have any doubt that that was the individual 
that you saw outside selling in the street that day? 


A. No, sir. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | have nothing 
further. 


THE COURT: Anything further from the 
defense? 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, if | could. 

THE COURT: It’s recross. 

MR. SAGOT: Right. 

RECROSS EXAMINATION 

BY MR. SAGOT: 
Q. Pursuant to the District Attorney's question, do you 
have any doubt that your surveillance began at 12:12 
p.m.? 
A. Do I have any doubt? 
Q. Yes, sir. 
A. If that’s the time | put down, that’s when I started. 


Q. That would be a yes or no answer, Officer. Do you 
have any doubt? 


A. I believe that’s it. 


App. 171 


Q. Yes. And if that’s the time you put down, put down 
where, Officer? 


A. I'm sorry, counselor. Put down the time where? 


Q. When you say if that’s the time you put down, put 
down where? On the 49? 


A. I, you know, I don’t know why it’s down as two 
o'clock. That | don’t know. | don’t know why. 


Q. Well, the fact that it’s down at two o’clock in the 49 
in two separate places, the beginning of the 49, which 
has been marked as D-2. 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Which says origin and details of complaint. It says 
on Friday, August -- 


THE COURT: We've already been through that. 
Please. 


MR. SAGOT: Then I'll withdraw that, Your 
Honor. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 

Q. Then if you don’t know why it says that on the 49, 
then I refer you to page thirteen of the notes of testi- 
mony where you were asked, quote, at what time of the 
day did you set up surveillance? 


Answers: Just about two. Just prior to two. 


App. 172 


If you can’t understand why it appears on the 49, 
= yon understand why it appears on the notes of testi- 
ny” 


A. What I can understand, if you're asking me what | 
understand. 


Q. Yeah. 


A. The discrepancy | would believe is from when | 
started the surveillance and possibly when I’m contact- 
ing the other officers when it’s official what's going on. 


Q. Well, I'll read this question again. Maybe you don’t 
understand it. ar 


THE COURT: You don’t have to read it. 
Please. 


MR. SAGOT: Very well. 
BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. Now, in terms of relationship to the time you set up 
your surveillance according to your testimony today at 
12:18 p.m., at what time in relationship, how long after 
that did Melendez leave the area in that Ford station 
wagon? How long after you s.t up that surveillance at 


12:18? 
A. Shortly. Shortly after two. 


Q. Shortly after two. So Melendez was in the area for 
one hour and forty-five, one hour and fifty minutes? 


A. He was there for a good while working around. 


App. 173 


How long after that did the blue Toyota pull up? 
After what, counselor? 


After Melendez left? 


> 8 -F <@ 


I'd say ten minutes. 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you. I have no further 
questions. 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, anything? 
BY MR. GAY: 


in the location 
Q. Officer, how many people were in 
where you were during the time that you made the 


surveillance that day? 


A. The immediate area? There was no one in my 
immediate area. 


Q. In the house where you were, or in the building 
where you were. 


MR. MECOLI: Objection. 


THE COURT: Well, let’s say in the structure 
that he was in. 


THE WITNESS: At one point, there were one, 


two other people at one point that I know of. Then after 


I was in there, I don’t know where they were. 
BY MR. GAY: 
Q. Did they admit you? 


App. 174 


MR. MECOLI: Objection. 
THE COURT: Did they what? 
MR. GAY: Admit you. 

MR. MECOLI: Objection. 
THE COURT: Well, overruled. 
THE WITNESS: Yes. 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. And were those people there when you left that day? 


A. No, sir. 


MR. GAY: May it please the Court, at this time 
I move for the disclosure of the identity of the individ- 
uals who admitted this officer to that premise that day 
for the reason that it is obvious at this point that the 
issue with respect to time is a crucial one. On the one 
hand, we have an observation that took place over a 
period of perhaps eighteen minutes, if you believe this 
officer’s initial report, which also tracks that time to 
other events immediately following the two o’clock time 
frame. He repeats that same testimony in the notes of 
testimony and he has testified to a series of transactions 
that, according to his testimony and according to 
common sense, must have taken place over a long 
period of time. That issue of time has become crucial 
with respect to this officer's credibility and I move for 
the disclosure of the names and addresses of those 
individuals so that they may be interviewed and 
subpoenaed to testify in this case if it’s necessary. 


App. 175 


MR. SAGOT: I would join in that request, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: Does the DA have a response to 
that? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, | do, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: I’m sure Mr. Corrigan joins. 
MR. CORRIGAN: | join, Your Honor. 


MR. MECOLI: It is for these persons that the | 
officer doesn’t want to reveal the confidential location in 
the first place, and to reveal them now and to bring 
them into the courtroom would place them in great risk. 


THE COURT: Well, of course, you’re familiar 
with Carter Pritchett, are you not? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, | am, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: And there’s some pretty strict 
requirements with respect to the circumstances. In 
Carter Pritchett, as you know, those are cases where you 
have informants who were present at a drug transaction 
and in Carter Pritchett, the Court has, the Supreme 
Court has in essence said that if you have a informant 
who’s present and the only non-police witness at a drug 
transaction, his identity has to be disclosed. 


MR. MECOLI: That’s correct, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Isn't that analogous to this 
situation? 


App. 176 


MR. MECOLI: I would say this is more analo- 
gous to Commonwealth versus Miller, Your Honor. 
We're talking about a situation where they want the 
name of an informant and the defense is not entitled to 
that absent a showing. In I believe it’s Commonwealth 
versus Jackson, they are not entitled to the informant’ s 
name regardless. 


THE COURT: Well, that’s not an accurate state- 
ment of the law. The law says that the Court has to, as 
far as Miller goes, which is a successor to Hall, that if 
there’s a, which is in a search warrant context, not a 
guilt or innocence context, that in a search warrant con- 
text the Court has to balance the danger to the informant 
versus the need of the defense to conduct their defense. 


It seems to me that Carter Pritchett actually says 
when we're talking about eyewitnesses going to guilt or 
innocence, that the requirements are stricter there. 


Now, let me ask you this. Was there any testi- 
mony about the possible existence of these witnesses at 
the preliminary hearing? 


MR. MECOLI: None. 


THE COURT: So this in fairness would be the 
first time that the defense would be aware of this; is that 
correct? ; 


MR. GAY: No question about that, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Is there any reason they ought to 
be aware of this? I mean, he didn’t testify as to what 
his location was before. 


MR. MECOLI: No. 


App. 177 


MR. SAGOT: The preliminary hearing notes 
clearly state that that is a confidential location. 


THE COURT: What I’m going to do is hold 
that under advisement for the moment and just see if 
you have any questions for the officer. I will rule on 
that but I’m not going to rule on it right at this moment. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, we'd ask you to, 
before you rule on that, hear from the officer even in 
camera with the a attorneys. 


THE COURT: We'll get to that in a minute. | 
want to see if we can conclude what other questions 
may be had for the officer. Mr. Gay, do you have any 
further questions for the officer? 


MR. GAY: Judge, anything else that I want to 
develop can be done from the notes of testimony at that 
preliminary hearing unless it’s already in the record. 


THE COURT: Mr. Corrigan, do you have any- 
thing further? 


MR. CORRIGAN: I just have a couple of ques- 
tions. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Officer, you stated that you were in this location on 
this particular day pursuant to information you received 
from various individuals regarding the activities of Mr. 
Melendez. Now, do you possess any contemporaneous 
notes that you took at the time that you received this 
information regarding Mr. Melendez? 


A. I don’t believe so, no, sir. 


App. 178 


Q. And did you put in the 49 that you wrote regard- 
ing -- 


A. Counselor, I couldn’t hear you. 


Q. Did you refer to this information that you received 
from various individuals? I know you characterized 
them as other officers, neighborhood residents, people 
that have been arrested in and around that location in 
previous weeks. Did you make any reference to infor- 
mation received from those individuals in the 49 which 
you prepared with respect to the arrests of the individ- 
uals who are here in court today? 


A. I don’t recall. 


Q. Well, if you were shown the 49, would that refresh 


your recollection as to whether or not you referred to 
that information? 


A. Sure. What part of it, counsel? 


THE COURT: Is there somethi 
ng there that you 
wish to direct his attention? Do you believe it’s in there 
or it’s not in there? 


at Hee CORRIGAN: It's notin there, Judge. I'd 
J Ike to satisfy himself that : 
o fy there’s no reference 


THE COURT: Is there any objecti 
reading the 49? sdisnessr ine ens 


MR. MECOLI: I have no objection to that, Your 


Honor, but I just object to this questioning. Admissions 
are not inconsistent statements. 


App. 179 


THE COURT: Well, | know that is the law in 
Pennsylvania. I think the question is not whether this is 
an inconsistent statement. I think the question is did he 
record any information about the information he had 
before he went out there, and | think that’s a legitimate 
question to see whether any statement may exist. 


All right. Mr. Corrigan, do you have anything 
further? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Not at this time, Judge. 


THE COURT: Do you have anything further for 
the officer? 


MR. MECOLI: No, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: I just have one or two questions 
for the officer. 


BY THE COURT: 
Q. Officer, was the Lincoln impounded? 


A. At that time, no, sir. The Lincoln could not be 
started. 


Q. Pardon me? 


A. The Lincoln could not be started. It was a °77 
Lincoln and it wouldn’t start and they just didn’t bother 


impounding it. 
Q. Just left it there. 


A. Yes, sir. It was a °77. 


App. 180 


Q. Could you describe the physical condition of this car 
to me? 


A. The outside, the side and the rear that | saw looked 
fairly decent. It wasn’t in new condition. 


Q. Did it have four tires on it? 


A. Four tires. It had the glass. It looked like it would 
be legal for the highway. 


Q. It had a tag? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Is it your testimony that before you went out to 
Auburn Street you had specific information about this 
Lincoln automobile before you got there that day? 

A. That and another car, yes, sir. 


THE COURT: Does either counsel have any 
questions based on the Court's questions? 


MR. SAGOT: No. 
MR. MECOLI: None, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: All right. You can down, 
Officer. Thank you. ry 


(Witness excused.) 
THE COURT: I think at this point, I’m tryi 
, ng to 
conclude some things here. Are there specific, well, 
could I see the notes of testimony from the preliminary 
hearing from the Quarter-Sessions file? And also, what 


App. 181 


| would intend to do is to read these this evening 
because | understand that counsel has, nobody has an 
objection as to my doing so. That will speed it up. | 
assume only as to the testimony of Officer Nimmo. Is 
he the only one that testified? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, he is, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: And then does somebody have a 
copy of the 49 for me to take with them? 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, I'll give you mine. 
Also at some point in time | was going to move in this 
property receipt which | assume is essentially stipulated 


to. 


THE COURT: | assume he has somebody else 
to testify. 


MR. MECOLI: That's correct. 


THE COURT: The confiscating officer. 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, sir 


THE COURT: Do you have something else to 
offer? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, sir, Officer Adam. He 
stopped the car, the Toyota, and arrested them. 


THE COURT: All right. Now, let’s talk for a 
minute about the issue of the, that Mr. Gay has raised 


about disclosing the identity of these people. 


MR. MECOLI: Could I, Your Honor, see you in 


the back with counsel? 
App. 182 


3 THE COURT: First let’s talk about law for a 
minute. The Hall-Miller cases about revealing the iden- 
oe EEE Sse-6 Hen of euned Ger Gr eat go os 

it to eyewitness informants. 
informants. vn) 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: There’s a difference between an 
pene ama An informant can also be 
cyewitness as were in Carter Pritchett. In Carter 
Pritchett, which I recently had occasion to examine ad 
nauseam and to find that | had ruled that an eyewitness 
informant whose identity did not have to be disclosed, | 
subsequently after reviewing those cases very closely 
learned that the requirements in Carter Pritchett are very 
strict. And in those particular cases, the courts have 
held, the courts held that where an eyewitness, informant 
eyewitness is the only non-police witness to an alleged 
to be disclosed, which in effect makes the Common- 
wealth not use that person, lose the case unless they're 
willing to reveal the identify of the informant. I ruled 
in the Commonwealth's favor and then after reading the 
cases reversed myself. So I’ve been through those 
cases. 


___ Now, the difference that we have here is that 
we're really not talking about eyewitnesses to guilt or 
innocence. We're talking about someone who was an 
eyewitness to an element of a motion to suppress. So 
that I sincerely doubt that any of you are going to be 
i satmtteeae rien actin re You 


_ MR. GAY: Well, Judge, I think that maybe 
there's not a case on point but there is an analogy on 


App. 183 


point. A motion to suppress evidence, according to our 
own Supreme Court, for the purpose of tolling Rule 
1100, is the first step in the fact-finding process toward 
guilt or innocence. Our own Sworeme Court has said 
that. Not only that but at trial the same motion would 
be made. This issue is crucial. There’s absolutely, we 
are maybe hours away from having the same thing done. 
And when you talk about guilt or innocence, the only 
reason that a decision has not been made by our 
Supreme Court, | suggest, with respect to the disclosure 
of, and a truly eyewitness in a motion to suppress evi- 
dence, is because there's no such case that’s gone before 
our Supreme Court. There's no case that either denies 
or grants the defense the identity of an eyewitness in a 
motion to suppress evidence simply because that issue 
has not been raised. | suggest to the Court, though, the 
person is nonetheless an eyewitness and we are well on 
the way in the process of determining guilt or innocence 
and there should be no difference. 


THE COURT: Now, before | hear from the 
Commonwealth, do either defense counsel wish to say 


anything? 
MR. SAGOT: No. I would join in Mr. Gay's 
argument, Your Honor. 


MR. CORRIGAN: | also join, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: All right. I’m prepared to hear 
from you on the legal aspects of this. Do you wish to 
add anything to this? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | think the most 
valid point that’s been made is yours. It’s that the per- 
son is not an eyewitness to the crime that’s alleged in 
this case at all. They are a witness to a collateral issue, 


App. 184 


if you will, They can verify something that the wi 

has said on the stand in the motion or not verify it and 
that’s their purpose. And what | would suggest, Your 
Honor, is that in any case where a witness takes the 
stand and says, well, I arrived at this time or I arrived at 
that time, well, there must have been someone that saw 
you. Of course. There may have been. But that 
doesn't make that person available to be revealed, 
whether it be an informant or otherwise. And these 
people that are, that stand in danger of being revealed 
here stand in some danger. 


THE COURT: Let me just state one thing. The 
Court does not take lightly the concept of revealing the 
name of a citizen who allegedly cooperated in a drug 
investigation. That's something that I take very, very 
seriously. So let there be no mistake about that. I don’t 
take that. That is a very serious, serious decision for a 
court to make. So you need not reinforce that point. 


_ MR. MECOLI: Correct. Now, Your Honor 
there is a case that came down after Miller that does 
deal with the Commonwealth's disclosure of informants. 
I do not have it with me, unfortunately, and I'd like to 
have a chance to go get it and to review it to see if 
that’s applicable to this situation. I don’t know if it is 
or not, quite honestly. 


THE COURT: Well, it seems to me that on thi 
particular issue, there are some generic questions that I'd 
just like to take two or three minutes and ask Officer 
Nimmo before we break for the evening and just to 


the Supreme Court is that that is not a procedure that 
they look favorably on. 


Officer, if you could just take the stand again for 
a moment. 


THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 


BY THE COURT: 


Q. Officer, | don’t want you to tell me the name or sex 
or any of the other questions | ask you about this per- 
son, but I want you to tell me whether you recall it. Do 


you recall the name of the person who admitted you to 
your observation point? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. You do. If you recall the name, | assume you recall 
the sex. 


A. yes, sir. 


Q. So if you saw that person again, you'd be able to 
identify that person; is that correct? 


A. Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: That’s all I really wanted to 
know. Okay. Thank you, Officer. 


(Witness excused.) 

THE COURT: All right. What I would suggest 
that you do is this. If either of you, I’m going to look 
at some things myself tonight although I really think it’s 
just a question of analogy here. But | would urge the 


App. 186 


District Attorney to read Carter Pritchett and any coun- 
sel that wants to bring in any other applicable law that 
they think is relevant to this particular issue would be 
appropriate. Now, of course, there are some very intri- 
cate logistics that would have to be worked out if the 
Court was going to consider any type of in camera pro- 
ceeding. The initial inquiry that arises is who would 
determine whether or not that person is available. It 
would seem to me that if I was, for the sake of discus- 
sion, if I was to say that | would be willing to conduct 
an in camera proceeding to determine if this person 
could be located to ascertain what that evidence is, that 
someone ought to have to make a determination as to 
whether that person is there. Certainly, it would seem to 
me that the person who I would have to do that is | 
would have to direct the District Attorney as an officer 
of the court to have his people make the appropriate 
inquiries to determine whether that person is there and 
then to report back. Does either counsel have any sug- 
gestion as to how that could be done differently? 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 


MR. SAGOT: I was going to say | agree with 
Your Honor conceptually. I think the only contact that 
the District Attorney would have in terms of that indi- 
vidual would be through the officer who just testified, 
who is exactly the person whose credibility is in ques- 
tion. That’s the part that bothers me about that. 


THE COURT: Well, there’s certain things that 
can be done in that regard. I could ask that the name be 
revealed to me before any inquiries are made. That's 
why I asked the question. 


MR. GAY: Judge, as long as proper safeguards 
were taken to avoid the moral hazard that exists given 


App. 187 


the attack on the officer’s credibility. If protection is 


given to that issue, | certainly have no objection to any 
way that would be reasonable. 


THE COURT: I would invite all of you to think 
about this over the evening and we'll resolve it tomor- 
row morning. 


MR. SAGOT: Is it fair to assume that Your 
Honor will be hearing no further testimony on this 
matter today? 


THE COURT: That’s correct. 


MR. SAGOT: With the Court’s permission, | 
have a conference scheduled at 9:30 tomorrow morning 
with Judge Kline with six other attorneys and it’s a 
matter to be tried next week and it shouldn’t take more 
than a half an hour. 


THE COURT: Well, I mean, I'll call him 
myself. But I mean, you know, when we have a case 
listed here in the middle of the trial, I don’t see how we 
could possibly do that. 


MR. SAGOT: I understand. It’s no fault of 
Your Honor. It was actually listed yesterday. 


THE COURT: Mr. Clark, you know what we 
could do? We have enough deferreds tomorrow that if 
our District Attorney comes here tomorrow at 9:30, if 
Mr. Sagot comes here at ten that will be all right. So 
tell Judge Kline that I specifically excused you until ten 
o'clock. 


MR. SAGOT: That should be fine. I can’t 
imagine that it would last more than a half an hour. 


App. 188 


THE COURT: I'd ask our District Attorne t 
be here at 9:30 and for you to be here at ten. om 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you, Your Honor. 


(Hearing recessed.) 


App. 189 


IN THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS OF INDEX 
PHILADELPHIA COUNTY 
FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA COMMONWEALTH’S EVIDENCE 
CRIMINAL TRIAL DIVISION 


cake Officer Salvatore Scarpato DR. CR. 


COMMONWEALTH , 
VS. [App. 194] [App. 197] 
EDWIN LABRON - No. 9009-2318 

-and- —RDR._ 
RICHARD RAMOS - No. 9009-2300 (App. 206) 

-and- 
LUIS LAJARA - No. 9009-2314 Cities Chien Seiten De 

pes [App. 208] 


- Courtroom 254 City Hall 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Thursday, November 21, 1991 Officer Gerald Nimmo RDR 


BEFORE: HONORABLE G. CRAIG LORD, J. [App. 227] [App. 212) 


APPEARANCES: 


EX 
GINO MECOLI, ESQ. HIBITS 


Assistant District Attorney NO. 
Counsel for the Commonwealth IDENT. 


VINCENT CORRIGAN, ESQ. eieccdersre 42 [App. 201] 
Defender Association D-4 Notes of testimony of 
Counsel for Defendant Labron preliminary hearing App. 227] 


ALLAN SAGOT, ESQ. ae 
Counsel for Defendant Ramos 


ANDREW GAY, ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Lajara 


PRETRIAL MOTIONS 
(VOLUME Il) 


App. 190 App. 191 


PROCEEDINGS. 


THE COURT: Mr. Clark, are we ready to 
proceed? 


COURT CRIER: I am, Judge. 


THE COURT: All right. I’ve advised counsel 
that the way I would wish to proceed this morning is to 
have the Commonwealth present the remainder of its 
testimony. It’s my understanding that the defense may 
wish to recall Officer Nimmo. | will consider that once 
the Commonwealth has concluded their testimony on the 
motion. And I will also hear any argument and make 
any, hear any case law that either the Commonwealth or 
defense wishes to present on the issue raised yesterday 
as to whether the defense is entitled to learn the identity 
of the person who admitted the officer to the confiden- 


tial location. 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. There’s been some mis- 
understanding. The defense filed, Mr. Lajara filed a 
motion to suppress physical evidence in this case and 
I’m proceeding on all the grounds that were raised in 
that motion, in case there’s been some misunderstanding. 


THE COURT: Well, you did articulate -- 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir, with respect to the search 
of Mr. Lajara’s person. And also | at this time, to the 
extent that it may not have been done, move to raise the 
issue of the search of the Lincoln and particularly the 
absence of a search and seizure warrant. 


THE COURT: Basically, what | heard yesterday 
is that there was a challenge to the recovery of the 
physical evidence from wherever it was recovered. 


App. 192 


MR. GAY: Yes sir. 


3 THE COURT: So that’s the way I viewed the 
motion. 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: I'll continue the sequestration 


order. Who would be the Commonwealth's next wit- 
ness? 


MR. GAY: May it please the Court, at this time 
the defense moves to recall Officer Nimmo as of further 
cross-examination. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I'd only ask if 


they’re going to call him, that they call him as their 
witness. 


THE COURT: I'll let you call him as part of 
your case as of cross. 


4 


MR. SAGOT: Very good. 


THE COURT: When it comes to your case. | 
mean, does the order really matter? 


! | MR. GAY: No, sir. It really doesn’t matter, | 
imagine. 

| THE COURT: As long as you can cross 
examine him, it doesn’t make any difference. 


“oie MR. GAY: Well, Judge, the problem with it is, 
it will be cross-examination purely for the purpose of 
impeachment and | think properly it should be that we 


App. 193 


Did your come to be at that location at that date and 


would be allowed to recall him as of cross-examinauion rasa 


at this time. 


i ; A. Yes. 
THE COURT: Let's do this. Let's hear from es 


the other witnesses. Then we'll ask Officer Nimmo to Q. Could you tell us what you did at that date, time and 
come back up and I'll hear your — location that brings you to court here today. 

MR. GAY: Yes, sir. Thank you. A. If Your Honor please, acting on information 
received, | went to the 900 block of Auburn Street. | 
went directly to a 1977 Lincoln painted blue. It was 
parked on the south side of the street on the pavement. 
I forced open the trunk of that vehicle. 


THE COURT: Who's your next witness’ 


I 
MR. MECOLI: Excuse me, Your Honor. | — 
would call Officer Scarpato. Before we go further, I'd 


ets back on, I'd ask the xp a, ) 
Ta a ee aes ton | oes ju led this Q. How did you do that, Officer? 
" morning. A. There was a toolbox on the pavement near the car 


and I took a large screwdriver from that box and forced 


. name. Spell 
COURT CRIER: State your full ” open the lock of the trunk and then the trunk opened. 


your last name. Give your badge number, district or 


division. MR. GAY: May the record show that the wit- 
on Ss: Police Officer Salvatore ness during the course of his last two sentences was 
HE | NE ; “a 
- S-C-A-R-P-A-T-O. Badge — smiling. 
Philadelphia Police Department, Narcotics ©nt THE COURT: I'll take note of it for whatever 
it's worth. 
OFFICER SALVATORE SCARPATO, ~~ wl dniia 
having been duly sworn, was examined and testits MR. SAGOT: This is our first notice of that 
follows. . . toolbox, Your Honor. Never mind, Your Honor. 
DIRECT EXAMINATION THE COURT: All right. Please proceed. 
BY MR. MECOLI: BY MR. MECOLI 
tery attention ugust twenty- 
Q. Officer, directing your reg y Q. Did you seize anything from that trunk, Officer? 


in the vicinity 
fourth, 1990, at approximately 2:20 p.m. in the : 
of the 900 block of West Auburn Street in Philadelphia. 


App. 195 
App. 194 vp 


A. Yes, I did. | recovered from the trunk two plastic 
bags which contained a white substance and one plastic 
sandwich baggie which contained five clear plastic 
packets. Each packet contained a white substance. | 
placed those items -- 


THE COURT: How many packets were within 
the sandwich baggie’ 


THE WITNESS: Five, Your Honor. | placed 
those items on property receipt number 291304. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Now, from where in the trunk did you recover these 
items? 


A. They were on the right side of the trunk. 


Q. Did you have occasion to look anywhere else in the 
vehicle? 


A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Where else did you look? 

A. 1 looked in the interior of the vehicle also, and | 
recovered fifty dollars in United States currency from 
under the rear seat. 


Q. Now. Officer, what was it that brought you to this 
vehicle? 


A Information from Officer Nimmo. 


Q. What was that information”? 


App. 196 


A. What he had observed. 

(). What did he tell you? 

A. Well, he wasn’t talking directly to me. He was 
relaying this information to a supervisor that was in my 
vehicle. And I don't remember his exact words, some- 
thing about drug transaction and they just put it in the 
trunk and a blue Toyota had left. And that’s when we 
all went to the location. 


MR. MECOLI: I have nothing further. 
MR. SAGOT: May I inquire, Your Honor? 
THE COURT: Yes. 

CROSS EXAMINATION 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. Were you able to observe that location prior to the 
time you went to the Lincoln to open the trunk or were 


you out of view of what had ever gone down prior to 
that time? 


A. Prior, | was out of view. 


Q. And this information you received from Officer 
Nimmo, was it by radio? 


A. Yes. 


Q. On that particular detail, you were part of the 
surveillance detail? 


A. | was part of the backup unit. 


App. 197 


Q. The backup unit for the surveillance detail. 


A. That's correct. 


Q. How many brother officers were with you in that 
backup unit? 


A. In my vehicle, there was three other officers. And 
there were two more vehicles. I’m not sure how many 
officers were in that. 


Q. Had you met to discuss the game plan, if you will, 
prior to setting up the surveillance? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, beyond the scope. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 


THE WITNESS: We had talked about it up in 
headquarters prior to going out. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 

Q. And how many people were part of that group that 
talked at headquarters and ultimately went out to the 
field? 


A. | would say eight or nine. 


Q. What time did you arrive? How far were you from 
the 900 block of Auburn Street? 


THE COURT: When? 
MR. SAGOT: At the time that the surveillance 
had been set up. 


App. 198 


THE WITNESS: We were 
blocks oF soo rm approximately two 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. What time did you arrive two block 
location that day? piste Saca 


A. I don’t recall what time we arrived. 


Q. Was it a long period of time or a short period of 
time prior to popping the trunk on the Lincoln? 


THE COURT: Prior to what? 


BY MR. SAGOT: 

Q. Popping the trunk on the Lincoln. 

A. It was not a long period of time from when we inj- 
tially got to our backup position to whein we went to 
Auburn Street. I don’t remember exactly how much 
lume had elapsed, but it was not a long period of time. 


Q. When you say not a long period of time, approxi- 
mately how much time are you referring to? 


MR. SAGOT: Thank you very much. I ha 
nothing further of this witness. . 


THE COURT: All right. Mr. G 
Pte 4 gh ay, anything for 


MR. GAY: Yes. 


App. 199 


BY MR. GAY: 

Q. Officer, during the course of your searching the 
trunk of the Lincoln, did you find a plastic bag that was 
not clear? 

A. The items that I mentioned were in a plastic bag. | 
can’t recall what color it was. It might have been white 
but I’m not certain about that, counsel. 

Q. You just don't remember; is that right? 

A. 1 don’t remember. 


Q. All right. And all things are possible when yuu say 
it might have been; is that it? 


A. It might have been, yes. 


Q. Did you surrender to someone all of the items that 
you found in the trunk of the Lincoln? 


What do you mean surrender? 


Did you give them over to someone? 


Pr @ @ 


No. I held on to them. 


Q. Did you prepare the property receipt yourself that 
ultimately scheduled the items that you found in the 
Lincoln? 

A. Yes, sir. 


MR GAY: And may I have just a moment, Your 
Honor, to approach the witness? 


App. 200 


THE COURT: Yes. 


MR. GAY: And may we have this marked, 
please, defense exhibit next in order. 


THE COURT: We were at D-3 
COURT CRIER: | believe so, Judge. D-3. 


MR. SAGOT: Were the notes D-3, Your Honor? 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Officer Scarpato, would you please . 
first tell me by whom it was prepared sp ricandniaas 


A. This was prepared by me. 


Q. Does D-3 schedule all of the items that 
in the trunk of the Lincoln? hater 


A. Yes. 


Q. Having read D-3, is your recollection now refreshed 
as to whether or not there were any plastic bags in the 
trunk of the Lincoln that were not clear? 


MR. MECOLI: I object, Your Honor. Looki 
at what D-3 is, I don’t think it indicates that. i 


THE COURT: I'll overrule the objection. 


THE WITNESS: Would you 
ghee you repeat the question. 


BY MR. GAY: 


App. 201 


i i llection refreshed 
Q. Having now read D-3, is your recollec 
as to whether there were any plastic bags in the trunk of 
the Lincoln that were not clear plastic bags? 


A. I don’t remember any plastic bags that were not 
clear. 


Q. Very well, sir. 
THE COURT: Any objection to my looking at 


the -- 
MR. GAY: Absolutely not. 
THE COURT: From the Commonwealth? 
MR. MECOLI: No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Thank you. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Now, the next question, Officer. Does D-3 ade- 
quately and fully describe the items that were shown 


thereon? 
A. Yes, it describes them. 


MR. GAY: Yes, sir. Thank you. I have no 
further questions. 


THE COURT: Mr. Corrigan, any questions? 
MR. CORRIGAN: Yes, Judge. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


App. 202 


Q. Officer Scarpato, when you arrived at the 900 block 
of West Auburn Street you said there were a total of. 


including yourself, a total of four officers in your car; is 
that right? 


A. I believe so, yes. 


Q. And were you the only car that arrived on the scene 
of the 900 block of West Auburn Street or did another 
car come along with you or meet you there? 


A. I believe another car went to that location. Not the 
same direction we went in. 


Q. Right. 
A. But I’m not certain about that. 


Q. So you're certain that there were at least four police 
officers on this location. There could have been as 
many as Six or seven. 


A. That’s possible, yes, counselor. 


Q. And now, were you the first to arrive or did the 
other car arrive first? 


A. We were the first ones to go up the 900 block. 


Q. And when you did so, two individuals, a Mr. Labron 
and a Mr. Santiago, were taken into custody; is that 


right? 
A. Yes, they were. 


Q. And that would be before you searched the Lincoln. 
correct? 


App. 203 


A. Well, I didn’t actually observe them taken into 
custody. 


Q. Now, when you arrived in the block, did you 
remember where the blue Toyota was located? 


A. I don’t remember any blue Toyota on that block. 


Q. Now, you say that when you arrived on the 900 
block of West Auburn, you yourself went directly to the 
Lincoln. That was your assignment, is that right? 


A. That's correct. 


Q. And there were two individuals arrested but they 


were not arrested by you and you weren't paying par- 
ticular attention to where they were; is that right? 


A. That’s correct. 


Q. So now, when you arrived on the scene did you 
force the trunk of the Lincoln immediately or were you 
there maybe two minutes, three minutes before you did 


that? 
A. I met everybody there a couple of minutes. 


Q. And now, you did not recover a key to the trunk of 
that Lincoln, did you sir? 


A. No, I did not. 


Q. Now. was all the evidence that was recovered in the 
900 block of West Auburn given to you or did other 
officers who recovered other evidence keep that evi- 
dence themselves until they were placed on property 
receipts? 


App. 204 


A. [| wouldn't know. I just had custody from what | 


recovered from the vehicle. | w i 
3 as not given 
evidence. . shed 


Q. And you recovered from the vehic! 
e the cocaine 
from the trunk and nothing else; is that right? 


A. Fifty dollars from inside the vehicle, whi 
under the rear seat. ssi 


Q. And now, were you the only officer searching the 


vehicle, or did other officers assi ; ; 
vehicle? scant tipoet we chnen 


A. There was another officer there, | don’t 
. . . : , all 
looking inside the vehicle as I was. gs Cie 


Q. And you don’t recall at this time whether that other 
officer or yourself found the money inside the vehicle. 


A. No. I found the money. 


Q. Now, So you were not paying attention, as it were 
or present in the sense of observing any search which 
might have been taking place of the two individuals who 
were arrested in the 900 block of West Auburn. 


A. No. I wasn’t involved with that. 


Q. So you wouldn’t know whether or not any drugs or 


wae like that was recovered from them: is 


A. No, I wouldn’t know. 


MR. GAY: May we have just a moment? 


App. 205 


THE COURT: Yes. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, other than the two individuals that were placed 


into custody by police officers, were you aware of any 
other people in the 900 block of West Auburn at the 


time that you arrived? 

A. I really wasn’t paying any attention. 

Q. And now, prior to this operation even beginning, 
you had information which specificaily pointed you to 
this Lincoln or you were just, or you don’t know? 

A. Do you mean prior to the operation? 

Q. Right. 


A. I had no knowledge of any vehicle prior to going 
out there. 


MR. CORRIGAN: I have no further questions. 

THE COURT: Anything further? 

MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, very briefly. 
REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. On that Lincoln, did you notice if it had a license 
tag? 


A. Yes, it did. 


App. 206 


Did you see that license tag? 


Yes, | did. 


Do you remember what that license tag is today? 
SNE349. 


What state was that? 


PR. BS woe 


Pennsylvania. 
MR. MECOLI: I have nothing further. 
THE COURT: Any questions? 


MR. GAY: No. 


THE COURT: All ri 
Officer. Thank you. right. You can step down, 


THE WITNESS: Thank you, Your Honor. 


(Witness excused.) 


THE COURT: Anvthi urther 
Commonwealth? ames from the 


MR. MECOLI: y 
call Officer Adams. Our Honor, we lastly would 


THE COURT: Officer Adams, Sylvester. 
COURT CRIER: Place your right hand on the 


Bible. State your full name. § 
- Spell your last name. 
Give your badge number, district for the record, please. 


App. 207 


THE WITNESS: Officer Kenneth Adams. A-D- 
A-M-S. 1101, First District. 


OFFICER KENNETH ADAMS, after having 
been duly affirmed, was examined and testified as 


follows. . . 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MECOLI: 
Q. Officer, | want to direct your attention to August 
twenty-fourth, 1990, in the 500 block of West Lehigh 


Avenue, approximately 2:20 p.m. Were you at that 
location on that date and time? 


A. Yes, I was. 


Q. At that date, time and location, did you come into 
contact with anyone you see in court here today? 


A. The gentleman at the defense table. 
Q. Could you point to who you mean, sir? 


A. I haven’t seen him in a year, but this gentleman in 
the black shirt. 


Q. Indicating for the record Defendant Lajara. 


A. And this gentleman here. 
THE COURT: Which gentleman? 


THE WITNESS: In the flower, next to him. 


App. 208 


MR. SAGOT: This one here? Indicating Mr. 
Ramos, Your Honor. 


BY MR. MECOLI: 


Q. Now, how did you come into contact with those two 
defendants at that date, time and location? 


A. I received radio information from Officer Nimmo 
that two gentlemen that were in a blue Toyota were 
heading in our direction and he would like those 
gentlemen stopped in conjunction of his investigation 
that was going on a couple of blocks away. 


Q. When you say stopped, what do you mean? 

A. Detained, arrested. 

Q. Where did you find those gentlemen” 

A. In the 500 block of West Lehigh. 

Q. How did you stop them? 

A. I believe there was another car besides me, Officer 
Arvello, and one unmarked car. | believe we had 
another unmarked car with us. We boxed them in, got 
out of the car, identified ourselves as police officers, 
took those gentlemen out of the car and brought them 


back to the location that Officer Nimmo wanted them 
brought back to. 


Q. And what happened at that point? 


A. They were identified by Officer Nimmo and they 
were placed under arrest? 


App. 209 


Q. Now, what car did you take them out of? 


A. A blue Toyota with a Pennsylvania license plate of 
XZB583. 


Q. Did you, did you or your partner search either of 
these individuals? 


A. We patted the gentlemen down for weapons but they 
weren't searched until after they were taken back inside 
the Narcotics Unit. 


Q. Did you recover anything from them? 


MR. SAGOT: Objection. He didn’t say he 
searched them. 


THE COURT: Did you search them inside of 
Narcotics? 


THE WITNESS: No, I didn’t. 


THE COURT: All right. I'll sustain the 
objection. 


MR. MECOLI: Just one moment, Your Honor. 
I have nothing further. 


THE COURT: All right. Any questions, Mr. 
Sagot. 


MR. SAGOT: I have no questions. 
THE COURT: Mr. Gay? 


MR. GAY: No sir. I have nothing. 


App. 210 


MR. CORRIGAN: No, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: All ri 
Officer. Thank you. l right. You may step down, 
(Witness excused.) 


THE COURT: Is there anythi 
. ything further 
Commonwealth wishes to present on the wn a the 


MR. MECOLI: I believe we’ 
Nimmo and that would be it oe 


THE COURT: Yeah. Okay. Let’ 
Nimmo come back in, Sylvester. : one Ollew 


the Pres “ ete Well, I'm allowing you to recall 
/ » hres m going 10 give him the opportunity to 


MR. SAGOT: V ll 
- rng a a | 


THE COURT: I'm going to give the 


Commonwealth a few moments to look something over. 


App. 211 


COURT CRIER: In the interim, Officer, state 
your name for the record. 


THE WITNESS: It’s Officer Gerald Nimmo, 
9638, Philadelphia Police Narcotics Unit. N-I-M-M-O. 


COURT CRIER: And I will remind you, you're 
still under oath, Officer. 


MR. GAY: Your Honor, may | have a moment 
with counsel? Maybe we could give him some direction 
as to where we want to go. 


MR. MECOLI: Very good, Your Honor. Thank 
you. I'd just ask to have them again if there’s a need 
for redirect. Thank you. 


THE COURT: Yes. Who's going to ask the 
questions? Who wishes to proceed with the 
questioning? Mr. Corrigan? All right. 


RECROSS EXAMINATION 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


Q. Now, Officer Nimmo, there was some discussion 
yesterday of a gentleman by the name of Raphael 
Melendez, who was allegedly present at the scene and 
was not arrested at that time. Now, it transpired that he 
was in fact arrested at some point; is that correct? 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And on March the sixth of this year, you testified at 
a preliminary hearing before the Honorable Judge 
DeLeon with reference to Mr. Melendez and these 
events; is that right? 


App. 212 


A. | testi ' 
= estified. | don’t remember what the date was. 


Q. Now, at that time, were 
ie, you asked the followin 

questions? | apologize to counsel and the Court on I 
only have one copy of these notes. You were asked 
—- question: Now, where in here did you find 
pe 49? —— you back to the 49, did you adopt 
as $s in this police 49? Who was it prepared 

Answer: Myself. 

Question: And as far as you just read it. 

Answer: Yes, correct, 


Question: You just reviewed it at the bar 
f the 
court. To your knowledge, e erythi a 
police 49 completely -- : Re Cat's in the 


Mr. Roberts, the District Attorney: 
object, Your Honor. P soo 


MR. MECOLI: Objection, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Let him finish. 


MR. CORRIGAN: He didn’t prepare it. 


And it goes on to answer to a question: Itisa 


summary of the situation. 


App. 213 


Question: Are there any errors in there that you 
just read over that you can tell me now is a mistake? 


Answer: The the only thing I looked over was 
dates, times, names and types of vehicles. 


Question: And you also looked over what was 
confiscated from whom. 


Yes, sir. 
BY MR. CORRIGAN: 
Q. Now, at that time, you didn’t state to counsel there 
were any errors with respect to the dates, times, names 
of persons and confiscated items, is that right? 


A. Did I state that there was errors? 


Q. Yes. 
A. I don’t recall, no, sir. 


Q. And you did have an opportunity to review the 49 
and did in fact review it, did you not? 


A. Back in March? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Now, referring you, if I might, to page thirty of the 
notes of testimony. Actually, referring you to page five 


of the notes of testimony. You were asked the 
following question by the District Attorney: Please tell 


App. 214 


His Honor what exactly occurred on that date that brings 
you to court. 


Your answer at that time was: If Your Honor 
please, on that date and time while assigned to a nar- 
cotics unit working plainclothes, | conducted a surveil- 
lance of the 900 block of West Auburn Street. At 
approximately two p.m. | observed both defendants 
along with two other hispanic males in the 900 block of 
West Auburn Street. 


Now, you then went on to describe the males 
present and your answer: Two of the males, | believe 
one was Santiago, the other one was Labaron, these two 
males were being approached by numerous black and 
hispanic males. They accepted US currency and were 
passing out white packets, white plastic packets. They 
took out clear plastic baggies. This went on for several 
minutes. The defendant then comes over, that would be 
referring to Mr. Melendez, talked to the two males, 
Labaron and Santiago, went over to a blue Lincoln auto- 
mobile which was parked on the south side of Auburn 
Street. He opened the trunk of the car with a key. He 
went to the right side, the right rear of the car, and 
retrieved from there another plastic baggie and gave it to 
the males Santiago and Labaron baggies from that. He 
stayed for a few minutes. The transactions were stil! 
going on. 


Approximately ten minutes, the defendant went 
back to the older hispanic male, Santiago, and gave him 
the keys to the Lincoln. The defendant then went into a 
Ford station wagon and went it would be east on 
Auburn and south on 9th Street. Approximately ten 
minutes after he left, the males are still selling packets 
on the highway. A blue Toyota pulled up with two 


App. 215 


other hispanics. And that would be the end of your 
answer. 


Now, do you recall giving that answer in 
response to Mr. Roberts’ question on that day, sir? 


A. I remember the incident. I don’t remember 
testifying, no, sir. 


Q. Officer, do you know if there's any reason why : 
today you have difficulty recalling testifying in Marc 
and yesterday you had difficulty recalling testifying “on 
believe October of 1990 but yet you clearly remem 

an incident that took place in August of 1990? 


MR. MECOLI: Objection. 

THE COURT: Overruled. 

THE WITNESS: | don’t have difficulty remem- 
bering testifying. I don’t have difficulty with the 
incident. I have difficulty if you're asking me what 
specific questions, specific answers verbatin. 


MR. SAGOT: I just want to apologize to the 
Court. If you'll indulge me for just one minute. 


THE COURT: Yeah. 
MR. SAGOT: Thank you, sir. 


BY MR. CORRIGAN: 


j i tion to 
. Now, finally, I just want to direct your atten 
a twenty-one of these notes of testimony when you 


were asked the following question: How long was your 


surveillance on that date, on August twenty-fourth? 


App. 216 


And: Approximately two o'clock. 


Question: Two o'clock? And when was the 
arrest made of the other individual? 


The other male? 
Yes. 
I believe 2:20. 


Question: So for twenty minutes, for the twenty 
minutes that you observed the Lincoln Continental, was 
my client, again referring to Mr. Melendez, there for the 
entire twenty minutes? 


Answer: No sir. He was there for about ten, 
maybe fifteen minutes. 


Now, do you recall those questions and those 
answers, sir? 


A. I remember the incident, yes, sir. The questions and 


answers, | remember testifying. I believe | testified to 
that. 


Q. Okay. And also, I direct your attention to page four 
of the notes of testimony. The following question was 
asked of you by the District Attorney: Directing your 
attention, Officer, to the date of August twenty-fourth, 
1990, at approximately two o’clock p.m. in the vicinity 
of 900 West Auburn Street in Philadelphia. Did you 
come into contact with anyone you see here in the 
courtroom today? 


Your answer to that question was yes, sir. 


App. 217 


Now, do you recall giving that answer in 
response to that question? 


A. Specific question? Yeah, | believe I testified to that, 
yeah. 
in thi f testimony, 
Well. now, in this notes, in these notes ry) 
petlhor times you referred to the surveillance as vr 
referring to the time of two p.m. You also reviewed 
49, which again contained the information that the sur- 


i having heard all of 
veillance began at two p.m. Now, 
that. sir, are you still saying that the surveillance started 


at actually around 12:15 p.m. or did it begin at two 
p.m.? 


A. I'm still saying it’s a summary of the events and the 
surveillance started prior to It. 


THE COURT: Prior to what? 


THE WITNESS: Prior to two o'clock. About 
12:15. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor, | have no more 
questions. Apparently Mr. Sagot does. 


MR. SAGOT: Just a few, Your Honor, if | 
could. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


i i ination and cross- 
_ During the course of direct exam! 
eth you testified that the distance that you 


observed -- 


A. Which time, counselor? 


App. 218 


THE COURT: Well, why don’t you clarify it. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. During the course of your testimony, sir, you were 
asked in the courtroom -- 


THE COURT: Here? 
MR. SAGOT: Here. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. At what distances you were able to observe the 
various activities that you described to us. You claim or 
you stated and testified at that time that it was anywhere 
from fifty to a hundred and fifty feet in distance, if | 
recall your testimony; is that correct? 

A. No, sir. It was closer at times. 

Q. I’m sorry. Closer? 

A. It was closer at times. 


Q. But it was certainly no greater than a hundred and 
fifty feet; is that right? 


A. That would be when I first observed them, yes, sir. 
Q. At any time was it greater than that? 
A. No, sir. 


Q. Now, referring back to these notes of testimony of 
the Melendez hearing that occurred on March sixth at 
page twenty-eight. The following question and answers 


App. 219 


were asked and answered by you. By Mr. Popper, | 
believe. You could see. Excuse me. This was you 
testifying. When the trunk was opened I could see into 


the trunk, Your Honor. 


Mr. Popper: Sir, you were behind looking at the 
trunk; is that correct? 


Answer: | could see him in the trunk and he 
opened the trunk and from less than two hundred feet 


away. 
You were using binoculars, | assume. 
Answer: No, sir. 


With your naked eye from two hundred feet 
away you could see what he was doing inside the car? 


Answer: I was less than three hundred feet. 
Yes, I could. 


Do you remember testifying at the preliminary 
hearing and providing those answers to the Court? 


A. | don’t recall three hundred feet. Two hundred feet 
I may have said because I was well within two hundred 


feet. 


Q. Okay. The other answer was, I was less than three 
hundred feet. Do you recall that answer? 


A. That I do not recall. 
Q. If 1 would show you these notes of testimony and 


ask you to review the last six lines. May | approach the 
witness, Your Honor? Would you please do so and then 


App. 220 


I will ask you if that refreshes your recollection as to 
your testimony on that day at the Melendez preliminary 
hearing. 


A. From the point where | could see him i 
Pataca im in the trunk, 


Q. Yeah, right down there. Yeah. 
A. All right. 


Q. Does that refresh your recollection? Have you 
reviewed that, Officer? 


A. It’s the same questions you asked me, yes, sir. 
Q. Right. And does, do the notes of testimony refresh 
your recollection as to the maximum distances that you 


observed this activity? 


. ] . was 


Q. It was well within a hundred and 
: se fifty feet or two 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Which one, sir? 

A. Depending on what time you're saying. 

Q. All right. Now, in addition to that, the period of 
time that you observed, you've testified earlier that you 


observed the defendants Labron and Santiago retail sell- 
ing narcotics on the street; is that correct? 


App. 221 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And you also testified that you observed that for 
about an hour and a half and that you saw approxi- 
mately fifty two-bag buys during that period of time, if | 
recall your testimony correctly. 


A. It was a guesstimate. Yes, sir. 


Q. But that was your guesstimate at the time that you 
testified in this case. 


A. Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: I heard the testimony. 


BY MR. SAGOT: 


Q. Now, sir, at page thirty of the notes in the Melendez 
hearing, the following questions and answers took place 
at page thirty; And did you see what Labron and Santi- 


ago did with what they received? 


Yes, sir. They sold them on the street to 
hispanic and black males. 


And approximately how long did that take? 
Answer: Ten minutes at most. 


Do you recall testifying in that fashion at the 
Melendez hearing? 


A. I believe. I believe. You know, | remember 
testifying. Yes, sir. I believe | mentioned that. 


App. 222 


(9. Do you recall mentioning that this retail activity 
took place for a period of ten minutes? 


A. I don’t know if | was referring to ten minutes prior 


to him leaving or at what point 
pee resc pomt you re talking about. | 


MR SAGOT ; ; 
em Re, AGOT: | have no further questions of this 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, anything? 
MR. GAY: Yes, sir, I do. 
BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Officer, to be clear about one thi 

> ng. The Toyota 
was parked ahead of the Lincoln and [ take it. 2 
about a car length or two away from the intersection of 
Auburn and 9th Street; is that approximately correct? 
A. What I recall, yes, sir. 


Q. Now, I just want to know. | want 
, to put these 
questions to you and I want you to tell me whether or 
not there's anything about the question as put to you 
now that you do not understand. 
MR. MECOLI: Objection. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 


BY MR. GAY: 


Q. Question: So you were behind looki | 
is that correct? coking at the trunk: 


App. 223 


Do you understand that question? 
A. I understand that question. 


Q. Is there anything unclear about it that you can tell 
the Court at this time? 


A. It’s not asking me at what time am | behind it. 

Q. Well, let me ask you this. At any time that you 
were behind the Lincoln looking at it, did the Lincoln 
move? 


A. The Lincoln never moved. 


Q. Did you move from where your point of observation 


was? 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. And where did you move to from one place to 
another place? 


A. I was on the same level and | would move within 
maybe fifteen to twenty feet. 


Q. Okay, So at most there was a difference of maybe 
fifteen feet that you moved from one window to another 
window, let us say, in the same room perhaps, wherever 
that was. 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. But not a substantial distance more than fifteen or 
twenty feet. 


A. Correct, sir. 


App. 224 


(9. Okay. Now. the next question. See if there's 
ans thing about this question that you do not understand 


Question: And he opened the trunk and from 
less than two hundred teet awav. You were using 
binoculars | assume 

Do you understand that question? 

\. | understand English. ves. sir. 


Q. Do you understand the following question? 


With your naked eve from two hundred feet 
away. you could see what he was doing inside the car. 


Do you understand that question? 


MR. MECOLI: I'd object to that, Your Honor. 
[hat misstates -- 


THE COURT: Overruled. 
MR. MECOLI: That's the defense testifving. 
MR GAY: I just want to know -- 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, | overruled the 
objection. You can answer the question. 


THE WITNESS: Do I understand the question? 
MR. GAY: Yes. 
THE WITNESS. I understand the question. 


BY MR. GAY 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


Question. Do you understand this question” 


Did you see anything else in the trunk of that 


car’? 
\. | understand the question 


©. | want you to see if there's anything that vou do not 
understand about this question. 


MIR. MECOLL Your Honor, could we have the 


answer to the last one’ 


MR. GAY: I'm not asking him about the 
answer, Judge. 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay, it’s overruled. 
MR. GAY: Yes. sir. 
BY MR. GAY 


©. Is there anything about the following question that 
vou do not understand” 


Question: How far were you from the blue 
Lincoln Continental” 


\ | understand it. 


MR. GAY: Very well. sir. Thank you. I have 


no more questions. 
THE COURT: Anything further? 


MIR. SAGOT: Nothing, Your Honor? 


App. 226 


THI COURT: Anything for the Commonwealth 
of the officer? 


MR. MECOLE Could | have the notes. please” 


MR. GAY: Sure. Twenty-one. twenty-eight 
twenty. | 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MECOL! 


Q. Officer. do you recall exactly what your testimony 
was? 


aoe MR. GAY: I can't hear the District Attorney. 
I'm in a dead spot. 


BY MR. MECOLI.- 


Q. Do you recall exactly what your testimony was on 
March sixth, 1991”? 


A. No, sir. 
Q. Showing you what's been marked. is this D-4” 


THE COURT: We really haven't marked it vet. 
It's not been marked. 


COURT CRIER: C-4? 
MP. MECOLI: I think it’s D-4, actually. 
MR. SAGOT: D-4, I believe. 

BY MR. MECOLIL 


App. 227 


Q. Showing you what's been marked D-4. specifically 
page five. Can you read that. please? 


A. Out loud. counselor’ 
Q. If vou like 
A. I'm sorry. counselor? 


THE COURT: Do you want him to read it out 


loud or read it to himself? 


MR. MECOLI: Read it out loud if he likes. 


THE WITNESS: Answer: If Your Honor 
pleases, on that date and time while assigned to the 
Narcotics Unit working plainclothes | conducted a 
surveillance of the 900 block of West Auburn Street. 


MR. GAY: | object to that. Your Honor. 


MR. CORRIGAN: This is all repetitive. 
MR. GAY: And | demand an offer of proof. 


THE COURT: Maybe I'm missing something. 
You were permitted to question him on certain aspects 


of his testimony. 


MR. GAY: Prior inconsistent statements and 
whether or not he understood the question. 


THE COURT: I understand. | assume counsel 


is attempting to rehabilitate that with prior consistent 
statements. Now. how | can rule on whether they re 
consistent before | hear what they are is something I've 


always wondered about. 


App. 228 


MR. GAY: Very well. Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Go ahead. Officer. 


THE WITNESS: I conducted a surveillance of 
the 900 block of West Auburn Street. At approximately 
two p.m. I observed both defendants along with two 
other hispanic males in 900 block of West Auburn. two 
other males | believe to be Santiago and the other one 
was Labaron. and these two males were being 
approached by numerous black and hispanic males and 
they were accepting US currency and passing out white 
packets, white plastic packets they took out of the clear 
plastic baggie. They went. that went on for several 
minutes. Defendant then came out. The defendant then 
came out, talked to the other two males, Labaron and 
Santiago, went over to the blue Lincoln automobile that 
was parked in the south side of Auburn Street. He 
opened the trunk of the car with a key. He went to the 
right s‘te, the right rear of the car and retrieved from 
there a plastic baggie and gave the other two males. 
Santiago and Labaron. baggies from that. He stayed 
there a few minutes. The transactions were still going 
on. 


Approximately ten minutes. the defendant went 
up to the older hispanic male. Santiago, and gave him 
keys to the Lincoln. Defendant went on. Excuse me. 
The defendant then went into. Go to another page? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes. 


MR. SAGOT: Weill. Your Honor I'd object to 
reading the notes of testimony into the record. Number 
two. | think also, it's inappropriate because the District 
Attorney is now impeaching his own witness. 


App. 229 


THE COURT: You say impeaching. | think 
he’s trving to rehabilitate his own witness. 


MR. SAGOT: Well. I think he’s using another 
prior inconsistent statement. 


THE COURT: Whether it’s consistent or 
inconsistent is up to the Court to determine. 


MR. SAGOT: Without question, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: So I'm going to let him continue. 


| mean, I'm not going to sit here and let him read the 
whole thing. but if he wants to continue briefly. go 
ahead. 


MR. SAGOT: | think the notes have been 
marked as an exhibit. Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Do you want me to read the 
notes? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, that would be fine 
with the Commonwealth. 


THE COURT: How about | read the notes. Is 
that acceptable? 


MR. GAY: Your Honor, | certainly have no 
objection to the Court reading the notes. They certainly 
go beyond the issue of impeachment. though. 


THE COURT: All right. [| can read them as 
well as the officer. Why don’t you hand up the notes 
and I°ll read them. 


App. 230 


| VIR. CORRIGAN: Your Honor. the notes of tes- 
tumony as copied do reflect two preliminary hearings 


MR. MECOLL: For persons not even here. 


| MR. CORRIGAN: The section in question 
would be page one through page thirty-three. 


THE COURT: One to thirtv-thr 
y-three. Is 
agreed. Mr. Mecoli’ hia 


MR. MECOLI: I believe so. Your Honor. 


7 THE COURT: Why don’t you just check on that 
and see. Save ourselves a lot of time here. 


MR. MECOLI: Very good. One to thirty-three. 
| THE COURT: All right. Now, what we'll do 
is. I assume. now. with that. Mr. Mecoli, | assume you 
wish. | don’t think you have any exhibits, do you? 

MR. MECOLI: No. | don’t. Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Are you resting on the motion? 


MR. MECOLI: Yeah. I would rest at this point. 


THE COURT: All right. Now, do you wish to 
move in your exhibits? ; 


MR GAY: | do at this time. 
MR. SAGOT: Yes. Your Honor. 


; THE COURT: Any objection from the 
Commonwealth’ 


App. 231 


MIR. MECOLET No 


THE COURT. Now. here's the procedure that | 
think would be most efficient. At this point. we have 
the open issue of the. whether the ¢ ourt should direct 
the Commonwealth to determine tt the -- Officer. vou 
ean step down. Thank you. You should wait outside. 


(Witness excused.) 


THE COURT Whether the Court should 
comply with your request that the Commonwealth be 
directed to produce the person who admitted the officer. 
However, the defense has rested: is that correct? With 
the exception. | mean, is the defense prepared to rest 
with the exception of the possible testimony of that 
witness and any additional items that may be opened up 
by that witness if the Court orders 1? 


MIR. SAGOT. On behalf of the defendant 
Ramos, ves. Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Mr. Gay” 

MR. GAY: Yes. Your Honor. 

THE COURT: And Mr. Corrigan? 

MR. CORRIGAN: Yes. Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Now. okay. | think there are 
some questions on the motion which could moot that 
issue 


MIR. SAGOT. There's another question too, 
Your Honor. 


939 


App. 232 


THE COURT: Which is? 


MR. SAGOT. Even without intellectualizing the 
issue. | think if the District Attorney spoke to his 
officer. his officer even at the Court's direction may not 
wish to give up that individual's identity. 


THE COURT: Well. 1 must tell you, | have not 
in any way decided that issue. 


MR. SAGOT: I'm saying regardless of Your 
Honor’s decision. If he advises the Court that -- 


THE COURT: All right. But here’s what | 
think I'd like to do at this time. Mr. Mecoli. you 
handed up the case and I want to give the citation to 
counsel so that we all have it. Commonwealth versus 
Dellagatti. Cite is 538 A.2d. It's $38 A.2d page 34. 
1988 panel decision of the Superior Court. 


MR. SAGOT: | apologize. Your Honor. 538 
A.2d? 


THE COURT: 34. And I've read it quickly and 
in that particular case. it is true that the Superior Court 
did not see the Carter applied to the disclosure of the 
informant in that particular situation. 


Now. do you wish to advance anything else other 


than that case in response to their request to the Court 
that the officer identify the informant? 


COURT CRIER: Counsel. before you proceed. 
THE COURT: Thank you. Mr. Clark. 


(A brief recess was taken.) 


les 
We 


App. 2 


THE COURT: All nght. Mr. Mecoli. do you 
have anvthing else vou wish to add on that issue in the 
way of argument’ 


MR. MECOLL Your Honor. there are other 
cases dealing with it and my research showed me What 
Your Honors did) Commonwealth versus Carter 1s 
controlling in the instance of a witness but they all deal 
in these cases with evewitnesses. Any case that deals 
with an informant or someone who ts not a witness to 
the case has not been. there has not been a requirement 
for the Commonweaith to disclose in that instance. 


THE COURT. When you say a witness in the 
case. Vou mean a witness to the transaction. 


MR. MECOLI Eyewitness to the crime. And 
as in Dellagatti. Your Honor. in which the person is a 
tool in terms of getting to the actual crime, that person 
has not been. the Commonwealth has not been obligated 


to disclose that person. 


THE COURT. Well. is it fair to say that the 
issue that vou would have the Court turn down Mr. 
Gav's request is on the basis that the evidence or the 
testimony which they would seek to produce is not as 
central to the process as was the eyewitness s testimony 
in Carter. something like that’ 


MR. MECOLI: Exactly. Your Honor. It's 
always been, from my reading. it’s a balancing test. 
And when there is a person who in Carter, the person 1s 
anv eyewitness. they re there. they're part of the scene 
in what goes on. But in every other case that I’ve been 
looking at. when the person is not an eyewitness, when 
thes ‘re not there. when they re an informant on a 
warrant -- 


App. 234 


[HE COURT: Weill. any eyewitness. An I wit- 
ness to what? This person is an eyewitness to certain: 
things that allegedly occurred. It's not that the Person is 
hot an eyewitness. It's a question. That's why I use the 
word centrality of it| They are clearly an eyewitness. 


MRO MECOLL Well. true. But in Dellagatti. 


Your Honor. the person that was the informant in that 
case -- 


THE COURT: Was an eyewitness also. 


MR. MECOLI: Was an eyewitness to intro- 
ducing the undercover officer to the defendant and could 
have been called for that purpose. The Court looked at 
that and figured that the government's privilege 
outweighed the defense need for disclosure. 


THE COURT: All right. Now, do either 


counsel wish to draw my attention to anything additional 
on that score? 


MR. GAY: Your Honor, | think that counsel is 
mincing words when he talks about an eyewitness. An 
evewitness is someone who has firsthand knowledge. 
It's that simple. { don’t think there's any question about 
that. And if you look at. you know. the Pritchett 
decision. | think that this is revealing. Moreover, even 
if the trooper’s testimony did not establish that the 
informant was an eyewitness. it did establish that the 
informant was an active participant. You're talking 
about people who were there. who have relevant knowl- 
edge concerning when the officer entered the house. 
That's really the issue. And to that extent, they are 
eyewitnesses to material facts. Those facts are material 
to this motion and to the question of whether or not that 
officer is telling the truth. While it may not be as 


‘A 


App. 23 


important at this time. you know, given the impeach- 
ment material and given Officer Scarpato’s testimony. it 
is still an issue unless the Court feels that it’s not an 
issue any longer. In that in any event, if the Court so 
felt. | would not press the issue of the production of 
those witnesses as long as the defense’s point has been 
made to this Court. 


THE COURT: Well. | understand your point. 
Now, | want to raise one other item at this point with 
the District Attorney and that is this: That | question at 
this point whether the evidence that you introduced 
establishes that a warrant was not necessary to enter this 


vehicle. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, | have case law on 
that also, if | may present it. 


THE COURT: What do you have on that? 


MR. MECOLI: It's Commonwealth versus 
Jenkins. Your Honor. If | can have just a moment, I'll 
find it. 


THE COURT: All right. Take your time and 
find it. 


MR. MECOLI: If | could hand this up to the 
Court. 


THE COURT: Sure. Mr. Clark? 


MR. MECOLI: | had more time with this, Your 
Honor, so | have copies for the defense counsel. 


THE COURT: Is there any other case law that 
you can give me? 


App. 236 


MR. MECOLI: No. Your Honor. 


: THE COURT: Well. let me just say this. 
Jenkins is a 1991 Superior Court decision and as such, it 
would not overrule the Pennsylvania Supreme Court . 
cases. I'd like to call your attention to several case" 


MR. MECOLI: Very good. Your Honor. 


‘ THE COURT: And also that of defense counsel. 
Commonwealth versus Rodriguez. which is at $85 
Atlantic 2d 988°88. Pennsylvania Supreme Court 199] 
Also Commonwealth versus Baker. Baker is $4] A2Qd 
1381, 1988 Pennsylvania Supreme Court case. And the 
reason | call these to your attention is because as | have 
read these other cases. without having read Jenkins, | 
don't think the Pennsylvania Supreme Court has yet said 
that as long as you have probable cause to believe that 
contraband is in a vehicle, there is an automatic right to 
search that vehicle without a warrant. 


If you read Baker and you read Rodriguez. they 
talk about exigent circumstances. They talk about 
sudden encounters with vehicles. They talk about the 
exception to the warrant requirement being based 
the mobility of the vehicle. Now. there ~d some oe, 
confusing Statements. | guess. if | recall them. where the 
Supreme Court says something to the effect of impound- 
ment Is Not a requirement, it’s an alternative. And thev 
talk about impoundment being perhaps more invasive — 
than a search. But as | read this case law. at least 
preliminarily. | don’t believe that the Supreme Court has 
said that you can’t. that there's a per se right to search a 
vehicle without a warrant. that there must be some 
showing of exigency. 


App. 237 


In this particular case. the testimony that we ve 
heard suggests that there were a large number of officers 
on the scene. that there was advance information about 
the vehicle being used in the drug operation, and there 
are -- let's put it this way. [| question. [I'm not making 
any findings. | question whether a showing of exigency 
has been made 


Now. theretore. the way | would like to proceed 
on this. because this is an issue that has intrigued me 
because as I read these decisions I just don’t know 
where the Supreme Court is and where they're going. | 
see that the Rodriguez case was a decision. It's an area 
of the law that | think is not crystal clear. But what | 
would like to do is a to adjourn this proceeding at this 
time, hear any arguments that any of you wish to make 
on the exigency issue on the next date, and then see if 
it's necessary to go beyond that. But | want to give you 
the opportunity to respond and defense counsel to come 
in with anything else that they may have. | think the 
date | would like to set this for is Wednesday of next 
week. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor. unfortunately | will 
be out of town next week. to December second. 


THE COURT: How about if we set it for 


Tuesday of the following week? Well, Mr. Clark, how 
does my schedule look there? 


MR. SAGOT: Judge. I'm in Doylestown on the 
third, two matters. 


THE COURT: Let's just see what we have. 


COURT CRIER: You're in Doylestown when, 
counsel? 


App. 238 


MR. SAGOT: The third of December 


MR. CORRIGAN: I have two matters on that 
day as well. Your Honor. 


. THE COURT. How about Wednesday. the 
tourth? sf 


MR. CORRIGAN: Fine. Your Honor. 


MR. SAGOT: I have four matters on that dav 
now. It Your Honor wishes to schedule it, I'l! just fit it 
in. The fifth in the morning would be much better. 


THE COURT: Is that a Thursday. the fifth? 
COURT CRIER: Yes. sir. 


| THE COURT: Let's make it Thursday, the fifth 
it any of you wish to submit any written memoranda on 
that and copy the other side. I'll consider it. Or if you 
believe there's a case that controls. you need only send 


me a letter with a copy to the other side with the cite of 
the case. 


rae Is there anything further on this matter at this 
ime™ 


MR. GAY: I just have a question, Your Honor. 
and | don't mean to hold this up. When you say argue 
the exigency issue. should we also be prepared to argue 
the sufficiency of the Commonwealth's evidence and all 
issues of credibility as well? 


THE COURT: Yes. I mean, I want to highli 
that exigency issue because that's the issue that’s ” 


foremost in my mind. The issue of facts may not have 


App. 239 


to be reached. So what I'd like to do is recess until two 
unless we have something that vou want to knock out. 


(Hearing recessed. } 


App. 240 


IN THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS OF 
PHIL ADELPHIA COUNTY 
FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 
CRIMINAL TRIAL DIVISION 


COMMONWE \I iff 


VS. 

EDWIN LABRON No. 9009-2318 
-and- 

RICHARD RAMOS No. 9009-2300 
-and- 

LUIS LAJARA >: No. 9009-2314 


Courtroom 254 City Hall 
Philadelphia. Pennsylvania 
[hursday. December 5, 199] 


BEFORE: HONORABLE G. CRAIG LORD. J. 


APPEARANCES: 


GINO MECOLI. ESO. 
Assistant District Attorney 
Counsel tor the Commonwealth 


VINCENT CORRIGAN. ESQ. 
Defender Association 
Counsel for Defendant Labron 


ALLAN SAGOT. ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Ramos - 


ANDREW GAY. ESQ. 
Counsel tor Defendant Lajara 


PRETRIAL MOTIONS 
(VOLUME Il) 


App. 241 


PROCEEDINGS. 


THE COURT. All right. Where is the third 
attorney on this case. do we know? 


MIR. SAGOT: That's Mr. Corrigan, Your Honor. 
MR. GILLISON: Ul stand in, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Have you heard from Mr. 
Corrigan’ 
COURT CRIER: I heard from him earlier this 


morning. Your Honor. He told me he would be in his 
office. 


THE COURT: Are all the defendants here? 


COURT CRIER: No. Your Honor. The third 
defendant is still not down. He's in custody. 


THE COURT: Mr. Mecoli, let me ask you this. 
Do vou have anything further that you wish to present in 
the way of law? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor. | have argument : 
with respect to aspects of the case. | don’t have any law 
on the exigency matter which you asked me to look 


into. 


THE COURT: I'm going to go forward and hear 
what vou have to say argument-wise and we ll give Mr. 
Corrigan an opportunity to focus in on it if I deem it 
necessary. 


App. 242 


Frankly. I didn’t see how the record before me 
Was sufficient to permit a warrantless entry into the car. 
I'm prepared to hear what you have to say, 


MR. MECOLI: I have two arguments. Your 
Honor. My first argument goes to defendants 
respectfully as to Mr. Sagot and Mr. Gay. and that 
would be with respect to the expectation of privacy. 
Neither of these defendants exercised control over the 
trunk or the car. They handed items to these individuals 
who put the items in the trunk. My first argument goes 
to Commonwealth versus Ferretti, that they absolutely 
have no legitimate expectation of privacy in that trunk in 
order to contest what was taken out of it at the time. 


THE COURT: So you're saying that they don't 
have standing. 


MR. MECOLI: No, Your. Honor. They have 
automatic standing under Commonwealth versus Sell but 
standing is different than a legitimate expectation of 
privacy. That doesn’t automatically give them the right 
to legitimate expectation of privacy such that if | had a 
bag of something that is contraband and | throw it away, 
it's the same thing. Your Honor. | could contest that 
that bag was taken illegally or there was a forced 
abandonment issue under Sell because | have standing 
under the Pennsylvania State Constitution. However. do 


| have a legitimate expectation in an item that I have 
abandoned” 


Neither of these defendants have any expectation 
or interest. They've passed these items to someone else. 
gave them up. abandoned them, no interest right there. 
And the other person put them into the trunk. So as to 
them, Your Honor. they have no basis on which to con- 
test that that trunk was opened at all. No expectation of 


App. 243 


privacy. none whatsoever. And that’s our argument as 
to these defendants and also to Mr. Corrigan s 
defendant. 


THE COURT: Well. Mr. Corrigan’s defendant. 
as I recall. wasn't he the one that was observed opening 
the trunk with the key or the keys were handed to him’ 


MR. MECOLI: He put the items in there. 
That's correct. Your Honor. And again, as I point out, 
the motion goes to these two defendants but it also 
includes him. He was seen being handed items out of 
there. They key was handed off to another individual 
who handed it to him. Now, whether he has a reason- 
able expectation of privacy based on that, we would 


dispute that. 


THE COURT: What's your second argument? 


MR. MECOLI: The second argument goes to 
exigency. In these circumstances, the officer sees what 
he sees and definitely has probable cause to enter the 


vehicle. 


THE COURT: The probable cause is not the 
issue, as far as I'm concerned. I'll hear what the 
defense counsel has to say. 


MR. MECOLI: As to the exigency, Your Honor, 
you pointed out the Jenkins case which was a Superior 
Court case that was decided afterwards. However, I 
would submit to you. Your Honor, that it is persuasive 
authority and should be looked at in this matter. It is 
the exact same circumstances we re dealing with here. 
The exigency of a car is presumed by its mobility. In 
this case. there's no reason for the police to say let s 
immobilize this car and get a warrant. That’s an option 


App. 244 


that they have. There's no requirement to get a warrant. 
Exigency with a vehicle is presumed. 


I'd also point out to Your Honor that they re on 
the scene at an undisclosed location. Now. the officer 
Was Very reluctant to give any information on that and 
that’s another issue in this case. 


THE COURT: At the moment it isn't. At the 
moment. if the Court rules that there was no warrant. 


that you needed to get a warrant and you didn’t. nothing 
else really matters. 


MR. MECOLI: I understand, Your Honor. But 
nevertheless, the officer brought out in his testimony this 
is a confidential location, that people could be 
endangered and he wishes to keep it confidential. 
Certainly at that point with a car in the street and 
officers coming in to make an arrest and seizing a large 
amount of drugs. with the fact that one of the people 
who was seen in this trunk has left the area and is not 
apprehended. with all those facts. Your Honor, for the 
officers to sit there and immobilize the car and wait is 
not something that would meet with the exigencies of 
the situation. Anyone could come back to that car. 
Someone could come and get in it and drive away. 
Now, the officers could sit there. but how are they 
supposed to process these defendants? Are they 
supposed to wait? 


THE COURT: I'm not here to decide what my 
policy would be if it was up to me to rewrite the Fourth 
Amendment. My task is to interpret the case law. And 
when you say that with a car exigency is presumed, 
you ll recognize that the pronouncements of the Penn- 
sylvania Supreme Court say that automobiles are not 
without the warrant protections, totally without the 


App. 245 


"BEST AVAILABLE COPY™ 


Warrant protections of the Fourth Amendment. And on 
the record before me. there's testimony that there were 
eight police officers on the scene or that were in the 
vicinity. There were two defendants to be arrested. 
There was no -- only because | asked the question was 
there any testimony about whether the car was mobile. 
And furthermore. the record was that there was knowl- 
edge that this particular car was used in the storage of 
drugs and there was no testimony about any problems. 
anything that would have been difficult, any particular 
difficulty that would have been presented in immobi- 
lizing this car. 


Now. I have yet to find a case that says that if 
you have probable cause to search a car, you don’t need 
a warrant without showing any more. All the cases that 
I've read say that the reason that the warrant require- 
ment can be dispensed with as to cars in certain situa- 
tions is for the mobility and the exigency, and they look 
to certain particular things to create an exigency. And | 
don’t see it. What it sounded to me like you were say- 
ing is that there's a generic exception to the warrant 
requirement for automobiles. What was the exigency in 
this situation? 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I’m not saying that 
there is a generic exception. There is a diminished 
expectation of privacy in an automobile based on its 
inherent mobility. That's the language that the Court 
uses. 


THE COURT: But what is the exigency in this 
case” 


MR. MECOLI: If 1 may point out. In the cases 
where you cited. Baker and I believe the other one was 


Rodriguez. 


App. 246 


; THE COURT: Rodriguez was one of them. 
veah. 


MR. MECOLI: If you look at the Baker case. 
Your Honor, in that case sou're dealing with a traffic 
stop where certainly in that case they could have 
stopped. immobilized the car. had officers stand around 
it and gotten a warrant and then gone into it. It's the 
same situation. But they didn’t. Your Honor. based on 
the fact that there's a diminished expectation of privacy 
based on the fact that there is an option available to the 
officers. It is not something that is required of them 
when they're dealing with a situation with an 
automobile. 


Again, Your Honor, | would point to Common- 
wealth versus Jenkins. which is again the same, on all 
fours fact scenario as the fact situation. 


THE COURT: Which one? 


MR. MECOLI: Commonwealth versus Jenkins. 
In that case. it’s the same situation. They handed drugs 
out of a trunk of a vehicle which are then for sale. The 
officers see this, go into the trunk without a warrant. 
and the Superior Court declared that reasonable under 
“Ye circumstances. And. Your Honor. based on that case 
ind based on the fact that in the cases you cited, Baker, 
there is no warrant at all. As a matter of fact, those 
cases deal with a different situation but the same exi- 
gency, the same diminished expectation of privacy in 
that car. That goes back to the same argument that | 
had before. These defendants had no expectation of 
privacy in that vehicle in any case. 


THE COURT: You'll notice in the lenkins case. 
they point out. they distinguish Jenkins from Ross in 


App. 247 


that thes point out that in Ross, the police had 
information about the specific vehicle prior to going out 
on the scene. Now, I'm not sitting here defending the 
logic of these decisions 


VIR. MECOLL | understand. 


THE COURT. What I'm saying is that | don't 
think, other than the tact that the car, in this particular 
case. it turned out the car was immobile because you |! 
recall the officer testified they tried to start it and 
couldn't get it started. | don’t know that that’s all that 
relevant because it looked like it might have been 
mobile. But be that as it may, | don’t see any cases that 
say that just because a car is mobile you don't need a 
warrant. | mean, you saw yourself the statement in here 
that says that the warrant requirement is not inapplicable 
to automobiles. 


MR. MECOLI: Your Honor, I'd ask you one 
question, then. What in Baker makes that any more 
exigent then the situation at hand? 


THE COURT: Pardon me? 


MR. MECOLI: What about the case of Baker 
makes it any more exigent in that situation where that 
car was searched than in Jenkins? 


THE COURT: Well. in Baker, for example, I 
think the Court emphasized that the car was suddenly 
encountered. That was their words. It was encountered 


in the course of a traffic stop. Now, | must tell you that 


| don’t really see much difference between a car that is 
suddenly encountered and one that’s encountered in the 
way that it was encountered hers In other words, 


App. 248 


between a traffic stop and one that isn’t. But never- 
theless. that’s the way the courts seem to be going. 


| Now. | understand your point. What is the 
standing case sou cited to me? 


MR. MECOLI: Commonwealth versus F , 
ai. 
F-F-R-R-F-T-T-] erretti 


THE COURT: Do you have a copy of that for 
the Court? 


MR. MECOLI: Yes, I do. Your Honor. 


THE COURT: If you expect me to straighten 
out the law of standing in Pennsylvania in this case. you 
should read Commonwealth versus Peterson and see how 
confused the appellate courts are on that. 


MR. MECOLI: Again, I'd emphasize that we 
are not arguing standing here, which is automatic under 
Sell, but a reasonable expectation of privacy, which 
could only happen in something that you have control 
over or interest in. Neither of these defendants has any 
interest in this automobile, none. 


THE COURT: I understand your argument. Do 
you wish to respond, Mr. Sagot? 


MR. SAGOT: I do wish to respond, Your 
Honor, but my thrust is going to be slightly different 
than the issue that the Court framed. If I could. 
Specifically during the motion to suppress, we have the 
notes from it and | reviewed them completely yesterday. 
| specifically asked the officer whose car it was, the _ 
Buick. Did you run the tag? This, that and the other. 
To this day we don't know whose car it was. We 


App. 249 


cannot through the Commonwealth establish any right to 
privacy of that vehicle, for that omission. 


But | think there’s a predicate issue that Your 
Honor must decide before even reaching the warrant 
issue and the predicate issue is whether or not the 
officers had enough at that time based on credible 
testimony before the Court to be in that position. 


THE COURT: I've assumed for purposes of this 
argument today. | have assumed the credibility issue. 


MR. SAGOT: Well. | would argue strongly that 
in this particular case. it’s an assumption that should not 


be reached. 


THE COURT: Well, | can assume anything. 
You're saving | shouldn't decide it that way. 


MR. SAGOT: I understand that, Your Honor. 
My position is, and I'm not speaking for Mr. Gay or 
Mr. Corrigan, is that the testimony up to the point that 
that car is searched is so convoluted and so fraught with 
fabrication that on the issue of credibility alone, Your 
Honor need not reach that point. From the notes of 
testimony, and I've highlighted most of them, we have a 
situation where a transaction was observed from 
somewhere between twenty-five -- 


THE COURT: Could I make it real simple 
today? I want to limit stood to legal arguments and 
leave aside the credibility. 


MR. SAGOT: Very well. 


App. 250 


cae THE COURT: That's the way | want to proceed 
in this thing. particularly with Mr. Corrigan not here. If 
you have any legal response to what he has to sav. 


MR. SAGOT. Ull deter to Mr. Gay on that. 


THE COURT Mr Gay? 


MR. GAY Judge. there is a clea: distinction 
between an automobile that’s stopped in traffic and the 
situation that presented itself in this case. | mean, it is 
obvious that if there are individuals in an automobile 
and the police are there confronting them. there is the 
possibility of danger and that the police have a right 
under those circumstances to search to protect them- 
selves, and that’s | think a clear and simple distinction 
that could be made in this case. If you're not going to 
get into the -- 


THE COURT: I'm not today. 


. MR. GAY: If you're not going to get into the 
credibility issue. I'd wish to point out to the Court that 
the Commonweaith has presented no evidence to this 
Court to show that either of these defendants abandoned 
any right of privacy in that vehicle. The 
Commonwealth has not presented any evidence to show 
that neither of these defendants never had a right of 
privacy in the vehicle. The defendants have raised the 
suppression issue and have claimed a right of privac 
therefore in this vehicle. and it is the a of the : 
Commonwealth under those circumstances to present 
evidence that they do not have a right of privacy in that 
vehicle or that the right of privacy has somehow been 
abandoned. 


App. 251 


Now. if the Commonwealth intends to show 
abandonment in this case. that must be done by clear 
and convineing evidence. You can't meet that burden or 
you can't even meet the preponderance burden when 
there's no evidence at all before the Court with respect 
to the connection between these defendants and that 
vehicle. All sou have here ts the pronouncement of Sell 
that they have the right to raise the issue. And that. sir. 
| think is as much as could be said under the 
circumstances. 


THE COURT. Let me ask you this, Mr. Gay. | 
think our appellate courts are struggling with the issue 
of what Sell really means. There was a recent panel 
decision by Judge Beck. Judge Popovich and Judge 
Hoffman. three eminent members of the Superior Court. 
and it involved entry into a fortified drug house. And 
two of the judges. well. Judge Hoffman particularly said 
that his’View of Sell was that the, what Sell means is 
that if anyone has a constitutional right of privacy in the 
area that was searched by the police. that a defendant 
who has an interest in the outcome of the case can raise 
the Fourth Amendment issue regardless of whether it's 
the defendant's particular right of privacy that was 
violated. That's what Judge Hoffman says that Sell 
means. In other words. and he say it in so many words, 
that Sell means that a defendant may vicariously assert 
the constitutional rights. invasion of constitutional rights 
of another person even though his own particular consti- 
tutional rights aren't violated in that particular case. 


So. for example. under Judge Hoffman's analysis 
of Peterson. | believe he would conclude that whether or 
not the two defendants that are here today had a privacy 
right in the automobile. they must, they may neverthe- 
less assert that someone's privacy right was violated in 
going into that automobile without a warrant. And if 


App. 252 


thes ‘re successful in that assertion. they ail. J 
Beck on the other hand. | think. is inh ep oie 
thinking on it. where there seems to be a elimination of 
the vicarious. the ability to vicariously assert somebody 
else's rights. ! 


| I think this ts an important issue in Pennsylvania 
and it really is one that should be resolved because so 
many different cases are really affected by. you know. 
what is, you know. who is going to be allowed to assert 
rights. It Sell means what Justice, Judge Hoffman says 
it means, then Mr. Mecoli’s argument about your clients 
had no expectation of privacy in a car fails. If Judge 
Hoffman's or Judge Beck's view is correct. then | think 
we have to get into the question of whether the Com- 
monwealth has established in this case that your partic- 


ular clients have no expectation of privacy interest that 
car. 


MR. GAY: So you want us to brief the 
argument to the Superior Court. 


THE COURT: Well. I think what I would like 
to do is this. This is a significant enough issue that | 
would like both the District Attorney and defense to 
brief the issue of whether the officers needed a warrant 
to enter the car and if only for the reason that I don’t 
know how, if I was a police officer out in the field. | 
would possibly figure out when | needed a warrant and 
when I didn’t. because there's just. you know, some 
very confusing law in this area. 


So what I'd like to do is give this a date in 
January. Give it a date for briefs to be submitted. 


MR. GAY: Judge. may | ask for a February date 
for briefs? I've got six right now that I'm working on. 


App. 253 


MR. SAGOT: | would join in that request. 


THE COURT. Ull give ut an early February 
date. 


COURT CRIER- Do you want February. Your 
Honor. 


THE COLRI: Yeah. Maybe first or second 
week. 


MR. SAGOT: May we have the week of the 
tenth, Your Honor. if that’s possible? 


THE COURT: That's all right with me. 
COURT CRIER: Thirteenth. 


MR. SAGOT: Thirteenth I'm on trial in a 
federal matter. 


THE COURT: We'll have the briefs submitted 
by the thirteenth and then we'll list the case for the 
twentieth. | wanted to take the time to discuss this with 
counsel present because | want to focus the thing on 
where | am jn this case, and | would urge you all to 
read Commonwealth versus Peterson. It's a panel deci- 
sion by Beck. Hoffman and Popovich having to do with 
a fortified drug house. 


MR. SAGOT: This room. Your Honor? 


THE COURT: We'll list it out of 617. I don’t 
know where | will be. 


MR. GAY: Judge. do you have the cite on 
Peterson. 


App. 254 


THE COURT: 1 don’t. but if you call my law 
clerk and tell her that it’s in the outline for the class | 
conducted yesterday. she'll get it for vou. 


| MR. SAGOT. Can we have the name or cite for 
Ferretti? 


THE COURT: Ferretti is $77 A.2d 1375. That 
should conclude this matter. 


(Hearing recessed.) 


App. 255 


IN THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS OF 
PHIL ADELPHIA COUNTY 
HIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 
CRIMINAL TRIAL DIVISION 


COMMONWEALTH 


Vs 


EDWIN LABRON No. 9009-2318 
-and- 

RICHARD RAMOS / No, 9009-2300 
-and- 

LUIS LAJARA ~ No, 9009-2318 


Courtroom 475 City Hall 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Thursday, March 5, 1992 


BEFORE: HONORABLE G. CRAIG LORD, J. 


APPEARANCES: 


JOHN MINGES. ESQ. 
Assistant District Attorney 
Counsel for the Commonwealth 


ALLAN SAGOT, ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Ramos 


ANDREW GAY, ESQ. 
Counsel tor Defendant Lajara 


VINCENT CORRIGAN, ESQ. 
Counsel for Defendant Labron 


PRETRIAL MOTIONS (Cont'd.) 


App. 256 


PROCEEDINGS. 


THE COURT: Are you ready to proceed. Mr. 
Minges? 


MR. MINGES: Yes. Your Honor. 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor. before you begin, if 
Your Honor is really going to make a decision from the 
bench. I don't have a problem with that. I'll waive an 
interpreter on behalf of my client. 


THE COURT: That's all that I'm going to do. 
MR. SAGOT: Thank you. 


THE COURT: We're here for the Court to 
render a decision on a motion to suppress which was 
filed on behalf of all three defendants and litigated 
before this Court towards the end of November. | have 
received very helpful and able briefs from the Common- 
wealth and several of the defendants and I’m prepared to 
render the Court's decision at this time. I'll give a brief 
explanation of the Court's decision. Should it become 
necessary for the Court to issue formal findings of fact 
and conclusions of law, | will do so. 


First of all, as to Mr. Ramos and Mr. LaJara. | 
have reviewed the various cases to see whether any 
violations of the fourth amendment rights of Mr. Ramos 
and Mr. LaJara have occurred in this case or whether. 
conversely. the Commonwealth has established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that no, that the evidence 
that was recovered was not recovered, was recovered 
without violation of these defendants’ rights. 


App. 257 


| do believe that there was no violation of the 
constitutional rights. The Commonwealth has persuaded 
me by a preponderance that there was no violation of 
the constitutional rights of Mr. Ramos and Mr. LaJara. 
I believe that in this particular case. that neither of these 
defendants had any reasonable expectation of privacy as 
to the trunk of the automobile over which they appeared 
to be asserting no dominion or control and in fact others 
Were asserting that control. Accordingly, as to Mr. 
Ramos and Mr. LaJara. the Court will dismiss or deny 
the motions to suppress. 


With respect to Mr. Labron, I’m going to grant 
the motion to suppress based on the recent Pennsylvania 
Supreme Court decision of Commonwealth versus 
Rodriguez. I believe that Rodriguez stands for the 
proposition that in order to search a vehicle in 
Pennsylvania without a warrant, assuming that you had 
probable cause, which | think is not an issue in this 
case, some exigency must still be shown. It appears that 
under the law as it presently stands, if a vehicle is, 
quote, suddenly encountered, and quote. perhaps in the 
form of a car stop, that our appellate courts regard this 
as sufficient exigency to permit the exception to the 
warrant for that vehicle suddenly encountered. How- 
ever, in this particular case. there was testimony that the 
officers knew that drugs would be stored in a, I believe 
the vehicle was a Lincoln that was involved here. They 
knew the type of car. They knew the location. And I 


believe that this is distinguishable from a car stop where, 


in this situation, the case at hand, the prior knowledge 
allowed for some planning. There was also testimony 
that there were eight or ten police people in the area. 
The evidence as to the car's mobility was weak if not 
nonexistent. And there was no evidence that the police, 
that anyone knew of the police presence in the area so 
as to create exigency under that type of analysis. So 


App. 258 


accordingly. I'm going to grant the motions to suppress 
as to Mr. Labron. 


Now. my suggestion is that I give all three 
defendants a date on the same date in the majors 
program with the idea that as to Mr. Labron. that date 
will be for status of appeal. As to the other two 
defendants. the date would be the date for trial. So, 
John, could you call Criminal Listings and ask them. tell 
them motion to suppress. three co-defendants, motion to 
Suppress granted as to one, denied as to two. We'd like 
to list them all three together. It's a majors case. One 


will be for status of appeal and the other two will be for 
trial. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Judge, with respect to Mr. 
Labron, he’s not here. He's in custody. I think he’s 
currently being held on a hundred and fifty thousand 
dollars bail for this case. I’d ask that Your Honor 
permit him to sign his own bail at this point. 


THE COURT: Here's the thing. Do we have an 
extract on the guy and everything else? 


MR. CORRIGAN: I do. I believe, have a 


current extract. He has no prior convictions, | do know 
that. 


THE COURT: Can I see if we have an extract 
on Mr. Labron? 


COURT CLERK: Here’s one from November. 


THE COURT: Has he been incarcerated since 
this trial? 


App. 259 


MIR. CORRIGAN: He’s been incarcerated since 
November of | 989. 


THE COURT: On this case? 
MR. CORRIGAN: On this case, Judge. yes. 
THE COURT: What was his bail before” 


MR. CORRIGAN: At some point there was a 
failure to appear on this case and then at that point his- 
bail. he turned himself in, I believe, and then his bail 
was raised to a hundred and fifty thousand dollars or 
whatever the exact amount is. I'm not sure. But I 
know it’s over a hundred thousand dollars. I'm sorry. 
Since November of 1990, Judge. Not since November 
of 1989. Well over a year, though. 


MR. SAGOT: Your Honor, there was a 
transcript that was made and part of the record. It was 
the only copy we had. In the companion matter of 
Commonwealth versus Melendez. 


THE COURT: Are you looking for that? Is that 


it? 


MR. SAGOT: We need those notes for any 
future proceeding. ; 


THE COURT: Let me just check something. 
With respect to the bail request for -- 


MR. MINGES: May I be heard before the Court 
decides’ 


MR. MINGES: Sure. 


App. 260 


MR. GAY. Judge. before vou proceed to the 
matter of bail. may | be heard on a motion for recon- 
sideration of the Court's decision on this case with 
respect to one issue which the Court may not have 
addressed” 


THE CO RI Sure 


MR. GAY | think it’s fairly clear from all the 
evidence in this case and the charges against these 
defendants that the Commonwealth's theory is that all of 
the defendar:; were engaged in a conspiracy to possess 
the drugs. Lider any theory. possession by any of them 
would be possession by all. as a consequence of which 
there would be a reasonable expectation of privacy on 
the part of anyone who was a party of the entire 
enterprise. 


THE COURT: Well, let me say this. I did 
consider that aspect of the case. And I will concede that 
if you want to call it the question of standing or the 
question of when one could assert that their interests are. 
their fourth amendment interests are brought into play, 
it's an area | think the courts are working on. But this 
is my best judgment at the present time as to what the 
state of the law is. And I do understand that argument 
and I think is one that is a argument that has to be given 
some weight. But this is my best judgment at this time 
as to what the state of the law is. 


MR. GAY: Yes. sir. 


THE COURT: I may be wrong, but I took my 
best shot at it. Mr. Sagot? 


App. 261 


MR. SAGOT: By the statements that you made 
earlier. since Your Honor is now sitting in the civil 
program. Your Honor will not be hearing this for trial? 


THE COURT: No. 


MR. SAGOT. That being the case, Your Honor. 
I'd also ask vou to at this time make a motion to recon- 
sider based on an issue that the Court did not touch in it 
findings. We sat through this motion for the better part 
of a day. I believe. and I believe that one thing that 
stood out throughout the entire motion was the absolute 
lack of credibility of the testifying officer. We had 
provided the Court -- 


THE COURT: If you want to argue credibility, 
I've made by determination in that regard, sir. 


- MR. SAGOT: Very well. That was my concern, 


Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Yeah, I’ve made that determina- 
tion. | wouldn't have decided it this way without 
finding the officer's observations credible. 


All right. Now, bail. 
MR. MINGES: Very briefly. Your Honor. As 


the Court knows. I’m handling the matter today for Mr. 
Mecoli, who is away on vacation. I’ve reviewed Mr. 


Labron’s ROR report. It would appear that he has little. 


if any, contact in the community. There are no 
significant ties that would keep him here. 


Additionally. upon reviewing the file very 
briefly. it appears to me that the defendant apparently 


did not turn himself in on his own but very likely was 


App. 262 


brought in from bench warrant status as a result of a 


subsequent arrest by other narcotics officers in the same 
general area. 


tie THE COURT: Can I see the Quarter-Sessions 
file for Mr. Labron? Are they working on a date for us” 


COURT CRIER: Yes. 


3 MR. CORRIGAN: Judge. he may have been 
picked up on the bench warrant but he certainly was not 


picked up in relation to any other matter. The only case 
that he has is this one. 


THE COURT: It looks like he bench warranted 
here at arraignment. 


MR. CORRIGAN: That's correct. Then the 
bench warrant was withdrawn and a hundred fifty 
thousand dollars bail was imposed on the twenty-eighth 


of November of 1990. He's been in custody since that 
time. 


THE COURT: Let me say this. He's been in 
custody since when? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Since the twenty-eighth of 
November, 1990. 


THE COURT: Any objection to my looking at 
his ROR sheet. 


MR. CORRIGAN: No, Judge. It shows three 
prior failures to appear prior to his arrest on this matter. 
Judge. I also would dispute the District Attorney's 
assertion that he has no significant ties to the community 
based on the ROR sheet shows that he’s been a resident, 


App. 263 


living in the same residence for a period of five years 
and that he’s been a Philadelphia area resident at that 
single location for a period of five years prior to his 
arrest. Which is longer than I’ve been a resident in 
Philadelphia and longer than | have lived at my present 
address, but | consider myself to have significant ties to 
Philadelphia at this port. 


THE COURT: Let me say this, Mr. Corrigan. | 
do have some reluctance in setting the bail by imposing 
upon Mr. Minges. you know, who's unfamiliar with the 
matter and not knowing about the situation. I would 
make this statement to you: That how long does it take 
vou to get a bail petition decided by the motions court 
judge? 


MR. CORRIGAN: Quite some time. I couldn't 
say to be sure. Judge. 


THE COURT: Does ut take a month? 


MR. CORRIGAN: At least a month, I would 
think. 


MR. GAY: It could. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Judge, at this point I fail to 
see what purpose is to be served by keeping him in 
custody. If the Commonwealth does not appeal thirty 
days from now, he'll be released at that time, and if the 
Commonwealth does appeal. it’s going to be a couple of 
years before the gets case gets back for trial even 
assuming that the Commonwealth prevailed. 


THE COURT: There's no question in my mind 
that | would be inclined based upon what I know right 
now to give the guy very low bail. However, I would 


App. 264 


prefer to give Mr. Mecoli the opportunity to have his 
say since he’s been with this case. Now. in order not to 
keep your client. when is Mr. Mecoli going to be back’ 


MR. MINGES: I don't know. [ can find that 
out. 


THE COURT. | would say this: Mr. Mecoli 
need only call Mr Corrigan on the phone and say what 
he has to say and I'l! decide the bail issue. It's not 
something | want to get into a big brouhaha about but | 
do want to hear what he has to say. Would you find out 
when he’s going to be back and let Mr. Corrigan know? 
Then if it’s is if it looks like he's going to be gone an 
extended period of time. I'll act in some fashion. 


MR. CORRIGAN: Are you going to be in court 
next week? 


THE COURT: I'm going to be on vacation, 
theoretically. but as a practical matter I'm going to be in 
my office. in and out of my office finishing up some 
work. Did we get a date vet? 


COURT CLERK: I believe he’s still on the 
phone. Judge. 


THE COURT: Why don't I do this, then. Well. 
I'll wait just a minute. 


MR. SAGOT: If I could, just in case Your 
Honor didn’t write it down. My request for those 
Melendez notes. 

MIR. MINGES: They were used at the motion to 
suppress’ 


App. 265 


MR. SAGOT: Apparently the narcotics officer. 
thats a. he was another defendant in this case and the 
narcotics officer also testified in that case. 


THE COURT: Well. it’s an exhibit. 


MR. SAGOT: Exactly. I have no problem with 
Your Honor retaining an exhibit, but we need a copy of 
them and that's our only one. 


THE COURT: Why don’t I just copy it and 
send it to you. 


MR. SAGOT: Would you please do that? 
THE COURT: Sure. 


MR. SAGOT: Do you also have some prelimi- 
nary hearing notes also” 


THE COURT: Yeah. You're asking for a copy 
of the notes from Wednesday, March the sixth, the 
Melendez preliminary hearing? 


MR. SAGOT: That's exactly correct. 


THE COURT: All right. We'll copy it for you. 
I'm going to give this back to our clerk for the Quarter- 
Sessions file. 


COURT CRIER: Judge, on this matter it's going 
to be 4/3. B section. Room 425, pretrial, nine o'clock. 


(Hearing concluded. ) 


App. 266 


