 
 United States v. Winstar Corp. et al., 518 U.S. 839 (1996). 
LII 
Supreme Court 
United States v. Winstar Corp. et al. (95-865), 518 U.S. 839 (1996). 
Opinion 
 [ Souter ]Concurrence 
 [ Breyer ]Syllabus 
 Dissent 
 [ Rehnquist ]Concurrence 
 [ Scalia ]HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version 
No. 95-865 
UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. WINSTAR 
 CORPORATION et al. 
on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the 
 federal circuit 
[July 1, 1996] 
Justice Scalia, 
 with whom Justice Kennedy and Justice Thomas join, concurring in the judgment. 
I agree with the plurality that the contracts at issue in this 
 case gave rise to an obligation on the part of the Government to afford 
 respondents favorable accounting treatment, and that the contracts were 
 broken by the Government's discontinuation of that favorable treatment, 
 as required by FIRREA, 12 
 U.S.C. § 1464(t). My reasons for rejecting the Government's defenses 
 to this contract action are, however, quite different from the plurality's, 
 so I must write separately to state briefly the basis for my vote. 
The plurality dispenses with three of the four "sovereign" defenses 
 raised by the Government simply by characterizing the contracts at issue 
 as "risk shifting agreements" that amount to nothing more than "promises 
 by the Government to insure [respondents] against any losses arising from 
 future regulatory change." Ante, at 41. Thus understood, the plurality 
 explains, the contracts purport, not to constrain the exercise of sovereign 
 power, but only to make the exercise of that power an event resulting in 
 liability for the Government--with the consequence that the peculiarly 
 sovereign defenses raised by the Government are simply inapplicable. This 
 approach has several difficulties, the first being that it has no basis 
 in our cases, which have not made the availability of these sovereign defenses 
 (as opposed to their validity on the merits) depend upon the nature of 
 the contract at issue. But in any event, it is questionable whether, even 
 as a matter of normal contract law, the exercise in contract characterization 
 in which the plurality engages is really valid. Virtually every 
 contract operates, not as a guarantee of particular future conduct, but 
 as an assumption of liability in the event of nonperformance: "The duty 
 to keep a contract at common law means a prediction that you must pay damages 
 if you do not keep it,--and nothing else." Holmes, The Path of the Law 
 (1897), in 3 The Collected Works of Justice Holmes 391, 394 (S. Novick 
 ed. 1995). See Horwitz Matthews, Inc. v. Chicago, 78 F. 3d 
 1248, 1250-1251 (CA7 1996). 
In this case, it was an unquestionably sovereign act of government--enactment 
 and implementation of provisions of FIRREA regarding treatment of regulatory 
 capital--that gave rise to respondents' claims of breach of contract. Those 
 claims were premised on the assertion that, in the course of entering into 
 various agreements with respondents, the Government had undertaken to continue 
 certain regulatory policies with respect to respondents' recently acquired 
 thrifts; and the Government countered that assertion, in classic fashion, 
 with the primary defense that contractual restrictions on sovereign authority 
 will be recognized only where unmistakably expressed. The "unmistakability" 
 doctrine has been applied to precisely this sort of situation--where a 
 sovereign act is claimed to deprive a party of the benefits of a prior 
 bargain with the government. See, e.g., Merrion v. Jicarilla 
 Apache Tribe, 455 
 U.S. 130, 135-136, 145-148 (1982). 
Like The Chief Justice, see post, at 1-8, I believe that 
 the unmistakability doctrine applies here, but unlike him I do not think 
 it forecloses respondents' claims. In my view, the doctrine has little 
 if any independent legal force beyond what would be dictated by normal 
 principles of contract interpretation. It is simply a rule of presumed 
 (or implied in fact) intent. Generally, contract law imposes upon a party 
 to a contract liability for any impossibility of performance that is attributable 
 to that party's own actions. That is a reasonable estimation of what the 
 parties intend. When I promise to do x in exchange for your doing 
 y, I impliedly promise not to do anything that will disable me from 
 doing x, or disable you from doing y--so that if either of 
 our performances is rendered impossible by such an act on my part, I am 
 not excused from my obligation. When the contracting party is the government, 
 however, it is simply not reasonable to presume an intent of that 
 sort. To the contrary, it is reasonable to presume (unless the opposite 
 clearly appears) that the sovereign does not promise that none 
 of its multifarious sovereign acts, needful for the public good, will incidentally 
 disable it or the other party from performing one of the promised acts. 
 The requirement of unmistakability embodies this reversal of the normal 
 reasonable presumption. Governments do not ordinarily agree to curtail 
 their sovereign or legislative powers, and contracts must be interpreted 
 in a common sense way against that background understanding. 
Here, however, respondents contend that they have overcome this 
 reverse presumption that the Government remains free to make its own performance 
 impossible through its manner of regulation. Their claim is that the Government 
 quite plainly promised to regulate them in a particular fashion, 
 into the future. They say that the very subject matter of these 
 agreements, an essential part of the quid pro quo, was government 
 regulation; unless the Government is bound as to that regulation, 
 an aspect of the transactions that reasonably must be viewed as a sine 
 qua non of their assent becomes illusory. I think they are correct. 
 If, as the dissent believes, the Government committed only "to provide 
 [certain] treatment unless and until there is subsequent action," post, 
 at 13, then the Government in effect said "we promise to regulate in this 
 fashion for as long as we choose to regulate in this fashion"--which is 
 an absolutely classic description of an illusory promise. See 1 R. Lord, 
 Williston on Contracts §1:2, p. 11 (4th ed. 1990). In these circumstances, 
 it is unmistakably clear that the promise to accord favorable regulatory 
 treatment must be understood as (unsurprisingly) a promise to accord 
 favorable regulatory treatment. I do not accept that unmistakability demands 
 that there be a further promise not to go back on the promise to 
 accord favorable regulatory treatment. 
The dissent says that if the Government agreed to accord the favorable 
 regulatory treatment "in the short term, but made no commitment about . 
 . . the long term, respondents still received consideration." Post, 
 at 13. That is true enough, but it is quite impossible to construe these 
 contracts as providing for only "short term" favorable treatment, with 
 the long term up for grabs: either there was an undertaking to regulate 
 respondents as agreed for the specified amortization periods, or there 
 was no promise regarding the future at all--not even so much as a peppercorn's 
 worth. 
In sum, the special role of the agencies, and the terms and circumstances 
 of the transactions, provide an adequate basis for saying that the promises 
 which the trial court and the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit 
 found to have been made in these cases were unmistakable ones. To be sure, 
 those courts were not looking for "unmistakable" promises, see ibid., 
 but unmistakability is an issue of law that we can determine here. It was 
 found below that the Government had plainly made promises to regulate 
 in a certain fashion, into the future; I agree with those findings, and 
 I would conclude, for the reasons set forth above, that the promises were 
 unmistakable. Indeed, it is hard to imagine what additional assurance that 
 the course of regulation would not change could have been demanded--other 
 than, perhaps, the Government's promise to keep its promise. That is not 
 what the doctrine of unmistakability requires. While it is true enough, 
 as the dissent points out, that one who deals with the Government may need 
 to " `turn square corners,' " post, at 14-15 (quoting Rock Island, 
 A. & L. R. Co. v. United States, 254 
 U.S. 141, 143 (1920)), he need not turn them twice. 
The Government's remaining arguments are, I think, readily rejected. 
 The scope and force of the "reserved powers" and "express delegation" defenses--which 
 the plurality thinks inapplicable based on its view of the nature of the 
 contracts at issue here, see ante, at 49-51--have not been well 
 defined by our prior cases. The notion of "reserved powers" seems to stand 
 principally for the proposition that certain core governmental powers cannot 
 be surrendered, see, e.g., Stone v. Mississippi, 101 
 U.S. 814 (1880); thus understood, that doctrine would have no force 
 where, as here, the private party to the contract does not seek to stay 
 the exercise of sovereign authority, but merely requests damages for breach 
 of contract. To the extent this Court has suggested that the notion of 
 "reserved powers" contemplates, under some circumstances, nullification 
 of even monetary governmental obligations pursuant to exercise of "the 
 federal police power or some other paramount power," Lynch v. United 
 States, 292 
 U.S. 571, 579 (1934), I do not believe that regulatory measures designed 
 to minimize what are essentially assumed commercial risks are the sort 
 of "police power" or "paramount power" referred to. And whatever is required 
 by the "express delegation" doctrine is to my mind satisfied by the statutes 
 which the plurality identifies as conferring upon the various federal bank 
 regulatory agencies involved in this case authority to enter into agreements 
 of the sort at issue here, see ante, at 51-52. 
Finally, in my view the Government cannot escape its obligations 
 by appeal to the so called "sovereign acts" doctrine. That doctrine was 
 first articulated in Court of Claims cases, and has apparently been applied 
 by this Court in only a single case, our 3 page opinion in Horowitz 
 v. United States, 267 
 U.S. 458, decided in 1925 and cited only once since, in a passing reference, 
 see Nortz v. United States, 294 
 U.S. 317, 327 (1935). Horowitz holds that "the United States 
 when sued as a contractor cannot be held liable for an obstruction to the 
 performance of [a] particular contract resulting from its public and general 
 acts as a sovereign." 267 U. S., at 461. In my view the "sovereign acts" 
 doctrine adds little, if anything at all, to the "unmistakability" doctrine, 
 and is avoided whenever that one would be--i.e., whenever it is 
 clear from the contract in question that the Government was committing 
 itself not to rely upon its sovereign acts in asserting (or defending against) 
 the doctrine of impossibility, which is another way of saying that the 
 Government had assumed the risk of a change in its laws. That this is the 
 correct interpretation of Horowitz is made clear, I think, by our 
 two principal cases of this century holding that the Government may not 
 simply repudiate its contractual obligations, Lynch v. United 
 States, 292 
 U.S. 571 (1934), and Perry v. United States, 294 
 U.S. 330 (1935). Those cases, which are barely discussed by the plurality's 
 opinion, failed even to mention Horowitz. In both of them, as here, 
 Congress specifically set out to abrogate the essential bargain 
 of the contracts at issue--and in both we declared such abrogation to amount 
 to impermissible repudiation. See Lynch, supra, at 578-580; 
 Perry, supra, at 350-354. 
For the foregoing reasons, I concur in the judgment. 
