In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
V. 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


* 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Page 
American Smelting & Ref. Co. v. Colorado ex rel. 
Lindsley, 204 U.S. 103 (190777 16 
Amino Brothers Co. v. United States, 372 F.2d 485 
(Ct. Cl.), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846 (1967) 21 


Appleby v. City of New York, 271 U.S. 364 (1926). 16 
Atlas Corp. v. United States, 895 F.2d 745 (Fed. 


Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 811 (1990) 22 
Bowen V. Public Agencies Opposed to Social Secu- 
rity Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41 (1986) 15, 23, 25 


Charter Fed. Sav. Bank V. OTS, 976 F.2d 208 (4th 
Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 507 U.S. 1004 (1993) 3 
City of Cleveland v. Cleveland City Ry., 194 U.S. 


1 ———ůůůů———U— 20 
City of Puducuh v. Paducoh N., 261 U.S. 267 
SED —— 17 


Deming v. United States, 1 Ct. Cl. 190 (1865), 
appeal dismissed, 76 U.S. (9 Wall.) 145 (1870) 25 
FDIC v. Philadelphia Gear Corp., 476 U.S. 426 


111 ——————— — 15 
Guerini Stone Co. v. P. J. Carlin Constr. Co., 240 
Je 4 


Heil v. United States, 273 F. 729 (S.D.N.Y. 1921).. 14 
Home Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of Los Angeles, 211 
re 16, 17, 20, 21 
Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 458 (1926) 21. 25 
Jefferson Branch Bank v. Skelly, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 


1 . — 15,16 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571 (1934 14, 16, 
18, 23 

Maryland v. Railroad Co., 89 U.S. (22 Wall.) 105 
TE ee eee eee een 12 

New Orleans Gas Co. v. Louisiana Light Co., 115 
I 17 

Norman v. Baltimore & O. R. R. 294 U.S. 240 
r EO 23 
Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330 (1935) 22, 24 


(1) 


III 
Cases Continued: Page 


Peterson v. United States Dep’t of the Interior, 
899 F.2d 799 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 


Statutes and rules—Continued: Page 
EE 18 


ES 2 18 
1008 (1990 ——— 3 Ct. of Fed. Cl. R. 

Russell v. Sebastian, 288 U.S. 195 (1914) 16 — 63 8 
St. Cloud Pub. Serv. Co. v. City of St. Cloud, 265 TT 7.62 
ID — 16,17 a = 

Slater v. Emerson, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 224 (1857).. 12 Miscellaneous: 
we Crowninshield, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 122 - William Black, Ending Our Forebearers’ Forbear- 
* . — HHH * G—([ 2 [ —õ— ances: FIRREA and ee | Goodwill, 2 
where Ay 3 Director, OTS, 967 : Stan. L. & Poly Rev. 102 (1990) 10, 11, 12 
8 1 ü wae? 15 K „ 
— e, Padhanienis ane 2 * GAO, Financial Audit: Resolution Trust Corpora- 
9 (1963) *. 874 US. 15 tion’s 1994 and 1993 Financial Statements 
——— — 1 5 — ö —— 9 
Vicksburg v. Vicksburg Waterworks Co., 206 U.S. a aa oa cost aad Laat of 
a. abe eg — = Bankruptcy Law (1986) te 11 
V. 4 _ ( ) ————g National Commission on Financial Institutions 
Constitution, statutes and rules: Reform, Recovery and Enforcement, Origins and 
U.S. Const.: Causes of the S&L Debacle: A Blueprint for 
aics y Reform, A Report to the President and Congress 
Arta... 24 of the United States (19933) 9, 10, 11, 12 
ne...... er 24 


Act of Oct. 6, 1917, ch. 105, Art. IV, 40 Stat. 409- 


Susan Rose-Ackerman, Risk Taking and Ruin: 
Bankruptcy and Investment Choice, 20 J. Legal 


| | ene ee 18 Stud. 277 (1991) 11 
Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution 
and Taxpayer Recovery Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 
101-647, Tit. XXV, 104 Stat. 4859: 
§ 2551, 104 Stat. 4889 * * 9 
LL 9 
LL 9 
12 U.S.C. 1464 (a) (1988) (repea led) 14 
12 U.S.C. 1464 (b) (1988) (repea led) 14 
12 U.S.C. 1464 (s) (1988) (repeal ed) 14 
12 U.S.C. 1725 (a) (1988) (repeal ed 14 
12 U.S.C. 1725 (e) (3) (1988) (repealed ) 18 
12 U.S.C. 1726 (b) (1988) (repealed) )))) 14 
12 U.S.C. 1729 (f) (2) (1988) (repealed) .................. 18 
12 U.S.C. 1730 (t) (1988) (repealed) ...................... * 14 


Ju the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-865 


UNITED STATES OF Auk RCA, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


Respondents in these cases argue that Congress breached 
contracts with them when, in enacting FIRREA in 1989, 
it strictly limited the amount of intangible assets that 
federally insured savings and loan associations could use 
to satisfy federal capital requirements. In respondents’ 
view, federal bank regulators had made binding contrac- 
tual promises to them that Congress would not take such 
regulatory action or that, if it did, it would exempt re- 
spondents from the application of the new regulations. 

It would be quite unusual, to say the least, for federal 
regulatory officials to purport to make binding promises 


(1) 


2 


to those whom they regulate that Congress would not 
take future regulatory action that might be necessary 
to protect the public interest. As we show in our open- 
ing brief, no such promises were made here. When 
promises were made, they provided only that, to the extent 
that “goodwill” or “capital credits” could legally be 
treated as assets by thrifts, respondents could account for 
those intangibles on their books in certain ways. Such 
promises about the accounting treatment to be accorded 
assets were within the competence of bank regulators to 
make and were not breached in these cases. 

Reading the documents upon which respondents rely 
to refer to the accounting treatment to be accorded 
goodwill and capital credits, rather than to the right to 
treat these intangibles as assets regardless of Congress’s 
attempts to exercise its regulatory power to protect the 
solvency of the nation’s banking systems, is, we submit, 
the most natural interpretation of the relevant language. 
If there are any ambiguities in the language, however, 
this Court has made clear that such ambiguities must be 
resolved in favor of Congress’s ability to exercise its 
powers free of the threat of damage claims for breach 
of contract. Any alleged contractual limitation on Con- 
gress’s exercise of its sovereign powers thus must be un- 
mistakably clear. The court of appeals’ failure to apply 
that principle in these cases led it to misconstrue the 
documents upon which respondents rely, and incorrectly 
to impose breach-of-contract liability on the United States 
for Congress’s decision to adopt stricter capital require- 
ments in an effort to restore solvency to the nation’s 
thrift industry. 

1. Respondents repeat their claims that the thrift regu- 
lators promised that the government would count respond- 
ents’ supervisory goodwill (and, in Statesman’s case, cap- 
ital credits) as capital for purposes of satisfying federal 
capital requirements for periods of 25 to 40 years. Rep- 
etition of those claims does not substitute for their fail- 


3 


ure to obtain such promises in the terms of the contracts 
at issue. 

a. Glendale. Glendale concedes (Br. 21) that the 
“critical terms” on which it relies were not included 
within the four corners of the contract between the 
parties—the Supervisory Action Agreement (SAA). In- 
stead, Glendale claims (ibid.) that they were “contained 
in documents [primarily, Bank Board Resolution 81-710 
(J.A. 605-610)] that were included in the contract 
through the integration clause of the SAA. 

As the language of the integration clause of the SAA 
makes clear, however, the SAA, “together with an inter- 
pretation thereof or understanding agreed to in writing 
by the parties, constitutes the entire agreement between 
the parties thereto.” J.A. 598-599. That sentence pre- 
cludes construing the Bank Board Resolution as a state- 
ment of the parties’ contractual undertakings. The Bank 
Board was, in the first place, not a “party” to the SAA. 
See J.A. 587. Nor did the SAA parties (FSLIC and 
Glendale) ever “agree * * * in writing” to the Board's 
Resolution, which in all events was a statement of regu- 
latory policy, not a contractual “understanding.”* Ac- 


1 Glendale does not claim that the Bank Board Resolution itself 
or the terms contained in it would have constituted contractual 
commitments of the government, absent the integration clause in 
the SAA. Such documents were the record of the Bank Board’s 
regulatory actions, which the Board remained free to change, in 
accordance with applicable legal standards governing agency action. 
See, e.g., Charter Fed. Sav. Bank v. OTS, 976 F.2d 208, 211 
(4th Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 507 U.S. 1004 (1998); see also 
Transohio Savings Bank v. Director, OTS, 967 F.2d 598, 621 
(D.C. Cir. 1992); ef. Peterson v. United States Dep't of the 
Interior, 899 F.2d 799, 811 n.17, 813 n.18 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 
498 U.S. 1008 (1990). 


2 The Bank Board Resolution (J. A. 605-610) carries all of the 
conventional earmarks of an agency regulatory determination, not 
a contract. It begins with the factual premises for the agency’s 
action (the “whereas” clauses, J.A. 605-606), and continues with 


4 


cordingly, nothing in the integration clause could possibly 
have converted the Bank Board’s statements into con- 
tractual undertakings of the government. 

Under the integration clause, the Bank Board Resolu- 
tion did become part of the Glendale contract for the 
purpose of determining what occurs in the event of a con- 
flict between the SAA and the Bank Board Resolution: 
in that situation, nothing in the SAA “supersede[s]” the 
Bank Board Resolution. J.A. 599. That reference did 
not, however, convert the Resolution’s statements of reg- 
ulatory policy into contractual commitments.“ Cf. Guerini 
Stone Co. v. P.J. Carlin Constr. Co., 240 U.S. 264, 277 
(1916) (“[A] reference by the contracting parties to an 
extraneous writing for a particular purpose makes it a 
part of their agreement only for the purpose specified.” ) 
(emphasis added) (citing cases). 

Most of Glendale’s remaining arguments (Glendale 
Br. 22-26) regarding the meaning of the provisions in 
the Bank Board Resolutions and other documents are 
addressed in our opening brief (at 25-26, 28). The Peat, 
Marwick letter submitted by Glendale (see Glendale Br. 
22) after the transaction could not possibly constitute an 
additional contractual commitment by the government. 
As the Bank Board Resolution required, that letter was 
submitted so that the Board could determine “the reason- 
ableness of amounts attributed to goodwill * * * and 


the resolution clauses themselves, J. A. 606 (“Now therefore, it is 
resolved * , J. A. 607-610 (“Resolved further, * ), which 
granted the necessary regulatory approval to Glendale’s transaction. 


The Winstar integration clause, see J. A. 112, is virtually 
identical to the integration clause in Glendale. The Statesman in- 
tegration clause, on the other hand, provides that [this Agree- 
ment, together with any resolutions adopted by the Bank Board and 
documents delivered at closing * * *, constitutes the entire agree- 
ment between the parties.” J.A. 407-408. This provision is dis- 
cussed in our opening brief, at 32-36. Statesman’s claim regarding 
capital credits must be rejected in light of the unmistakability 
doctrine. 


5 


the resulting amortization periods” for purposes of apply- 
ing its then-current policy. J.A. 607. Had the letter been 
insufficient for those purposes, the Bank Board could have 
rescinded its approval of the transaction. The letter, 
generated by Glendale’s accountants, obviously did not 
and could not include any new contractual commitment 
by the government not already made in the SAA, and 
the approval of the letter by the Bank Board’s agent 
could not be construed to have made any such new 
commitment. 

b. Winstar and Statesman. Like Glendale, Winstar 
and Statesman also argue that their contracts included 
commitments by the government regarding the future 
treatment of supervisory goodwill.‘ We addressed those 
claims, as well as Statesman’s claims regarding capital 
credits, in our opening brief. See U.S. Br. 28-36." 


As noted in our opening brief, Winstar's Assistance Agreement 
expired in 1986, and any government obligations in that agreement 
therefore expired long before FIRREA was enacted. Winstar 
argues (Br. 30 n.19) that the expiration clause of its agreement 
is prefaced by the phrase “[e)xcept as otherwise specifically pro- 
vided in this Agreement.” J.A. 110. There is, however, no refer- 
ence to supervisory goodwill anywhere within the four corners of 
Winstar’s Assistance Agreement, and any commitments made in 
the Bank Board Resolutions and other regulatory documents would 
not appear to be commitments “in this Agreement.” Nor do those 
other documents “specifically provide” for any extended expiration 
date. Statesman claims (Br. 26) that its Regulatory Capital Main- 
tenance Agreement (RCMA) (J. A. 419) contains a contractual 
commitment regarding its capital credits and supervisory goodwill. 
Any such commitment, however, was only “({f]or purposes of this 
Agreement.” J. A. 419. The RCMA was never violated, and any 
such commitment is accordingly of no significance. 


5 Respondents also rely on statements in Bank Board documents 
and made by Bank Board officials in the course of negotiations. See, 
e.g., Winstar Br. 27 n.15, 30 n.18. At most, those statements 
demonstrate that the Bank Board anticipated that supervisory 
goodwill would be booked in connection with the transaction and 
that that was consistent with then-current Bank Board policy. 


6 


Winstar and Statesman both rely on the Accounting 
Principles clause in their Assistance Agreements. Winstar 
Br. 22-24, 28-29. For the reasons given in our opening 
brief (at 30-31), those provisions (J.A. 108-109, 458- 
459), which apply to “any computations made for pur- 
poses of this Agreement,” in fact support our argument. 
Winstar complains (Br. 29), however, that we have not 
“explain[ed] what ‘computations made for the purposes of 
this Agreement’ the clause could possibly be referring to 
if not regulatory capital computations.” The clause refers 
to computations that had to be made for purposes of 
provisions of Winstar’s Assistance Agreement that, for 
example, required FSLIC to make a cash contribution to 
Winstar based on its “aggregate negative Net Worth” (J.A. 
97), that requned FSLIC to indemnify Winstar for un- 
disclosed liabilities and claims (J.A. 100-101), and that 
limited FSLIC’s potential indemnity contributions with 
regard to subsidiary corporations to an amount determined 
by “[{Winstar’s] investment in [those] subsidiary corpora- 
tion{s]” (J.A. 102-103). See also, e.g., J.A. 362-368, 
368-373, 373-374, 380 (comparable Statesman provisions). 

2. In short, the government never made the promises 
regarding supervisory goodwill that respondents claim. 
Such promises could have been stated in simple language. 
For example, the parties could have provided that, “re- 
gardless of any changes that may be made in applicable 
federal statutes or regulations, [the thrift] may count 
supervisory goodwill created in this transaction as capital 
for purposes of satisfying federal capital requirements for 
the next [25, 35, or 40] years.” Or they could have pro- 
vided that, “for the purposes of satisfying federal capital 
requirements, the supervisory goodwill created in this 
transaction shail be credited to the [thrift’s] regulatory 
capital account and shall constitute regulatory capital, 
such capital to be recognized until amortized over [25, 
35, or 40] years.” See J.A. 362a; see U.S. Br. 34. That 
is not what the contracts in this case provided. Respond- 


7 


ents’ after-the-fact effort to revise their contracts to add 
promises that were never made should be rejected. 
Respondents argue that their contracts should be con- 
strued to contain the promise that they would continue 
to have the right to keep supervisory goodwill on their 
books, despite any statutory changes limiting the use of 
intangible assets, because the transactions as embodied 
in the documents would otherwise be “financially non- 
sensical in light of the value of the consideration that 
[FSLIC] received from [respondents].” Glendale Br. 
30;“ see also Winstar Br. 19. As we explain in our 


® Glendale suggests (Br. 32-34) that we conceded that the parties 
intended to make the contractual promise that goodwill could 
continue to be treated as an asset despite statutory changes. 
Glendale bases that alleged concession on what it claims was our 
failure to contest its Proposed Findings of Uncontroverted Fact in 
the Court of Federal Claims under Court of Federal Claims Rule 
56(d) (1). App., infra, 4a. That Rule was inapplicable in this case, 
however, and neither court below relied on it or otherwise suggested 
that we had made the alleged concession. Discovery in this case was 
stayed from an early date until at least the time the Court of 
Federal Claims issued its decision on reconsideration in Winstar 
(Pet. App. 153a-180a) on April 21, 1992. On that date and on 
May 6, 1992, the trial court requested further briefing from the 
parties regarding the effect of its Winstar rulings on Glendale’s 
case, but the trial court did not reopen discovery. Accordingly, we 
filed an affidavit (reprinted at App., infra, la-2a) pursuant to 
Court of Federal Claims Rule 56(g). See App., infra, 6a. That 
affidavit rendered Rule 56(d)(1) inapplicable. The affidavit stated 
that, insofar as the trial court was inclined not to grant our motion 
to dismiss and to grant summary judgment to Glendale, such “a 
ruling * * * would be premature, as [the government] has not had 
an opportunity to obtain discovery as to certain issues raised in 
plaintiff's motion for summary judgment.” App., infra, 2a. Our 
position was that, although we did not dispute that the key docu- 
ments (the SAA, the Bank Board Resolutions, and the Peat, 
Marwick letter) were each what they purported to be, any ruling 
that relied on other materials or affidavits to discern the intent of 
the parties would be premature, because we had not had sufficient 


opening brief (at 27 & nn.19-20), that is incorrect.’ 
At the time of Glendale’s transaction, no change in fed- 
eral policy permitting thrifts to count supervisory good- 
will as capital was imminent, and such a change was 
not in fact made until eight years later.“ Although. 
as respondents state, such a change immediately after an 
acquisition could subject a thrift to immediate danger of 
closure, it would also impose the costs of such closure 
on the Insurance Fund—precisely the outcome that all 
parties agree the Bank Board was trying to avoid. See 
Glendale Br. 3-4; Winstar Br. 3-5. Indeed, it was only 
Congress’s unprecedented decision to invest well over $100 


opportunity for discovery on those issues. The trial court appeared 
to accept our position, relying in the portions of its summary 
judgment ruling regarding Glendale (Pet. App. 114a-120a, 122a- 
125a) on no materials aside from the key contractual documents. 
Glendale cannot rely on a mistaken interpretation of a Court of 
Federal Claims Rule that neither that court nor the Federal] Circuit 
has accepted. 


7 Respondents assert that the government claims “that it is even 
entitled under the law to keep the multi-million dollar investments 
that it solicited from Statesman and Winstar and then seized along 
with the thrifts.” Winstar Br. 13. In fact, respondents’ invest- 
ments were not funds given to the government, but funds invested 
in the thrifts; when Statesman and Winstar were ultimately closed, 
the Insurance Fund had to make up a very substantial shortfall. In 
a similar vein, respondents allege that our claim is “that [the 
government] made no promises and assumed no risks in connection 
with [the] transactions.” Winstar Br. 20. The contracts with 
Winstar and Stat2sman, however, include numerous examples of 
government proriises—such as the indemnification provisions, see 
p. 6, supra—all f which were performed. Moreover, because the 
government remained responsible after the transaction, as before, 
for the insured deposits under the control of respondents at each 
of the thrifts involved, the government itself assumed significant 
risks in permitting the transactions to go forward. 


8 Federally insured thrifts always operate against a back- 
ground risk that the laws (or regulations) regarding financial 
soundness (or other regulatory matters) will be altered in a way 
that would threaten them with closure. See U.S. Br. 27 n.19. 


9 


billion to bail out the Insurance Fund that led to 
FIRREA’s 1989 alteration of federal policy.“ 

Prior to that time, respondents obtained very substan- 
tial benefits as the result of the transactiors in this case. 
Indeed, it was the profit-making potential of those trans- 
actions that led respondents to engage in them. For ex- 
ample, Glendale obtained the right to do business in Flor- 
ida, a lucrative new market where, at the time it filed this 
action, it had the “largest branch network of any thrift.” 
J.A. 561.“ It also acquired the assets of a large thrift 
institution and the substantial profit potential that those 
assets represented. In addition, Glendale obtained the 
going-concern value of the acquired thrift, a provision 
protecting it against rising interest rates, indemnification 
against unknown liabilities of the acquired thrift, and a 
variety of short-term cash advances. See U.S. Br. 43." 


Congress made more than $105 billion available to the Resolu- 
tion Trust Corporation, in four separate statutes. See GAO, Finan- 
cial Audit: Resolution Trust Corporation’s 1994 and 1993 Financial 
Statements 7 (1995). According to the most recent figures, only 
approximately $90.2 billion, however, was expected to be spent. 
See ibid. In addition to the RTC funds, the FLSIC Resolution 
Fund has an accumulated deficit of $43.7 billion. See FDIC, 1994 
Annual Report 95 (1995). 


1% In the Statesman and Winstar cases, the acquirers were new 
to the thrift industry. They obtained extremely valuable franchises 
to participate in the industry—franchises that were believed at the 
time to offer the key to high profits on a variety of types of loans, 
with most of the risk being borne by the deposit insurance fund. 
See National Commission on Financial Institutions Reform, Recov- 
ery and Enforcement, Origins and Causes of the S&L Debacle: 
A Blueprint for Reform, A Report to the President and Congress 
of the United States 45-47 (1993) [hereinafter Blueprint]. See 
Pub. L. No. 101-647, Tit. XXV. §§ 2551-2552, 2556, 104 Stat. 4889, 


4892 (statute requiring appointment and setting mission for 
commission) . 


The interest rate protection provision provided for payments 
from the government to Glendale if interest rates went up, and 


10 


Indeed, Glendale’s own assets increased from about $5 
billion at the time of the merger in 1981, see J.A. 550, 
to more than $25 billion at the time it filed suit in 1990, 
see J.A. 546. That increase alone suggests that Glen- 
dale’s participation in the transaction was a reasonable 
choice.” 

In addition, as commentators have explained, even if 
an acquiring thrift like Glendale showed a positive net 
worth on its books, such thrifts “were frequently insol- 
vent * * * on a market value basis.” William Black, 
Ending Our Forebearers’ Forbearances: FIRREA and 
Supervisory Goodwill, 2 Stan. L. & Pol’y Rev. 102, 104 
(1990).” In that situation, because the acquiring thrift's 
owners face no risk of further loss to themselves, the 
acquiring thrift 

has every incentive to take extreme risks, which prom- 
ise the possibility of very high yields. If the gamble 


payments from Glendale to the government if they went down. 
See J. A. 591-593. Glendale notes (Br. 9) that, because interest 
rates went down, this provision in fact resulted in a payment of 
$18.24 million from Glendale to the government. The provision 
nonetheless was inherently beneficial for Glendale. Although the 
government was to have begun its payments from the first dollar, 
the provision expressly excused Glendale from having to pay the 
first $20 million it would owe under this provision. J.A. 593. 


12 Similarly, Statesman’s net worth increased more than $6 
million between its March, 1988, transaction and July 5, 1990. 
Winstar Br. 6-7. (Due to a typographical error, our opening brief 
erroneously states in one place that the Statesman transaction took 
place in 1987. U.S. Br. 32. In fact, it took place in 1988, as our 
brief elsewhere correctly states. See U.S. Br. 6.) 


13 Although Glendale’s books indicated that it was solvent at 
the time of the transaction, the market value of its assets at the 
time of the transaction is a factual issue that has not been resolved 
in this case. During the 1980s, increasing numbers of thrifts that 
had appeared solvent turned out to have little or no capital when 
their assets were marked to market. See Blueprint 43-44, 52-54. 
Cf. J. A. 558-554 (32) (marking thrift assets to market produces 
dramatic decline in net worth). 


11 


pays off, the owners of the S&L or bank capture all 
the profit; if the gamble fails, the FSLIC or the FDIC 
pays for the loss. 


Ibid. Indeed, the general tendency of businesses with lit- 
tle of their own capital at stake to take risks is well- 
documented,“ and such high risk-taking was endemic in 
the thrift industry during the 1980s. 

Finally, there were further incentives for those in all 
of respondents’ positions to acquire thrifts. Of perhaps 
greatest importance was the way in which such trans- 
actions could increase the apparent income of the thrift. 
As the commission charged by statute with investigating 
the causes of the thrift debacle explained, thrifts involved 
in mergers or acquisitions were able to amortize the 
“goodwill” created by the acquisition slowly while taking 
accelerated paper profits based on the presumptive in- 
crease in the face value of mortgages as they approached 
the end of their expected lives.“ That enabled thrift 


See, e.g., Thomas H. Jackson, The Logic and Limits of Bank- 
ruptcy Law 205 (1986) (“When a firm is insolvent and has $100,000 
in debts and only $80,000 in assets, it is unlikely that it would be 
in the interests of the creditors to have that $80,000 placed on 
number 20 at a roulette wheel in Atlantic City, but it clearly would 
be in the interests of the shareholders to do so.“); Susan Rose- 
Ackerman, Risk Taking and Ruin: Bankruptcy and Investment 
Choice, 20 J. Legal Stud. 277, 296 (1991). 


1 The Commission explained: 


[The Bank Board] allowed and encouraged “goodwill mergers,” 
in which the assets of an acquired S&L were marked down to 
market, and the difference between its liabilities and the mar- 
ket value of its assets * * was designated as “goodwill[.|” 
[Once the goodwill was recognized, GAAP allowed the 
“discount” of the market value of acquired assets from their 
book value to be “accreted” as income over the remaining 
expected life of the assets under the assumption that the 
assets’ value would rise steadily to their book value. Because 
the “goodwill” fabricated from the acquisition was written 
off more slowly than acquired assets matured, the book in- 
come from “accretion of discount” exceeded the expense of 


12 


managers and owners to show large paper profits, per- 
mitting them to pay themselves high salaries and divi- 
dends. Blueprint 38. “Acquisitions of insolvent S&Ls 
were tempting to other S&Ls trying to stave off account- 
ing insolvency because acquirers could show fictitious 
income and continue to pay (indeed increase) dividends, 
high salaries, and so on.” Id. at 39. There were also 
substantial tax benefits connected with the transactions. 
See id. at 37-38. 

There are thus many reasons why entirely reasonable 
individuals would have taken the risks inherent in the 
transactions at issue in this case. At bottom, though, the 
terms of the contracts themselves are the best evidence of 
the bargains that reasonable parties in the position of re- 
spondents would have struck. See, e.g., Slater v. Emer- 
son, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 224, 238 (1857); Maryland v. 
Railroad Co., 89 U.S. (22 Wall.) 105, 111-112 (1874); 
cf. Sturges v. Crowninshield, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 122, 
202 (1819). Indeed, respondents’ own arguments that it 


depreciating goodwill. Consequently, the acquirer could lock 
in accounting profits over the life of the acquired assets. 
Blueprint 38-39. 


As another commentator has noted, although goodwill was typi- 
cally amortized over periods of 25 to 40 years, the thrifts’ assets 
were overwhelmingly composed of home mortgages. “Because of 
prepayments (typical when a home is sold) and refinancings, the 
estimated life of a new 30-year fixed-rate loan is approximately 
seven years.“ Black, supra, 2 Stan. L. & Pol’y Rev. at 105. “If the 
average expected remaining life of the [acquired institution's) 
loans is five years, the annual accretion of discount is 20 percent.” 
Ibid. Therefore, if goodwill and discount resulting from a merger 
are each $100 million, 


[ijn year one after the merger, 2.5 percent amortization of 
goodwill requires the S&L to recognize $2.5 million in expense. 
At a 20 percent annual rate for the accretion of discount, how- 
ever, the boost to income in year one is $20 million. The net 
effect is $17.5 million in added accounting profits. 

Ibid. “The larger the goodwill, i.e., the more the acquiring S&L 


overpaid for the failed S&L, the greater the reported profits.” 
Ibid. 


13 


would have been “madness” to enter into the contracts at 
issue, Glendale Br. 31, makes it incomprehensible why 
respondents’ able attorneys would have failed to demand 
that the promises they now claim to have been vital— 
promises that they would be permitted to count goodwill 
as capital for purposes of federal regulatory requirements, 
regardless of statutory or regulatory changes—be included 
in clear language in the contracts. 

3. Under the unmistakability doctrine, a government 
contract will be construed to include a promise that the 
government will exercise its sovereign regulatory author- 
ity in the future in a certain way only if that promise is 
given in unmistakable terms. See U.S. Br. 16-22.“ That 
does not mean, as respondents assert, that the contract 
must contain certain talismanic words, or that there must 
be both an initial promise that the government will exer- 
cise regulatory authority in the future in a specific way 
and a “second promise that Congress would not enact 
‘new regulatory legislation.“ Glendale Br. 26; see Win- 
star Br. 31-35. As noted above, there are various ways 
to phrase an unmistakable promise that a thrift may 
continue to count goodwill created in the transaction as 
capital, despite future changes in regulatory law or policy. 

Respondents allege that the unmistakability doctrine is 
inapplicable in this case because the contracts at issue 
here involved “commercial transactions in which both 


6 Winstar and Statesman appear to defend (Winstar Br. 36-38) 
the Federal Circuit’s conclusion that the unmistakability doctrine 
does not apply to actions seeking monetary damages for breach of 
contract. We respond to that argument in our opening brief (at 
20-22). Glendale no longer defends the Federal Circuit's conclu- 
sion on that point, and now relies instead on the claim that the 
contract in this case is a “financial” contract. See Glendale Br. 18 
(“Glendale’s point is not that the unmistakability principle has no 
application to any claim for breach-of-contract damages. Rather, 
the principle does not apply to a damages claim for the govern- 
ment’s breach of a contract entered into for its own financial 
benefit.) See pp. 13-14, infra. 


14 


parties were motivated by their own economic interests.” 
Winstar Br. 39; see also Glendale Br. 18 (unmistakability 
principle “does not apply to a damages claim for the gov- 
ernment’s breach of a contract entered into for its own 
financial benefit”). That claim is incorrect. Application 
of the unmistakability doctrine has nothing to do with 
whether the contract at issue provides an economic bene- 
fit to the government. 

As we explain in our opening brief (at 20 n.9), the 
unmistakability doctrine applies where the performance 
of the alleged promise by the government requires it to 
exercise—or not to exercise—uniquely governmental reg- 
ulatory authority in a certain way in the future. Where, 
on the other hand, the performance required of the gov- 
ernment is precisely the kind of performance that private 
parties typically render—such as the payment of a sum 
of money, see, e. g., Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571 
(1934), or the delivery of a telegram, see, e.g., Heil v. 
United States, 273 F. 729 (S.D.N.Y. 1921) (Hand, J.) 
—the doctrine has no application. 

The regulatory authority relevant to this case was the 
authority of Congress and the Bank Board to set mini- 
mum capital requirements for federally insured thrifts and 
to regulate the types of assets that may count toward 
meeting those requirements. See 12 U.S.C. 1464(a), (b) 
and (s), 1725(a), 1726(b), 1730(t) (1988) (repealed). 
As respondents recognize, they claim “promises to accord 
specified regulatory treatment to respondents’ supervisory 
goodwill * * *, promises that obviously could not have 
been made by a private party.” Winstar Br. 47. That 
regulatory authority is not comparable to any authority 
that an ordinary commercial entity could unilaterally exer- 
cise in an ordinary commercial setting. Regulation of 
thrift industry capital levels, like other aspects of bank 
regulation, is a regulatory function that is essential to pre- 
serve the health and safety of the industry and, ultimately, 
to avoid severe damage to the national economy. See gen- 


15 


erally FDIC v. Philadelphia Gear Corp., 476 U.S. 426, 
432-433 (1986); United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 
374 U.S. 321, 327-328, 329-330 (1963); see also United 
States v. Gaubert, 499 U.S. 315, 332 (1991). It is exactly 
the sort of federal regulatory authority protected by the 
unmistakability doctrine. 

The contractual promises that respondents allege would 
have committed federal officials and Congress to exercise 
federal regulatory authority in a particular way—i.e., to 
permit respondents to continue to count supervisory good- 
will toward satisfying federal capital requirements for 
periods of 25 to 40 years in the future. The contracts 
therefore may not be construed to surrender that regula- 
tory authority “unless such surrender has been expressed 
in terms too plain to be mistaken.” Jefferson Branch 
Bank v. Skelly, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 436, 446 (1862). 
See also Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to Social 
Security Entrapment (POSSE), 477 US. 41, 52-53 
(1986) (referring to “often-repeated admonitions that 
contracts should be construed, if possible, to avoid fore- 
closing exercise of sovereign authority”); U.S. Br. 16-18 
(citing cases). 

The unmistakability doctrine does not preclude the gov- 
ernment from committing itself to future exercises of 
sovereign regulatory authority (assuming such authority 
is the sort that may be the subject of a contract in the first 
place, see U.S. Br. 36-43). But what respondents them- 
selves (Winstar Br. 32) term “venerable and sensible 
rule of construction” does require that such commitments 
will not be recognized unless they are unmistakable. See 
U.S. Br. 16-20. Respondents were represented by coun- 
sel, who could have been expected to know that commit- 
ments regarding future exercise of federal regulatory au- 
thority cannot be the product of indirection or ambiguity. 

4. Because the contracts in this case did not contain 
the promises that respondents claim—and because, under 
the unmistakability doctrine, they may not be construed 


16 


to contain those promises—this Court need not reach 
the question whether the thrift regulators had the au- 
thority contractually to commit the government not to 
exercise regulatory authority over respondents for periods 
of 25 to 40 years. If that issue is reached, however, the 
Court should conclude that the thrift regulators had no 
authority to enter into such contracts. See U.S. Br. 36-43. 

a. Glendale argues extensively (Br. 37-39) that the 
“reserved powers” doctrine, which precludes state gov- 
ernments from entering into binding contracts regarding 
essential attributes of sovereignty, would not apply to the 
type of government contractual commitment allegedly 
made here. The cases that Glendale cites (Br. 37-38) 
concern contracts for sales of land by a government 
entity and contracts concerning the regulation of utility 
rates, rates of corporate taxation, and the method of 
payment of debts owed by the government. See, e. g., 
Wood v. Lovett, 313 U.S. 362, 372 (1941) (sale of 
land); Appleby v. City of New York, 271 U.S. 364, 380 
(1926) (same); St. Cloud Pub. Serv. Co. v. City of St. 
Cloud, 265 U.S. 352, 355 (1924) (utility rates); Russell 
v. Sebastian, 233 U.S. 195 (1914) (same); American 
Smelting & Ref. Co. v. Colorado ex rel. Lindsley, 204 
U.S. 103, 113 (1907) (corporation franchise tax); Lynch 
v. United States, 292 U.S. 571 (1934) (payment of debts 
in gold). 

We agree that the cases cited by Glendale do not in- 
volve the exercise of “reserved powers” that are never 
subject to contractual restriction. Indeed, the cases we 
ourselves rely upon have made clear that the govern- 
ment may—if it does so in unmistakable terms—make 
enforceable contractual commitments regarding allowable 
utility rates, see Home Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of Los 
Angeles, 211 U.S. 265, 273 (1908), or rates of taxation, 
see Jefferson Branch Bank v. Skelly, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 
at 450. Our argument is that Congress should not be 
deemed to have granted the authority to agency officials 


17 


to make such regulatory commitments absent an express 
and completely clear grant of authority to do so. As we 
note in our opening brief (at 39-40), this Court’s decision 


ernment, both its existence and the authority to make it 
must clearly and unmistakably appear, and all doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the continuance of the 
power.” 211 U.S. at 273 (emphasis added). See also, 
e.g., St. Cloud Public Serv. Co. v. City of St. Cloud, 265 


U.S. at 356; City of Paducah v. Paducah Ry., 261 U.S. 
267, 272 (1923). 


This does not mean, as Glendale contends (Br. 41), 
that “a party seeking to obtain a binding federal contract 
must obtain special and unprecedented legislation from 
Congress.“ Where the contract does not involve com- 
mitments regarding future government regulatory policy. 
the Home Tel. & Tel. rule has no application. Moreover, 
even where sovereign regulatory authority is involved. 


* Glendale relies (Br. 38) on New Orleans Gas Co. v. Louisiana 
Light Co., 115 U.S. 650 (1885). There was no question of gov- 
ernmental authority or clarity of contractual commitment in that 
case. Yet this Court nonetheless made clear that the contractual 
grant of an exclusive franchise to a utility company was “not, in 
any legal sense, to the prejudice of the public health or the pub- 
lic safety” because the firm’s activities that “prove[] to be in- 
jurious to the public health, the public comfort, or the public 
safety, may notwithstanding the exclusive grant to plaintiff, be 
prohibited by legislation, or by municipal ordinance passed under 
legislative authority.” Id. at 671, 672. See also id. at 672 (State is 
not obstruct [ed] in the exercise of her power to provide for the 
public protection, health, and safety”). Under the logic of re- 
spondents’ theory, however, FSLIC would have had authority to 
exempt particular thrifts from capital requirements altogether 
for decades—or permanently. A contract committing the govern- 
ment to permit certain thrifts to operate in an unsafe manner 
would surely obstruct the government’s “power to provide for the 
public protection, health, and safety.” 


18 


what is necessary (assuming the authority is of the sort 
that can be the subject of contract) is clear authorization 
from Congress for the federal agency to commit the gov- 
ernment to a particular regulatory policy for the future. 
As Glendale contends (Br. 40), such grants of authority 
are rare. Federal agencies generally are not expected to 
conduct regulatory policy through contractual means.“ 

Glendale attempts (Br. 42-43) to distinguish Home 
Tel. & Tel. on the ground that federal officials have in- 
herent general authority to enter into contracts. Even if 
correct,” that contention is of no assistance to respond- 
ents. Because the thrift regulators had general statutory 
authority tjo make contracts,” 12 U.S.C. 1725(c)(3) 
(1988) (repealed),” the additional existence of inherent 


18 The only example of such a contract that respondents suggest 
(Glendale Br. 41) is the life insurance contract at issue in Lynch 
v. United States, supra. That contract did not commit the govern- 
ment to exercise its regulatory authority in any particular way 
in the future, and its execution therefore did not require an ex- 
ceptionally clear grant of authority. Moreover, as we point 
out in our opening brief (at 42), the agency involved had specific 
authority from Congress to enter into the precise kind of yearly 
renewable term insurance contracts that it did. In addition, the 
key terms, providing for the amount of the premium nd the 
government payment in the event of death or disability, were 
precisely spelled out in the statute. See Act of Oct. 6, 1917, 
ch. 105, Art. IV, 40 Stat. 409-410. 


1 But see 41 U.S.C. 1l(a) (“No contract * * on behalf of 
the United States shall be made, unless the same is authorized by 
law or is under an appropriation adequate to its fulfilment.”); 31 
U.S.C. 1341 (a) (1) (B). 


% In addition to the general authority to make contracts, Glen- 
dale relies as well (Br. 40) on the former thrift regulators’ au- 
thority “to guarantee” acquiring institutions “against loss by 
reason of [their] merging or consolidating” with “an insured 
institution which is in default * * * [or] in danger of default.” 12 
U.S.C. 1729(f) (2) (1988) (repealed). The contractual commit- 
ments respondents allege, however, did not—and did not purport 
to- guarantee respondents “against loss“ because of the mergers; 


19 


authority to do the same thing is of no significance. The 
Home Tel. & Tel. rule is based on the harm that may be 
caused when regulatory officials enter contracts that com- 
mit the legislature to certain regulatory policies that, in 
the public interest, the legislature may seek to change in 
the future. In those circumstances, a specific delegation 
of legislative authority to enter into such contracts is 
required. 

Glendale also attempts (Br. 43) to distinguish Home 
Tel. & Tel. on the ground that the City of Los Angeles, 
whose contract was at issue there, “had no authority at 
all to enter into the contract.” The City of Los Angeles 
did, however, have very substantial general authority, 
such as the authority “[t]o exercise all municipal powers 
necessary to the complete and efficient management and 
control of the municipal property, and for the efficient 
administration of the municipal government, whether such 
powers be expressly enumerated [in the City’s charter] 
or not, except such powers as are forbidden or are con- 
trolled by general law.” See 211 U.S. at 275 n.1. More- 
over, the city charter specifically referred to the proce- 
dural requirements for the City to “mak[e] any contract.” 
Ibid. That would clearly have been sufficient to authorize 
the City to enter procurement contracts—for example, to 
contract with the phone company for telephone service 
to be provided to City offices. But contracts committing 
the City to certain substantive rate regulation policies 
were another matter. The Court pointedly noted that it 
could “find no * * * provision in the charter which by 
any possibility can be held to authorize a contract upon 
this important and vital subject,” id. at 274 (emphasis 
added), and that what must “clearly and unmistakably 
appear” is “that the city had legislative authority to make 
a contract of exemption from the exercise of the power 
of regulation,” id. at 277-278 (emphasis added). 


they would simply have committed the government to continue to 
permit respondents to count supervisory goodwill as capital. 


20 


As Glendale contends (Br. 43), the Court in Home Tel. 
& Tel. reaffirmed prior precedents holding that contracts 
regarding rate regulation were binding on the municipali- 
ties that entered into them. Referring to those cases, the 
Court explained that “[t]he decisions of this court * * * 
where a contract of this kind was found and enforced, 
all show unmistakably legislative authority to enter into 
the contract.” 211 U.S. at 276 (emphasis added). Each 
of those cases thus involved, not the general authority “to 
enter into contracts,” but very specific grants of authority 
to enter into precisely the contracts at issue.*’ Those 
cases illustrate that specific authority from the legislature 
is needed before city (or agency) officials commit the 
legislature by contract to follow certain regulatory poli- 
cies. No such specific authority was present here. 

5. We argue in our opening brief (at 43-46) that the 
“sovereign acts” doctrine derived from this Court’s deci- 
sion in Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 458, 461 
(1925), precludes respondents’ claim for breach-of- 
contract damages, because the alleged “breach” occurred 
as a result of Congress’s “public and general” decision to 
restrict or preclude all thrifts from counting intangible 


The Court described the two cases cited by Glendale (Br. 
43)—City of Cleveland v. Cleveland City Ry. Co., 194 U.S. 517 
(1907), and Vicksburg v. Vicksburg Waterworks Co., 206 U.S. 
496 (1907)—as, respectively, involving “comprehensive power to 
contract with street railway companies in respect to the terms and 
conditions upon which such roads might be constructed, operated, 
extended and consolidated” and “unrestricted [authority] * * * to 
provide for the erection and maintenance of a system of water- 
works to supply said city with water, and to that end to con- 
tract with a party or parties who shall build and operate water- 
works.” 211 U.S. at 277. See also id. at 276 (discussing other 
cases in which authority to enter into regulatory contracts was 
found, and which involved, respectively, a “contract [that] was 
in specific terms ratified and confirmed by the legislature” and a 
contract made “in obedience to an act of the legislature that the 
rates should be ‘established by agreement between said company 
and the corporate authorities?) 


21 


assets as capital for purposes of satisfying federal capital 
requirements. 

a. Respondents assert (Winstar Br. 45) that “[t]he 
operating premise of the sovereign acts doctrine is that, 
where the federal government is acting in distinct capaci- 
ties as sovereign and as a contractor, in its role as a 
contractor it is entitled to be treated as if it were a 
private contracting party—no better, no worse.” They 
then state (Br. 46) that, “when a contracting party— 
whether a private party or a government agency—in ef- 
fect assumes the risk that a change in the law will not 
occur, and that change does occur so as to impair con- 
tract performance, the party that assumed that risk will 
be liable in damages.” 

We have no quarrel with those statements of the law 
regarding the sovereign acts doctrine. See U.S. Br. 43 
(“The sovereign acts doctrine is based on a principle of 
equality between the government and private contrac- 
tors.”). If the contracts at issue here had included pro- 
visions in which the government assumed the risk of a 
change in the governing statutes, the sovereign acts doc- 
trine would not preclude a breach-of-contract remedy when 
those statutes were amended to render performance im- 
possible. See, e.g., Amino Brothers Co. v. United States, 
372 F.2d 485, 491 (Ct. Cl.) (“The Government cannot 
make a binding contract that it will not exercise a sov- 
erign power, but it can agree in a contract that if it 
does so, it will pay the other contracting party the 
amount by which its costs are increased by the Govern- 
ment’s sovereign act.”), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846 
(1967). As the original court of appeals panel in this 
case noted, however, “[a] private party does not neces- 
sarily promise that Congress will act only for the benefit 
of his promisee’s interests under the contract.” Pet. App. 
75a. Under the principle of equality upon which the 
sovereign acts doctrine rests, the same is true when a 
federal agency acts in its role as contracting party: the 


22 


agency as contractor does not automatically assume the 
risk that Congress will change the law. 

We do disagree with respondents’ contention (Winstar 
Br. 47) that, in the contracts at issue in this case, the 
government agreed to “assume [the] risk that future reg- 
ulatory changes would not interfere with the promised 
regulatory treatment of supervisory goodwill and capital 
credits.” There is no provision in respondents’ contracts 
in which the thrift regulators assumed the risk of a sub- 
sequent statutory change like FIRREA. See U.S. Br. 28 
(“no unlawful action” clause shifted risk of legal change 
to respondents). If respondents’ theory that the FSLIC 
contracts implicitly assumed the risk of a subsequent 
sovereign act of another agency were correct, it would 
swallow up the sovereign acts doctrine entirely. Under 
respondents’ theory, for example, the contract in Horowitz 
for delivery of silk that one executive agency signed would 
implicitly assume the risk that in fact occurred—that 
another agency would impose a railroad embargo making 
the government’s performance impossible. In this case, 
moreover, the contracting agency—the FSLIC—was in a 
different branch of the government from Congress, whose 
passage of FIRREA made performance impossible. See 
Atlas Corp. v. United States, 895 F.2d 745, 754 (Fed. 
Cir.) (holding sovereign acts doctrine applicable where in- 
creased cost of contract was the result of statute, despite 
fact that agency had agreed to adjust price in the event 
of “unilateral modification [of specifications] by govern- 
ment”), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 811 (1990). None of 
the Claims Court or Federal Circuit cases cited by re- 
spondents, see Winstar Br. 44-45; Glendale Br. 50, in- 
volved a similar situation. 

b. Respondents argue (Glendale Br. 44-46; Winstar 
Br. 46) that the sovereign acts doctrine is inconsistent 
with this Court’s decisions in Lynch and Perry v. United 
States, 294 U.S. 330 (1935). As the Court noted in 
POSSE, however, those cases “held that Congress does not 
have the power to repudiate its own debts, which constitute 


23 


‘property’ to the lender, simply in order to save money.” 
477 U.S. at 55. They do not support respondents’ 
argument. 

In Lynch, the government’s repudiation of its war risk 
insurance contracts was not part of any general program 
of regulation of the insurance industry, and the only 
individuals affected by the repudiation were those who 
had contracts with the government. Thus, unlike in Hor- 
owitz, the government program was not “public and 
general,” and the sovereign acts doctrine could have no 
application. Indeed, the Court in Lynch carefully noted 
that the insurance policies could not be annulled “unless, 
indeed, the action taken falls within the federal police 
power or some other paramount power,” 292 U.S. at 579, 
thereby implicitly distinguishing between mere repudiation 
of a money debt (as in Lynch) and public and general 
sovereign acts undertaken for the public welfare (as in 
Horowitz and this case). 

With respect to Perry, respondents rely (Glendale Br. 
44; Winstar Br. 46) on the fact that Congress’s decision 
to repudiate the commitments in certain government bonds 
that they would be repaid in gold was made at the same 
time as a broader determination that private debts of all 
kinds may not be paid in gold. Respondents argue from 
that fact that the attempt unilaterally to alter the terms 
of the public debt in Perry was part of a “public and gen- 
eral” act. However, the regulatory purposes underlying 
the regulation of private debts—primarily, the need to 
control the value of money in the economy and set it at 
a rate higher than would have been permitted by tying 
it to the value of then-scarce gold, see Norman v. Balti- 
more & O.R.R., 294 U.S. 240, 312-313, 315-316 (1935) 
—could be accomplished without applying the same mea- 
sure to alter the terms of existing government debt. 
Indeed, the purpose of promising repayment of govern- 
ment bonds in gold initially was “to assure one who lent 
his money to the Government and took its bond that he 
would not suffer loss through depreciation in the medium 


24 


of payment.” Perry, 294 U.S. at 348-349.” To repudiate 
that promise was “simply in order to save money,” POSSE. 
477 U.S. at 55—an end that has never been recognized 
as “public and general” under the sovereign acts doctrine.” 
c. Finally, Glendale argues (Br. 47) that to apply the 
sovereign acts doctrine in this case would be “to give 
[FIRREA] a retroactive effect.“ That contention is in- 
correct. FIRREA did not impose legal consequences on 
respondents based on the fact that, at some point in the 
past, they had counted supervisory goodwill as capital. 
FIRREA required thrifts to be adequately capitalized in 
the future. That is the ordinary, prospective operation 
of a statute, and it raises no retroactivity issues at all. 
Moreover, if Glendale’s argument were correct, then 
any recognition of a statute as a “public and general” 
act that may excuse a breach of contract would be con- 
trary to retroactivity principles, since any such recog- 
nition would “retroactively” eliminate a cause of action 
for breach of contract.“ In the 130-year history of the 


22 The Court in Perry also emphasized that the government 
bonds in that case were issued under the express constitutional 
authority “[t]o borrow Money on the credit of the United States,“ 
Art. I, § 8, Cl. 2, and supported by the declaration in Section 4 
of the Fourteenth Amendment that “[t]he validity of the public 
debt of the United States, authorized by law, * * shall not be 
questioned.” See 294 U.S. at 353-354. In light of those provisions, 
the Court held that the statute, “in so far as it attempted to over- 
ride the obligation created by the bond in suit, went beyond the 
congressional power.“ Id. at 354. In this case, there is no doubt 
that Congress had the authority to alter government policy re- 
garding capital requirements for thrifts. 


2 It should also be noted that the Court determined that the 
plaintiff in Perry had “fail[ed] to show a cause of action for 
actual damages,” see 294 U.S. at 358, in light of Congress’s valid 
action in forbidding the use of gold as legal tender, see generally 
id. at 357-358. 


24 Glendale relies (Br. 45 n.33) on the principle that “a private 
party cannot claim impossibility based on a supervening law or 


25 


sovereign acts doctrine, since the Court of Claims first 
recognized that a statute could be a sovereign act for 
purposes of the doctrine, see Deming v. United States, 
1 Ct. Cl. 190, 191 (1865), appeal dismissed, 76 U.S. 
(9 Wall.) 145 (1870), no court has ever held that stat- 
utes may not constitute “public and general” acts that 
can trigger the doctrine. 


* * * * * 


For the foregoing reasons, and for the reasons set 


forth in our opening brief, the judgment of the court 
of appeals should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


APRIL 1996 


decree when its ‘own actions created the condition of impossibility.’ ”’ 
However, all applications of the sovereign acts doctrine involve 
cases in which the government—by enacting a statute or taking 
some other sovereign act—has “created the condition of impossibil- 
ity” for its own performance. As this Court stated in Horowitz, 
the rationale of the doctrine is precisely that, in such a case, 
“(t]he two characters which the government possesses as a con- 
tractor and as a sovereign cannot be thus fused,” 267 U.S. at 461, 
so long as the sovereign act that has created the impossibility is 
a “public and general“ one. 


APPENDIX A 
IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


Action No. 90-772 C 
(Chief Judge Loren Smith) 


GLENDALE FEDERAL BANK, FSB, PLAINTIFF 


V. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DEFENDANT 


DECLARATION OF PATRICIA LEITNER PURSU- 
ANT TO CL. CT. R. 56(G) IN OPPOSITION TO 
PLAINTIFF GLENDALE’S MOTION FOR SUM- 
MARY JUDGMENT AS TO LIABILITY 


I, Patricia Leitner, make the following declaration: 


1. I am an attorney employed by the Department of 
Justice and am counsel of record for the United States 


in the above-captioned case. I am familiar with the facts 
and circumstances of this action, and make this declara- 
tion pursuant to Rule 56(g) of the Rules of the United 
States Claims Court in opposition to plaintiffs’ motion 
for summary judgment. 

2. The United States has argued in Defendant’s Mo- 
tion to Dismiss that the United States is entitled to dis- 
missal of plaintiff's claims, and in its Response to Plaintiff's 
Status Report and Opposition to Plaintiff Glendale’s Mo- 
tion for Summary Judgment as to Liability, the United 
States has argued that summary judgment should not be 
entered in plaintiff's favor. The issues presented may be 
resolved without resolution of factual issues. For this 


(la) 


2a 


reason, defendant's view has been that discovery is un- 
necessary and inappropriate in this action. If thi 

determines, however, based upon all of the pleadings 
and papers presently before it, that no material issues 
of fact exist at this time, and that, on the current record, 
plaintiff is entitled to summary judgment as to any claim 


issues raised in plaintiff's motion for summary judgment. 

3. Plaintiff alleges, relying upon documents outside 
its alleged contracts with the FSLIC, that the alleged 
contracts include provisions that do not appear on their 


appear on the face of those contracts. 

4. Defendant has argued that plaintiff has no such 
contractual rights and that, in any event, plaintiff has 
no contractual right that can bind the government from 
taking any action required by law. Should the Court 
deem plaintiff's claim cognizable, however, defendant will 
need discovery to obtain facts to determine what plain- 
tiff understood it had been promised, the basis for this 
understanding, and what reliance plaintiff placed on any 
alleged promises it received. 

I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing 
is true and correct. 


Executed on: June 15, 1992 


s Patricia Leitner 
PATRICIA LEITNER 


3a 
APPENDIX B 


Rule 56 of the Court of Federal Claims Rules provides 
as follows: 


Rule 56. Summary Judgment 
(a) For claimant 


A party seeking to recover upon a claim or counter- 
claim, or to obtain a declaratory judgment may, at any 
time after the expiration of 60 days from the commence- 
ment of the action in this court or after service of a 
motion for summary judgment by the adverse party, 
move with or without supporting affidavits for a summary 


judgment in such party’s favor upon all or any part 
thereof. 


(b) For defending party 

A party against whom a claim or counterclaim is as- 
serted or a declaratory judgment it sought may, at any 
time, move with or without supporting affidavits for a 
summary judgment in such party’s favor as to all or 
any part thereof. 


(c) Motion and proceedings thereon 


The judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if 
the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and 
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, 
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material 
fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment 
as a matter of law. A summary judgment, interlocutory 
in character, may be rendered on the issue of liability 
alone although there is a genuine issue as to the amount 
of damages. 


4a 
(d) Procedures 


The following procedures shall be followed with respect 
to motions for summary judgment other than in actions 
seeking review of a decision on the basis of an adminis- 
trative record: 


(1) The moving or cross-moving party shall file, 
together with its motion, a separate document en- 
titled Proposed Findings of Uncontroverted Fact. 
This document shall contain concise, separately num- 
bered paragraphs setting forth all of the material 
facts upon which the party bases its motion and as to 
which the party believes there is no genuine dispute. 
Each paragraph shall contain citations to the oppos- 
ing party's pleadings or to documentary evidence, 
such as affidavits or exhibits, filed with the motion 
or otherwise part of the record in the case. 

(2) The opposin, arty shall file, together with its 
opposition or cross-motion, a separate document 
entitled Statement of Genuine Issues. This document 
shall respond by reference to specific paragraph num- 
bers to those proposed findings of uncontroverted 
fact as to which it claims there is a genuine dispute. 
The party shall state the precise nature of its disagree- 
ment and give its version of the events, supported 
by record citations. The opposing party may also file 
proposed findings of uncontroverted fact as to any 
relevant matters not covered by the moving party's 
statement. 

(3) The parties may dispense with the documents 
called for in subdivision (d)(1)-(2) of this rule if 
they file, no later than the time of the initial motion, 
a comprehensive stipulation of all of the material 
facts upon which they intend to rely. 


In determining any motion for summary judgment, 
the court will, absent persuasive reason to the contrary, 
deem the material facts claimed and adequately supported 


interrogatories, further affidavits. 
When a motion for summary judgment is made and sup- 
ported as provided in this rule, an adverse party may 
not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of such 
partys pleading, but such party’s response, by affidavits 


6a 


or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific 
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. If 


such party does not so respond, summary judgment, if 
appropriate, shall be entered against such party. 


(g) When affidavits are unavailable 


Should it appear from the affidavits of a party opposing 
the motion that such party cannot for reasons stated pre- 
sent by affidavit facts essential to justify such party’s 
opposition, the court may refuse the application for judg- 
ment or may order a continuance to permit affidavits to 
be obtained or depositions to be taken or discovery to be 
had or may make such other order as is just. 


(h) Affidavits made in bad faith 


Should it appear to the satisfaction of the court at any 
time that any of the affidavits presented pursuant to this 
rule are presented in bad faith or solely for the purpose of 
delay, the court shall forthwith order the party employing 
them to pay to the other party the amount of the reason- 
able expenses which the filing of the affidavits caused the 
other party to incur, including reasonable attorney’s fees, 
and any offending party or attorney may be adjudged 
guilty of contempt. 


r ©. „ Govendudet riimtine ofricd, 1996 408017 40114 


