Supreme Court, U. 8. 
FIL é&pD 


95+ 865 DEC 1 1995 


No — Ur AE 
In the 


upreme Court of the Binited Sota States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
U. 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, EBT Al 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


APPENDIX TO 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


DREW . Dave, 11 


rau W. muna ER 


Assistant Attorney General 
PAUL BENDER 

Deputy Solicitor General 
JAMES A, FELDMAN 


Assistant to the Solicitor 


DOUGLAS LETTER 
Jacon M Lewis 


Scorr R. Mc INTOSH 
Attorneys 


Department of Justice 
. BC. 


20830 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Appendix A (Opinion of court of appeals (August 30, 

1995)) la 
Appendix B (Opinion of court of appeals on rehearing 

(August 18, 1998)) ccccccccccccccccccceeeeerereeeeeeeereeeeeeeereees 53a 
Appendix C (Opinion of United States C laims Court 

(Daly 84, 10BB)) . ..... e. . ...es“ 106a 
Appendix D (Opinion of United States Claims Court 

(April 21, 199% . . sssvssessusesseeeseeeteeeteeteetsvi, e 15g 
Appendix (Order of U nited States Claims Court 

(February 21, 1992)) . 122 1813 
Appendix F (Order of United States Claims Court 

(Daly BT, 100) . . ...... . · · . . eee,“ 183a 
Appendix G (Statutory provision and regulations) .. 196a 


(1) 


— —— — ———— 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


No. 92-5164 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS 
BANK, STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING Corp., THE 
STATESMAN GROUP, INC. AND AMERICAN LIFE AND 

CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY, 
AND 


GLENDALE FEDERAL BANK, FSB, PLAINTIFFS- 
APPELLEES 


V. 


THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT-APPELLANT 


Aucust 30, 1995 


OPINION 


BEFORE: ARCHER, Chief Judge, and Rich, NIEs, 
NEWMAN, MAYER, MICHEL, PLAGER, 
LOURIE, CLEVENGER, RADER, and 
SCHALL, Circuit Judges. 
Opinion for the court filed by Chief Judge ARCHER, 


in which Circuit Judges RicH, NEWMAN, MAYER, 


* Chief Judge Archer assumed the position of Chief Judge 


on March 18, 1994. 


** Circuit Judge Bryson joined the Federal Circuit on 


October 7, 1994, and has not participated in the disposition of 
this appeal. 


(la) 


2a 


MICHEL, PLAGER, CLEVENGER, RADER, and SCHALL 
join. Dissenting opinions filed by Circuit Judges 
NIES, and LOURIE. 


ARCHER, Chief Judge. 


The United States appeals the decisions’ of the 
United States Court of Federal Claims’ granting 
plaintiffs Winstar Corporation and United Federal 
Savings Bank, No. 90-8C, plaintiffs Statesman 
Savings Holding Corporation, the Statesman Group 
Incorporated and American Life and Casualty 
Company, No. 90-773C, and plaintiff Glendale Federal 
Bank, No. 90-772C, summary judgment on the liability 
portion of their breach of contract claims against the 
United States. The cases were consolidated for 
purposes of this interlocutory appeal. We affirm. 


I 


In its Winstar decisions, the Court of Federal 
Claims found that an implied-in-fact contract existed 
between the government and Winstar and that the 
government breached this contract when Congress 
enacted the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, 
and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA), Pub.L. No. 


! Winstar Corp. v. United States, 21 Cl. Ct. 112 (1990) (find- 
ing an implied-in-fact contract but requesting further briefing 
on contract issues) (Winstar J); 25 Cl Ct. 541 (1992) (finding 
contract breached and entering summary judgment on 
liability) (Winstar II) Statesman Savings Holding Corp. v. 
United States, 26 Cl. Ct. 904 (1992) (granting summary judg- 
ment on liability to Statesman and Glendale). 

2 The Federal Courts Administration Act of 1992, Pub.L. 
No. 102-572, § 902(a), 106 Stat. 4506, 4516, changed the name of 
the former United States Claims Court to the “United States 
Court of Federal Claims.” Except where the context requires 
otherwise, we refer to the trial court by its new name. 


3a 


101-73, 103 Stat. 183 (codified in relevant part at 12 
U.S.C. § 1464). Similarly, in the Statesman decision 
the Court of Federal Claims found that plaintiffs 
Statesman Savings Holding Corporation, the States- 
man Group Incorporated and the American Life and 
Casualty Insurance Company (together “Statesman”) 
and plaintiff Glendale Federal Bank (“Glendale”) had 
express contracts with the government and citing its 
Winstar decision, found that these contracts were 
breached by the enactment of FIRREA. 


The Court of Federal Claims certified its decisions 
in these three related cases for interlocutory appeal 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b) after determining that 
the decisions involved controlling questions of law 
as to which there is substantial ground for difference 
of opinion and that an immediate appeal may materi- 
ally advance the termination of these and other 
related cases. We granted the appeal. 979 F.2d 216 
(Fed.Cir.1992). After an initial split panel decision of 
this Court reversed the Court of Federal Claims, 994 
F.2d 797 (Fed.Cir.1993), we vacated the panel opinion 
and agreed with the plaintiffs’ suggestion to consider 
these cases in banc. 


II 


A. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, 40 
percent of the nation’s $20 billion in home mortgages 
went into default, 1700 of the approximately 12,000 
thrift institutions failed, and depositors in these 
thrifts lost $200 million. H.R. Rep. No. 54(1), 101st 
Cong., ist Sess. 292 (1989), reprinted in 1989 
U.S.C.C.A.N. 86, 88-89 (House Report). Congress took 
several measures in response. First, Congress 
created the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (Bank 
Board) to channel funds to thrifts in order to prevent 


da 


foreclosures and to allow thrifts to make loans on 
residences. House Report at 292, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
at 88; see Federal Home Loan Bank Act, Pub.L. No. 
72-304, 47 Stat. 725 (1932) (codified as amended at 12 
U.S.C. §§ 1421-1449 (1988)). Next, Congress added the 
Home Owners’ Loan Act, which authorized the Bank 
Board to charter and regulate federal savings and 
loan associations. Pub.L. No. 73-43, 48 Stat. 128 (1933) 
(codified as amended at 12 U.S.C. §§ 1461-1468 (1988)). 
Then, to further restore public confidence in thrift 
institutians, Congress in the National Housing Act of 
1934 provided federal deposit insurance for depositors. 
Pub.L. No. 73-479, 48 Stat. 1246 (1934) (codified as 
amended at 12 U.S.C. §§ 1701-1750g (1988)). This act 
also established the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), an agency under the 
Bank Board’s authority that regulated all federally 
insured thrifts. 


Among the regulatory requirements promulgated 
and enforced by the agencies were capital require- 
ments, which were minimum reserves of capital that a 
thrift had to maintain. Failure to comply with mini- 
mum regulatory capital requirements had severe 
repercussions for a thrift. The agencies had a variety 
of measures that could be taken against noncomplying 
thrifts. In the most serious cases, the government 
could seize the thrift and place it into receivership 
where it might later be sold or liquidated. This 
drastic remedy was rarely necessary, however, be- 
cause of the relative heaith of the thrift industry 
until the thrift crisis of the late 1970s and early 
1980s. 5 


In the late 1970s and early 1980s high interest rates 
resulted in sharply higher costs of funds for thrifts. 


5a 


The thrifts’ main assets were long-term, fixed-rate 
mortgages taken during times of lower interest rates. 
As a result, the revenues produced by these mort- 
gages were exceeded by the rapidly rising costs of 
attracting short-term deposits. Thrifts that were 
locked into long-term low interest rate loans simply 
could not meet their deposit obligations. This 
interest rate mismatch was one of the principal 
causes of numerous thrift failures. Eighty-one 
thrifts failed in 1981, 252 in 1982, and 102 in 1983. 
House Report at 296, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 92. 


With all of these bank failures and the likelihood of 
more occurring, the FSLIC faced deposit insurance 
liabilities that threatened to exhaust its insurance 
fund. See Olympic Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. 
Director, OTS, 732 F.Supp. 1183, 1185 (D.D.C.1990). 
As an alternative to liquidating failing thrifts and 
expending the FSLIC’s insurance funds, the Bank 
Board and FSLIC encouraged healthy thrifts to 
merge with the failing ones. In these supervisory 
mergers, the regulators provided direct assistance 
and other incentives necessary for the healthy thrifts 
to maintain their financial well-being after the 
mergers and in this way the regulators tried to avoid 
paying off the failing thrifts’ deposits out of the 
FSLIC’s insurance fund. Among the incentives 
offered by the FSLIC and the Bank Board was the use 
of the purchase method of accounting under which 
“supervisory goodwill” resulting from the merger 
would be treated as satisfying part of the merged 
thrift’s regulatory capital requirements. See Bank 
Board Memorandum R-31b (1981). Another incentive 
was the use of “capital credits” that also could be 
counted toward the regulatory capital requirements. 


6a 


The purchase method of accounting is a generally 
accepted accounting practice (GAAP) for mergers, 
which accounts for the surplus of the purchase price 
over the fair market value of the acquired organiza- 
tion as goodwill, an intangible asset. As explained by 
the Court of Federal Claims: 


Under [the purchase method of accounting,] . . the 
book value of the acquired thrift’s assets and 
liabilities was adjusted to fair market value at the 
time of the acquisition. Any excess in the cost of the 
acquisition (which included liabilities assumed by the 
acquirer) over the fair market value of the acquired 
assets was separately recorded on the acquirer’s 
books as “goodwill.” ... Goodwill was considered an 
intangible asset that could be amortized on a 
straightline basis over a number of years. 


Winstar J, 21 Cl. Ct. at 113. In the context of a 
supervisory merger, the difference between the fair 
market value of the failing thrift’s liabilities assumed 
by an acquirer and the fair market value of the failing 
thrift’s assets was considered “supervisory goodwill.” 
The Bank Board and the FSLIC allowed the merged 
thrifts to count this supervisory goodwill toward the 
minimum regulatory capital requirements and to 
amortize this goodwill over periods of up to 40 years. 
This permitted the healthy thrift to assume the 
deposit liabilities of the failing thrift and to maintain 
capital compliance without having to put up large 
amounts of its own money and without requiring 
large amounts of monetary assistance from the 
government. 


The capital credits incentive used by the Bank 
Board and the FSLIC to encourage mergers with 
failing thrifts involved the FSLIC’s contribution of 


7a 


cash to the merged thrifts. The regulators allowed a 
portion or all of this cash contribution to be treated as 
partial satisfaction of the merged thrift’s regulatory 
capital requirements. In addition, this cash contribu- 
tion in some instances would not be treated as an 


asset in determining supervisory goodwill generated 


by the merger. 


Allowing acquirers of failing thrifts to treat 
supervisory goodwill and capital credits as regulatory 
capital stimulated many acquisitions that would 
otherwise not have taken place because of the dif- 
ficulty of meeting the minimum capital requirements. 
Indeed this was the precise intention of the Bank 
Board and FSLIC—supervisory mergers could not 
have occurred without the approval by the regulatory 
agencies of these accounting treatments. As former 
Bank Board Chairman Richard Pratt stated in 
testimony before Congress: 


The Bank Board was caught between a rock and 
a hard place. While it did not have sufficient 
resources to close all insolvent institutions, at 
the same time, it had to consolidate the industry, 
move weaker institutions into stronger hands and 
do everything possible to minimize losses during 
the transition period. Goodwill was an indis- 
pensable tool in performing this task. The GAAP 
approach to purchase method accounting mergers 
provided a bridge which allowed the Bank Board to 
encourage the necessary consolidation of the 
industry, while at the same time husbanding the 
financial resources which were then available to 

it. 
Savings and Loan Policies in the Late 1970s and 
1980s: Hearings Before the House Comm. on 


Ma 


Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, lolst Cong., 


2d Sess., No. 176, at 227 (1990). i 

B. Winstar, Statesman and Glendale acquired 
insolvent, failing thrifts under this policy of « en- 
couraging thrift mergers. In each case, they received 
the ‘government's approver and assistance. In each 


would have had to pay to the insured — wll if the 
failing thrifts had been liquidated instead of being 
acquired, 

1. In September of 1981, Glendale Federal Bank 
was approached by First Federal Savings and Loan 
Association of Broward County (Broward) about a 
possible merger. Glendale was a federal savings and 
loan association based in California. It was a profit- 
able thrift, which was in full regulatory compliance. 
Broward was a federal savings and loan association 
based in Florida that had incurred significant losses. 
Broward’s liabilities exceeded its assets by 
approximately $734 million. Glendale submitted a 
merger proposal to the FSLIC, Glendale proposed to 
use the purchase method of accounting to record the 
supervisory goodwill resulting from this accounting 
as an intangible asset amortizable over periods up to 
40 years. After lengthy negotiations over the terms 
and conditions, the FSLIC agreed to provide assi- 
stance to the merged entity and to recommend 
approval of the merger transaction to the Bank Board. 


In its resolution approving the merger plan be- 
tween Glendale and Broward, the Bank Board imposed 
the condition that Glendale provide an opinion letter 
satisfactory to the Board's supervisory agent from its 
independent accountants justifying the use of the 
purchase method of accounting, specifically deserib- 


a 


ing any goodwill arising from the merger, and sub- 
stantiating the reasonableness of the amounts attrib- 
utable to goodwill and the resulting amortization 
periods and methods. The Bank Board resolution also 
gave the FSLIC authority to enter into a Supervisory 
Action Agreement (SAA) with Glendale. The SAA 
with Glendale was signed in November of 1981 and 
Glendale promptly consummated its merger with 
Broward, As required by the Bank Board resolution, 
Glendale later provided its accountants’ justification 
and opinion letter satisfactory to the Bank Board, 
which. stated that “$18,000,000 of the resultant 
goodwill . .. will be amortized on a straight line basis 
over 12 years” and that the “remaining goodwill of 
$716,666,000 will be amortized on a straight line basis 
over 40 years.” By the government's estimates, the 
Glendale-Broward merger saved the government 
approximately three quarters of a billion dollars. 


2. In 1987 Statesman approached the FSLIC about 
acquiring a subsidiary of an insolvent state-chartered 
FSLIC insured savings and loan in Florida, First 
Federated Savings Bank (First Federated), The 
FSLIC responded to the inquiry by indicating that 
Statesman would have to acquire all of First Feder- 
ated if the government was to assist. Further, it 
would require that Statesman's acquisition of First 
Federated be combined with the acquisition of three 
other financially troubled thrifts in Iowa.“ After a 
year of negotiating the FSLIC and Statesman agreed 


The three thrifts were First Federal Savings Bank of 
Waterloo, lowa, Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Association 
of Waterloo, lowa, and Perpetual Sevings and Loan Association 
of Waterloo, Iowa. 


10a 


on the terms of a complex plan whereby Statesman 
would acquire the four thrifts. 


Like the merger of Glendale, Statesman’s merger 
plan called for the use of the purchase method of 
accounting. The Statesman plan called for an invest- 
ment by Statesman and its co-investor American Life 
and Casualty Company of $21 million into States- 
man’s Savings Holding Company, which in turn would 
purchase $21 million of stock in a newly-formed fed- 
eral stock savings bank named Statesman Bank for 
Savings. The Statesman Bank for Savings would 
then merge with the four failing thrifts. 

As part of the transactions, the FSLIC and States- 
man entered into an Assistance Agreement calling 
for the FSLIC to provide a $60 million cash contribu- 
tion to the Statesman Bank for Savings. Under the 
Assistance Agreement and the Bank Board Resolu- 
tion approving the merger, $26 million of this cash 
contribution (including $5 million represented by a 
debenture that Statesman was required to pay back) 
was to be permanently credited to Statesman's re- 
gulatory capital (le., as a capital credit) for purposes 
of meeting minimum regulatory capital require- 
ments. Statesman’s merger is the only one of the 
— 4 at issue in this appeal that involves a capital 
credit. 


The Bank Board resolution permitted use of the 
purchase method of accounting. Supervisory goodwill 
arising from the merger acquisitions in the amount of 
$25.8 million was recognized as a capital asset for 
purposes of meeting regulatory capital requirements 
and Statesman was allowed to amortize that goodwill 
over 25 years. The Bank Board granted authority to 
the FSLIC to enter into the Assistance Agreement 


lla 


with Statesman and required Statesman to provide an 
opinion letter from its independent accountants to 
justify its use of the purchase method of accounting 
and supervisory goodwill. Statesman provided the 
opinion letter to the agency's satisfaction. By the 
government's estimates, the cost of the Statesman 
merger to the government was $50 million less than 
the cost of liquidating the four thrifts. 

g. In 1983 a Minnesota-based thrift, Windom Fed- 
eral Savings and Loan Association (Windom), was in 
danger of failing. The board of directors of Windom 


determined that its failure could not be avoided 


without assistance from the FSLIC. The FSLIC 
estimated that liquidating the federally insured thrift 
could cost $12 million dollars and it pursued an 
alternative to paying this money out of its insurance 
fund. It chose to solicit bids for the acquisition of 
Windom. 

Winstar Corporation was a holding company formed 
by investors for the purpose of acquiring Windom. 
Winstar in turn formed a new wholly-owned, federal 
stock savings bank, United Federal Savings Bank, to 
merge with Windom. Winstar's plan contemplated 
financing the merger by cash contributions by both 
the investors and the FSLIC. The plan also called for 
use of the purchase method of accounting and 
recording supervisory goodwill as an intangible asset 
which initially was to amortized over a period of 40 
years (later changed to 35 years). After negotiating 
the terms with Winstar Corporation and its in- 
vestors, the FSLIC recommended to the Bank Board 
that it approve the merger plan. The Bank Board 
approved the merger again subject to Winstar pro- 
viding an opinion letter from its independent ac- 


12a 


countants justifying the use of the purchase method 
of accounting and detailing the resulting supervisory 
goodwill, As a part of the transaction, FSLIC signed 
an Assistance Agreement with Winstar Corporation 
and the Bank Board issued a forbearance letter, The 
forbearance letter stated that intangible assets re- 
sulting from use of the purchase method of account- 
ing “may be amortized . . . over a period not to exceed 
35 years by the straight-line method.” By the govern- 
ment's estimates, the Winstar-Windom merger saved 
the government $7 million over what liquidation of 
Windom would have cost. 

C. In spite of these and similar actions taken by the 
Bank Board and the FSLIC, thrifts continued to fail 
and the public confidence in the thrift industry 
continued to erode during the late 1980s. In response 
to this crisis in the savings and loan industry, Con- 
gress in 1989 passed FIRREA. FIRREA substan- 
tially modified the overall thrift regulatory scheme. 
As pertinent here, it (1) abolished the FSLIC and 
transferred its functions to other agencies; (2) 
created a new thrift deposit insurance fund under the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC); (3) 
eliminated the Bank Board and replaced it with the 
Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), an office within 
the Department of Treasury, and made the OTS 
Director responsible for the regulation of all feder- 
ally insured savings associations and the chartering 
of federal thrifts; and (4) established the Resolution 
Trust Corporation (RTC), which was charged with 
closing certain thrifts. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1487 note, 
144 la, 1821. 


Among the legislative reforms of FIRREA was the 
requirement that the OTS “prescribe and maintain 


18a 


uniformly applicable capital standards for savings 
— 4 12 USC. § 1464(t)(1)(a). In addition, 
Congress expressly restricted the continued use of 
supervisory goodwill to satisfy regulatory capital 
requirements. 

FIRREA required federally insured thrifts to 
satisfy three — minimum capital standards: “tang- 
ible” capital, “core” capital, and “risk-based” capital. 
12 U.S.C. § 1464(t), Under FIRREA supervisory 
goodwill could not be included at all in satisfying 
minimum tangible capital. The amount of supervisory 
goodwill that could be included in satisfying “core 
capital decreased each year after FIRREA’s enact- 
ment and was entirely phased out on December 
$1, 1994. Finally, thrifts were required to main- 
tain “risk-based” capital in an ey: — 
comparable to that required by t omptroller o 
the Currency for national banks. 12 U.S.C. § 
1464(t(2(C). Although supervisory goodwill could 
be used for this purpose, FIRREA limited its 
amortization to a period of no more than 20 years, 12 
U.S.C, § 1464(t)(9)(B). 

FIRREA did not specifically cover capital credits 
or otherwise exclude FSLIC cash contributions from 
capital for purposes of determining compliance with 
any of the minimum capital requirements. The OTS, 
however, equated capital credits with “qualifying 
supervisory goodwill” within the meaning of the 
statute and promulgated a regulation that treated 
capital credits in the same manner as supervisory 
goodwill, 12 C. F. R. § 567.1(w). 

As a result of FIRREA and the OTS regulation, 
many thrifts that were previously in full compliance 
with the regulations on capital requirements failed to 


14a 


satisfy the new capital standards and immedia 
became subject to seizure. Glendale initially 


After FIRREA, Statesman immediately fell below 
the three new capital standards eotabliahed by the 
Act. As a result, the OTS appointed the RTC as 
receiver for Statesman in July of 1990. Winstar also 
fell into noncompliance as soon as the FIRREA 
capital requirements became effective. Winstar was 
placed in receivership by the OTS in May of 1990, 

D. The plaintiffs filed suit in the Court of Feder 
Claims alleging that under FIRREA the — —— 
or limited availability to them of supervisory goodwill 
(and capital credits in the case of Statesman) for 
satisfying regulatory capital constituted a breach of 
contract or, in the alternative, a taking of their 
contract rights without compensation in violation of 
the Fifth Amendment. The plaintiffs claimed that the 
government was contractually obligated to recognize 
supervisory goodwill generated by the mergers (and 
capital credits) as an intangible capital asset for 
purposes of their compliance with minimum regula- 
tory capital standards. The plaintiffs also claimed 


15a 


that they were entitled to amortize that supervisory 
goodwill for the agreed periods established at the time 
of their acquisitions of failing thrifts. Under their 
contract claims, plaintiffs asserted that FIRREA, 
and the regulations thereunder, as applied to them, 
breached those contract obligations. All of the 
plaintiffs filed summary judgment motions on the 
issue of liability. 


The government defended on the grounds that there 
were no contractual rights as alleged and that in any 
event the alleged agreements were subject to statu- 
tory and regulatory changes. Relying principally on 
Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to Social Secu- 
rity Entrapment (POSSE), 477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 
2390, 91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986), the government argued that 
the thrifts impermissibly sought to enjoin Congress’ 
power to legislate and the agencies’ power to re- 
gulate. The government further argued that the 
sovereign acts doctrine, as stated in Horowitz v. 
United States, 267 U.S. 458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 344-45, 
69 L.Ed. 736 (1925), precluded recovery for any 
contractual rights breached by FIRREA. 


The Court of Federal Claims granted summary 
judgment to the plaintiffs on the issue of liability 
under the contract claims and did not reach the 
constitutional takings claims. The court found that 

contracts were made between plaintiffs and 
the FSLIC in each of the three merger transactions. 
It held that these contracts were breached when the 
regulatory capital requirements of FIRREA, and the 
regulations, were applied to plaintiffs. The Court of 
Federal Claims distinguished POSSE on the grounds 


that the case did not involve bargained for contract 
rights but rather involved an entitlement program. 


16a 


The court also distinguished POSSE because the 
relief sought was an injunction to prevent the govern- 
ment from acting in its sovereign capacity, whereas 
plaintiffs only claimed damages for breach of their 
contracts. Finally, the Court of Federal Claims found 
that FIRREA, in specifically limiting the use of 
supervisory goodwill that had previously been 
contractually authorized, was not a sovereign act but 
rather was aimed directly at thrifts with contracts 
like those of the plaintiffs. Thus, the court concluded 
that the government could not rely on the sovereign 
acts doctrine to shield it from liability. 


III 


We review the Court of Federal Claims’ grant of 
summary judgment under a de novo standard of re- 
view, with justifiable factual inferences being drawn 
in favor of the party opposing summary judgment. 
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 
106 S.Ct. 2505, 2513-14, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). On 


appeal both parties ask for entry of judgment in their 
favor based on the uncontested facts of record. 


A. The Court of Federal Claims found that all the 
thrifts had contracts with the government that 
contained terms allowing the use of supervisory 
goodwill (and in Statesman’s case, capital credits) to 
satisfy a portion of their regulatory capital require- 
ments and that this intangible asset could be 
amortized over extended periods of time. In the 
Glendale and Statesman cases, the court determined 
there were express contracts with these terms, and 
in Winstar’s case, that there was an implied-in-fact 
contract with these terms. The government initially 
contends that no such contractual terms existed. 


17a 


Contract construction is a question of law that we 
review de novo. Hughes Communications Galaxy, 
Inc. v. United States, 998 F.2d 953, 957 (Fed.Cir. 1993). 
A principal objective in deciding what contractual 
language means is to discern the parties’ intent at the 
time the contract was signed. Arizona v. United 
States, 575 F.2d 855, 863, 216 Ct. Cl. 221 (1978). 


1. We agree with the Court of Federal Claims that 
the government had an express contractual obligation 
to permit Glendale to count the supervisory goodwill 
generated as a result of its merger ** eng’ ad 5 

ital asset for regulatory capital purposes. - 
larly, as the trial court determined, under this agree- 
ment Glendale was entitled to amortize the major 
portion of that goodwill on a straight line basis for a 
period of 40 years, and the balance for 12 years. 

The government contends that the FSLIC's SAA 
with Glendale is the only document evidencing 
Glendale’s contract with the FSLIC and that it 
contains no promise relating to goodwill or its amor- 
tization. As noted by the Court of Federal Claims, 
however, Glendale’s contract was not limited to the 
SAA itself, but also included the contemporaneous 
resolutions and letters issued by the FSLIC and the 
Bank Board. The SAA’s integration clause provided: 


This Agreement, together with an interpretation 
thereof or understanding — Ag — 1 — 
the parties, constitutes en agree 

between the parties thereto and supersedes all 
prior agreements and understandings of the 
parties in connection here with, excepting only the 
Agreement of Merger and any resolutions or 
letters issued contemporaneously herewith by the 
{Bank Board] or the FSLIC, provided, however, 


18a 


that in the event of any conflict, variance, or 
inconsistency between this Agreement and the 
Agreement of Merger, the provisions of this 
Agreement shall govern and be binding on all 
parties insofar as the rights, privileges, duties, 
obligations, and liabilities of the FSLIC are 
concerned. 


(Emphasis added.) 


One of these contemporaneous documents, which 
was relied on by the Court of Federal Claims, was 
Bank Board Resolution 81-710. The FSLIC needed 
the Bank Board’s approval before it could enter into 
the SAA with Glendale and approve the merger. The 
FSLIC and Glendale had negotiated the terms of the 
Broward merger, including Glendale’s proposed use of 
supervisory goodwill and Glendale’s obligation to 
absorb Broward’s deposit liabilities. After negotiat- 
ing terms satisfactory to both parties, the FSLIC 
recommended to the Bank Board that it approve the 


merger and authorize the FSLIC to execute the SAA 
with Glendale. 


Resolution 81-710 provided the Bank Board’s ap- 
proval, with certain conditions that Glendale was 
required to satisfy to the Bank Board's satisfaction, 
including the following: 


Not later than sixty days following the effective 
date of the merger, Glendale shall furnish an 
opinion from its independent accountant, satisfac- 
tory to the Supervisory Agent, which (a) indicates 
the justification under generally accepted ac- 
counting principles for the use of the purchase 
method of accounting for its merger with 
Broward, (b) specifically describes, as of the 


19a 


i i f assets 
Effective Date, any goodwill or discount o 
arising from the merger to be recorded on 
Glendale’s books, and (c) substantiates the rea- 
sonableness of amounts attributed to goodwill and 
the discount of assets and the resulting amortiza- 
tion periods and methods 


The Resolution continued: 


hall submit a stipulation that any good- 
Ales from this transaction shall be deter- 
mined and amortized in accordance with {Bank 
Board] Memorandum R-31b.... 


oard’s 
randum R-31b (1981) was the Bank B 

guidelines” on how an acquiring thrift could count 
the excess of the acquired thrift’s purchase price over 
the acquired thrift’s fair market value as an in- 
tangible asset under the purchase method of ac- 
1 ank Board clearly 

in Resolution 81-710, the B clea 

ethan its approval of the terms of the — 
including the terms that the purchase method = 
accounting would be employed in accounting for the 


4 
The Memorandum provided that: oi 
application from an association requesting approval for 
& business combination tobe accounted for by the purchase 
method of accounting, from which intangible assets wi 
result, should include a description of any resulting 
intangible assets and the plan for their amortization. This 
management's analysis of the underlying intangible assets 
and the resulting amortization periods and methods. 


Memo- 
accordance with applicable accounting principles, the 
in hee limited the period of amortization to 40 years or less. 


20a 


merger, that goodwill arising from the merger would 
be recorded on Glendale’s books, and that such 
goodwill would be amortized for reasonable periods 
under reasonable methods, provided these accounting 
treatments were justified to the satisfaction of the 
Bank Board’s supervisory agent. In this connection, 
the Court of Federal Claims observed: 


It is also uncontroverted that the government 
manifested its approval of the terms set forth in 
the opinion letter prior to the effective date of the 
Supervisory Action Agreement. In a letter from 
H. Brent Beesley, then-Director of FSLIC, to 
[Bank Board] dated November 19, 1981, FSLIC 
recommended the use of the purchase method of 
accounting for the merger. Beesley explicitly 
referred to a Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. 
opinion letter dated November 10, 1981 setting 
forth the specific amount of supervisory goodwill 
projected to be amortized pursuant to the merger, 
assuming the use of the purchase method of 
accounting. 


26 Cl. Ct. at 910. 


After the merger, Glendale submitted the required 
letter from its independent accountants to the Bank 
Board’s supervisory agent. The letter confirmed as of 
the date of closing the amount of goodwill resulting 
from the merger under the purchase method of 
accounting and reiterated the amortization periods 
and the amounts of goodwill to be amortized under 
each period. 


Pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement of 
Merger between [Glendale] and Broward dated 
November 20, 1981 and the Supervisory Action 


21a 


Agreement between [Glendale] and the Federal 
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) 
dated November 20, 1981, upon the effective date of 
November 20, 1981, [Glendale] accounted for the 
acquisition using the “Purchase Method” of 
accounting 


. . « $18,000,000 of the resultant goodwill is 
associated with the savings deposit base and will 
be amortized on a straight line basis over 12 years, 
the estimated life of the savings deposit base. The 
remaining goodwill of $716,666,000 will be 
amortized on a straight line basis over 40 years as 
[Glendale] believes that the remaining goodwill 
has an indefinite life since it is related to ex- 
pansion of operations into an entirely new market 
area. 


The letter further opined that the accounting and 
methodology for calculating supervisory goodwill 
were in accordance with generally accepted ac- 
counting principles. Glendale satisfied the conditions 
for merger approval set out in Resolution 81-710 by 
submitting both the independent accountants’ opinion 
and the stipulation that the accounting was in 
accordance with Memorandum R-3lb. Moreover, 
there is no dispute that these submissions were satis- 
factory to the Bank Board’s supervisory agent as 
required by that Resolution. 


We conclude based on all of the contemporaneous 
documents, which under the integration clause of the 
SAA collectively constituted the “Agreement” of the 
parties, that the Bank Board and the FSLIC were 
contractually bound to recognize the supervisory 


22a 


goodwill and the amortization periods reflected in the 
approved accountants’ letter. It is clear from the 
documents that this was the intent of the parties. 
Glendale consummated its merger with Broward on 
this understanding and in doing so saved the govern- 
ment hundreds of millions of dollars. 

Our conclusion is supported by other evidence and 
by the circumstances surrounding the transaction. If 
the parties did not intend to use supervisory goodwill 
for regulatory capital purposes there would simply be 
no reason for the extensive negotiations and the 
conditions regarding its use. It is not disputed that if 
supervisory goodwill had not been available for 
purposes of meeting regulatory capital requirements, 
the merged thrift would have been subject to 
regulatory noncompliance and penalties from the 
moment of its creation.’ Moreover, the recitals of 
the SAA state that “Glendale proposes to enter into 
an agreement of merger with [Broward]” and that 
Broward “is in danger of default and that the nature 
and/or amount of such assistance would be less than 
the losses FSLIC would sustain upon the liquidation 
of [Broward].” Without the use of supervisory 
goodwill, the merged thrifts would have been in a 
failing position resulting in the losses the FSLIC 
sought to avoid. Finally, it is appropriate to observe 
that no healthy thrift would consummate a trans- 
action that immediately put it in regulatory non- 
compliance. 


Prior to the merger, Glendale was a healthy, fully 
capitalized thrift. Glendale asserts, and the government does 
not disagree, that after merging with Broward Glendale's 
regulatory net worth would have been negative $460 million if 
supervisory goodwill had not been counted as a capital asset. 


We consider the government's argument that the 
Bank Board Resolution was merely a statement of 
“then-current prosecutorial and regulatory policy” to 
be of little significance. Once specific terms as to the 
amount of supervisory goodwill and its amortization 
periods under that regulatory policy were incor- 
porated in a negotiated arm’s length contract, both 
parties were bound to them. While it is true as the 
government argues that a statement of policy, for 
instance as set forth in Memorandum R-31b, could be 
changed (which it later was), the contract could not be 
changed except by mutual consent. 


The government makes two additional arguments 
why the Court of Federal Claims’ interpretation was 
wrong. First it contends that the SAA expired by its 
terms in November 1991, prior to the alleged breach. 
We view the expiration provision as only relating to 
executory provisions set out in the SAA, which 
obligated the FSLIC to make certain payments to the 
merged thrift for a limited period of time. This 
provision of the SAA in any event does not negate 
other obligations under the merger plan, including 
the specific time periods for amortization of goodwill. 


The government's second argument is based on the 
clause contained in the SAA, which provides that: 
“Nothing in this Agreement shall require any un- 
lawful action or inaction by either of the parties here- 
to.“ The government contends this clause contem- 
plates possible future changes in the law. The proper 
reading of this clause, however, is that neither party 
is required to act to the extent that some portion of 
the contract inadvertently violated the law as it 
existed at the time the contract was entered into. In 
any case, the clause clearly is not an escape hatch 


24a 


that allows the federal government to avoid per- 
formance of its contractual obligations without 
penalty by passing a law prohibiting its own per- 
formance. 


2. The Statesman transaction involved the acquisi- 
tion by merger of four failing thrifts, and thus the 
accompanying documentation was more complex than 
that in the Glendale transaction. The Court of Fed- 
eral Claims determined an express contract existed 
between the plaintiffs and the government which 
permitted the use of supervisory goodwill and capital 
credits in meeting regulatory capital levels, and 
which established the amortization period for such 
goodwill. We agree. 

In connection with the acquisition of the four 
thrifts, Statesman signed an Assistance Agreement 
with the FSLIC. The Assistance Agreement con- 
tained express terms that allowed capital credits to be 
used to satisfy regulatory capital. Not surprisingly, 
the Court of Federal Claims stated that “the govern- 
ment readily concedes that an express contract 
existed, at least in regard to the $26 million capital 
credit extended by the government to Statesman.” 26 
Ct. at 912. A similar concession has been made by 
the government in its appeal brief, which states: 

The terms of the Assistance Agreement provided 
that $26 million of that amount (the capital 
credit”) constituted RAP goodwill to be credited 
to Statesman’s regulatory capital. 


Thus, although the government maintains these 
terms were not insulated against changes in the law, 
there can be no doubt that contractual promises re- 
garding capital credits were made. 


25a 


The Statesman documents regarding the treatment 
of supervisory goodwill are, in substance ice, the sam ne 
as those in the Glendale transaction. The Assis- 
tance Agreement contained an integration clause 


the Bank Board. The Bank Board's Resolution 88-169 
approved the Statesman merger plan and authorized 
the FSLIC to enter into the Assistance Agreement. 
In contrast to the Glendale resolution, however, Re- 
solution No. 88-169 expressly approved and described 
the accounting treatments to be used in the States- 
man merger transaction, as follows: 

[The Acquisition and the Mergers shall be 
accounted for, and [Statesman] shall report to the 
Bank Board and the FSLIC, in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles pre- 
vailing in the savings and loan industry, as 
accepted, modified, clarified, or interpreted by 
applicable regulations of the Bank Board and the 
FSLIC, except to the extent of the following 
departures from generally accepted accounting 
principles: 


(a) Twenty-one million dollars of the 
initial contribution by the [FSLIC] to [States- 
man], and five million dollars of the principal 
amount of the Subordinated Debenture issued to 
the FSLIC, pursuant to § 6 of the Assistance 
Agreement, shall be credited to the regulatory 
capital account of [Statesman]; and 


(b) The value of any unidentifiable intan- 
gible assets resulting from accounting for the 
Acquisition and the Mergers in accordance with 
the purchase method of accounting may be amor- 


26a 


tized by [Statesman] over a period not in excess of 
twenty-five (25) years by the straight line method. 


As stated in the government's appeal brief: 


The Bank Board resolution also permitted use of 
the purchase method of accounting for the 
acquisitions. Thus, Statesman was allowed to 
amortize $25.8 million more in supervisory 
goodwill for 25 years. 


As it did in the Glendale transaction, the Bank 
Board reserved its approval of this accounting 
treatment until Statesman furnished within ninety 
days, “an analysis accompanied by a concurring 
opinion from its independent certified public 
accountants” which 


shall (a) specifically describe, as of the Effective 
Date, any intangible assets, including goodwill and 
the discount and premiums arising from the 
Acquisition and the Mergers, to be recorded on 
New Federal's books, and (b) substantiate the 
reasonableness and conformity with regulatory 
requirements of the amounts attributed to in- 
tangible assets, including goodwill and the dis- 
count and premiums, and the related amortization 


The government concedes that this condition was 
met to the Board’s satisfaction. 


We conclude that the government was con- 
tractually obligated to recognize the capital credits 
and the supervisory goodwill generated by the merger 
as part of the Statesman’s regulatory capital require- 
ment and to permit such goodwill to be amortized on a 
straight line basis over 25 years. 


27a 


g. The Court of Federal Claims concluded that 
Winstar had an implied-in-fact contract that obligated 
the government to allow Winstar to treat supervisory 
goodwill as a capital asset for regulatory capital 
purposes to be amortized over a 35 year period. Be- 
cause we are satisfied that an express agreement 
existed between the FSLIC and Winstar, on the same 
terms found by the Court of Federal Claims, we do not 
reach the question of whether there could also be an 
implied-in-fact contract. 

In July 1984 Winstar entered into an Assistance 
Agreement with the FSLIC, The Assistance Agree- 
ment stated that “the purpose of this Agreement [is] 


indom] may be protected against losses 
[United] and | Winstar may receive the benefits and 
assume the risks contracted for, and expenses to [the 
FSLIC] may be reduced.” While this purpose re- 
cognized there was a mutual exchange of benefits and 
risks in the agreement, Winstar's Assistance Agree- 
ment, like Glendale’s SAA, did not directly cover the 
treatment of supervisory goodwill. Again, however, 
this Assistance Agreement contained an integration 
clause which made “the Merger Agreement and any 
resolutions or letters issued contemporaneously with 
[the Assistance Agreement!“ part of the contract 
between the parties. 

Among the documents evidencing the government's 
contractual obligation is a forbearance letter of the 
Bank Board issued in July of 1984 to the Winstar 
investors. The forbearance letter in the first para- 


28a 


several terms of the Winstar transaction. Paragraph 
2 of those terms provides: 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, the value 
of any intangible assets resulting from accounting 
for the merger in accordance with the purchase 
method may be amortized by (Winstar] over a 
period not to exceed 35 years by the straight-line 
method .... 


The other documentation in the Winstar trans- 
action is substantially identical to that in the 
Glendale transaction with respect to accounting 
treatment for the merger. For example, there is a 
contemporaneous Bank Board resolution, Resolution 
84-363, approving the Winstar merger and giving the 
FSLIC the authority to proceed. That resolution 
required Winstar to provide an opinion “from its 
independent public accountants, satisfactory to the 
Supervisory Agent and to the Office of Examinations 
and Supervision” describing the use of goodwill and 
substantiating its reasonableness and conformity 
with regulatory requirements. It is not contested 
that Winstar satisfied the conditions in Resolution 
84-363 to the Bank Board’s satisfaction. 


We conclude that the documentation in the Winstar 
transaction establishes an express agreement allow- 
ing Winstar to proceed with the merger plan approved 
by the Bank Board, including the recording of super- 
visory goodwill as a capital asset for regulatory 
capital purposes to be amortized over 35 years. Other 
circumstances, such as those discussed above in 
connection with the Glendale transaction, are con- 
sistent with this conclusion and demonstrate that it 
was the intention of the parties to be bound by the 
accounting treatment for goodwill arising in the 


29a 


merger. Likewise, we find the government’s argu- 
ments regarding the expiration of the Assistance 
Agreement and the Agreement’s “unlawful action” 
provision unpersuasive for the same reasons as in the 


Glendale transaction. 


Finally, the government argues the Net Worth 
Maintenance Stipulation signed by Winstar required 
Winstar to abide by any changes in the law regarding 
regulatory capital. We agree to the extent the 
Stipulation requires Winstar to maintain its capital 
at levels set by the bank regulators. Winstar, like 
other thrifts, was bound to keep in 1 — 

regulations and laws regarding capital levels 
—— — — agreed 
to forbear from enforeing its regulations against it. 
This stipulation by Winstar to maintain its regula- 
tory net worth at whatever level the regulators set 
does not, however, eclipse the government’s own pro- 
mise that Winstar could count supervisory goodwill 
in meeting the regulatory requirements with which 
it had promised to comply. 

B. There can be little question that the application 
of FIRREA and the regulations thereunder to deny 
or restrict plaintiffs’ contractual rights to use 
supervisory goodwill with the associated amortiza- 
tion periods, and for Statesman’s capital credits, in 
partial satisfaction of their capital requirements was 
a breach of the FSLIC’s and the Bank Board’s 
agreements with them. FIRREA greatly reduced the 
amount of supervisory goodwill that could be used to 
meet regulatory capital requirements. See 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1464(t). The OTS by regulation treated capital 
credits in the same manner as supervisory goodwill, 


30a 


see 12 C.F.R. § 567.1(w), thereby restricting the use 
of such credits for regulatory capital purposes. 


Failure to perform a contractual duty when it is 
due is a breach of the contract. Restatement (Second) 
of Contracts § 235(2) (1981). The three plaintiff thrifts 
negotiated contracts with the bank regulatory 
agencies that allowed them to include supervisory 
goodwill (and capital credits) as assets for regulatory 
capital purposes and to amortize that supervisory 
goodwill over extended periods of time. When the 
plaintiffs satisfied the conditions imposed on them by 
the contracts, the government’s contractual obliga- 
tions became effective and required it to recognize 
and accept the purchase method of accounting for the 
mergers and the use of supervisory goodwill and 
capital credits as capital assets for regulatory capital 
requirements. 


After FIRREA and its implementing regulations, 
the bank regulatory agencies limited these assets as 
acceptable regulatory capital and limited the amor- 
tization periods. As a result, Winstar and Statesman 
were immediately thrown into noncompliance with 
the new regulatory capital requirements and were 
seized by federal regulators within approximately six 
months. Glendale survived the new capital standards 
but at considerable detriment. We conclude the gov- 
ernment failed to perform its contractual obligations 
under plaintiffs’ contracts. 


® Because we affirm the Court of Federal Claims’ decision in 
this case, we need not reach the question of whether FIRREA 
contemplated that capital credits would be treated as a form of 


supervisory goodwill. 


3la 


C. The government makes two additional argu- 
ments why the thrifts’ claims must fail. It contends 


of legislative change (the “unmistakability doctrine”) 
and (2) that the government’s contractual obligations 
were relieved by the enactment of “public and 
general” legislation by the Congress (the “sovereign 
acts doctrine”). The Court of Federal Claims 
analyzed each of these arguments extensively in its 
opinions and found neither to be persuasive. We agree 
with, and adopt, the substance of these analyses. See 
Winstar J. 21 Cl. Ct. at 115-17; Winstar II. 25 Cl. Ct. at 
544-53; Statesman, 26 Cl. Ct. at 916-24. 


1. The government contends that interpreting the 
contracts at issue as guaranteeing certain account- 
ing treatments in spite of Congress’ enactment of 
FIRREA is a restriction on the government’s power 
to legislate. The Supreme Court’s decision in 
POSSE, 477 U.S. at 52, 106 S.Ct. at 2397 is cited for 
the proposition that in interpreting contracts to 
which the government is a party, the contract should 
not be construed as waiving the government’s power 
to legislate unless it says so in unmistakable terms. 
In POSSE the Court, quoting Merrion v. Jicarilla 
Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130, 148, 102 S.Ct. 894, 907, 71 
L.Ed.2d 21 (1982), stated: 


[Wee have emphasized that (without regard to 
its source, sovereign power, even when un- 
exercised, is an enduring presence that governs 
all contracts subject to the sovereign’s jurisdic- 
tion, and will remain intact unless surrendered in 
unmistakable terms.” Therefore, contractual ar- 
rangements, including those to which a sovereign 


32a 


itself is party, “remain subject to su uent 

legislation“ by the sovereign. se 
POSSE, 477 U.S. at 52, 106 S.Ct. at 2397 (citations 
omitted). In its briefs on appeal and in the pro- 
ceedings below, the government also relied heavily on 
the opinion of the District of Columbia Circuit in 
Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift 
Supervision, 967 F.2d 598 (D.C. Cir.1992). (As 
explained below, Transohio was modified by the 
District of Columbia Circuit after the in banc 
arguments in the instant cases.) Because none of the 
thrifts can point to express language in their 
contracts preserving their contractual rights in the 
face of legislative change, the government concludes 
that the contracts must yield to the later enacted 
FIRREA capital requirements. 


The Court of Federal Claims in its first Winstar 
opinion, 21 Cl Ct. at 115, viewed POSSE as being in- 
apposite because the government “mischaracterize(s] 
the plaintiffs’ claim as one which improperly seeks to 
bind the government’s power to regulate.” Rather, 
the court noted that plaintiffs sought only money 
damages, which did not implicate the government’s 
power to regulate. Thereafter, in its Winstar I] opin- 
ion considering the government’s motion for clarifi- 
cation, the Court of Federal Claims held that POSSE 
did not preclude finding a binding contract that had 
been breached by the government, explaining its hold- 
ing as follows: 


Contrary to the assertions of the government, the 
Court’s holding in POSSE in no way precludes 
this court from finding the existence of a contract 
between the government and plaintiffs. As is 
evident from its opinion, the Court in POSSE 


33a 


recognized that the government has the power to 
enter into contracts which confer vested rights— 
rights which the government has a duty to honor. 
See Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 351 [55 
S.Ct. 432, 435, 79 L.Ed. 912] (1935) (“To say that 
the Congress may withdraw or ignore [its] pledge, 
is to assume that the Constitution contemplates a 
vain promise, a pledge having no other sanction 
than the pleasure and convenience of the pledgor. 
This Court has given no sanction to such a 
conception of the obligations of our Government.”), 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571, 580 [54 S.Ct. 
840, 844, 78 L.Ed. 1434] (1934) (“Congress was free 
to reduce gratuities deemed excessive. But Con- 
gress was without power to reduce expenditures 
by abrogating contractual obligations of the 
United States. To abrogate contracts, in the 
attempt to lessen government expenditure, would 
be not the practice of economy, but an act of 
repudiation.”). 


In POSSE, however, unlike the case here, no 
such vested rights were created as the basic 
elements of contract formation were absent. In 
contracts involving the government, as with all 
contractual relationships, rights vest and contract 
terms become binding when, after arms length 
negotiation, all parties to the contract agree to 


exchange real obligations for real benefits. In 
POSSE, the Court determined that such vested 


contract rights did not exist. POSSE, 477 U.S. at 
52, 54-55 (106 S.Ct. at 2396-97, 2397-98]. Although 
the Court did not explicitly so state, the facts of 
POSSE make it clear that the provisions of the 
original Social Security Act were not promulgated 


34a 


after negotiation, arms length or otherwise, 
between Congress and the plaintiffs who filed suit. 
As is the case with all legislation, the only 
“negotiations” or bargaining involved in the 
enactment of the original Social Security Act and 
its amendments took place in the halls of 
Congress. The “rights” at issue in POSSE, then, 
were solely government-created. They were 
really policy decisions made by the democratic 
political process. There was no legal considera- 
tion for the creation of these “rights.” At any 
time, the government could revoke them without 
legal consequence because the plaintiffs had not 
bargained for their creation. 


25 Cl.Ct. at 545-46 (footnotes omitted) (emphasis in 
original). 


The Court of Federal Claims returned to the 
government’s unmistakability argument again in its 
opinion in the Statesman case. By this time the 
District of Columbia Circuit had issued its opinion in 
Transohio, which the government argued supported 
the unmistakability argument it had made in Win- 
star. 


In Transohio, the plaintiff was a healthy thrift that 
merged with a failing one upon signing an Assistance 
Agreement with the FSLIC. After FIRREA was 
enacted, Transohio sought a preliminary injunction 
to enjoin the government from applying FIRREA’s 
provisions against the use of supervisory goodwill as 
regulatory capital. It argued that FIRREA would 
breach the government’s Assistance Agreement and 
that there would be a taking of Transohio’s property 
under the Fifth Amendment. 


35a 


The D.C. Circuit affirmed the district court’s 
denial of the injunction because Transohio was un- 
likely to succeed on the merits. Transohio, 967 F.2d 
at 601. While noting the district court had no 
jurisdiction over the breach of contract claims, the 
D.C. Cireuit analyzed whether Transohio had any 
contractual property rights that were protected 
under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment. 
Id. at 617. The court agreed there was a contract 
right for the treatment of goodwill, id. at 618 (“We 
think the documents strongly suggest that, in 
addition to money, the agencies gave Transohio some 
ability to count as regulatory capital the intangible 
assets created by its mergers.”), but concluded that 
the unmistakability doctrine precluded an inter- 
pretation of the contract that would guarantee such 
treatment against legislative change. Id. at 620. 
Because the thrift’s contract and taking claims were 
both dependent on the existence of a binding contract, 
the court stated there was no need to remand the case 
to consider the thrift’s monetary claims in the Court 
of Federal Claims. /d. at 614. 


The government argued to the Court of Federal 
Claims that Transohio was persuasive precedent 
against interpreting the thrift agreements as allow- 
ing recovery for contractual breach in the face of 
legislative change. The Court of Federal Claims was 
unpersuaded and criticized the Transohio court’s use 
of the unmistakability doctrine as one of contract 
interpretation rather than one of contract creation. 


The purpose animating the unmistakability doc- 
trine makes it clear that the doctrine controls how 


contractual rights with the government are 
created, i.e., whether the government has agreed 


36a 


in unmistakable terms to be contractually bound. 
The doctrine never has been understood as 
controlling, as the government has alleged in the 
Winstar-related cases, the effect of the govern- 
ment’s breach of a contract. See United States 
Trust Co. v. New Jersey, [431 U.S. 1, 28, 97 S.Ct. 
1505, 1518, 52 L.Ed.2d 92 (1977)] (“Thfe] [un- 
mistakability] doctrine requires a determination 
of the State’s power to create irrevocable contract 
rights in the first place, rather than an inquiry 
into the purpose or reasonableness of the sub- 
sequent impairment.”). The doctrine solely goes 
to whether a party possesses contractual rights 
which are binding and for which damages may be 
given. 


Thus, in Winstar and the instant cases, there has 
been little serious dispute that the government 
granted the acquiring thrifts, in the clearest 
possible terms, the right to certain types of re- 
gulatory capital treatment. Likewise, the ac- 
quiring thrifts have never contended in this court 
that the government is bound to specifically 
perform on this obligation. Rather, the dispute 
has primarily raged over the question of breach. 
Namely, whether the government must pay 
damages or provide restitution for its breach, or 
whether it is excused from such damages by an 
interpretation of POSSE or the sovereign acts 
doctrine. The historical understanding of the 
unmistakability doctrine is not applicable to this 
issue. 


26 Cl. Ct. at 920. 


37a 


We agree with the Court of Federal Claims’ view on 
the unmistakability doctrine. The terms of a gov- 
ernment contract, like any other contract, do not 
change with the enactment of subsequent legislation 
absent a specific contractual provision providing for 
such a change. Further, we conclude the Court of 
Federal Claims properly rejected the government’s 
argument based on POSSE that its sovereign power 
to legislate is at issue here. As the Court of Federal 
Claims observed: 


It is critical to this case . . . that plaintiffs are 
not claiming that the government contractually 
bound Congress not to change its regulations. 
Rather, plaintiffs claim that in their particular 
transaction with the government, it was agreed 
that they would be permitted to treat supervisory 
goodwill in a particular way for a fixed number of 
years. Thus, while Congress’ power to regulate is 
not impaired, the government may be compelled to 
pay for the results of its actions, especially when 
in so doing the government actually is paying 
because it received a benefit. 


Winstar I, 21 Cl. Ct. at 116. 


The thrifts did not ask for, and the Court of Federal 
Claims could not provide, injunctive relief that would 
have enjoined the thrift regulators from applying the 
FIRREA requirements to the thrifts. See Kanemoto 
v. United States Dep’t of Justice, 41 F.3d 641, 644 
(Fed. Cir. 1994). Rather the thrifts sought money 
damages for breach of contract by the government. 
Money damages, in contrast to injunctive relief, 
presents little threat to the government’s sovereign 
powers, other than the obvious financial incentive to 
honor its contracts. The Supreme Court’s decision in 


38a 


POSSE is predicated on the need to protect the 
sovereign’s legislative power and that concern is 
inapplicable where money damages alone rre at issue. 
Hughes Communications, 998 F.2d at 958 (distin- 
guishing POSSE and other unmistakability cases as 
cases seeking to enjoin the sovereign power to 
legislate from cases in the Court of Federal Claims 
where the plaintiff seeks only money damages). In 
sum, Congress was always free to deem supervisory 
goodwill a bad idea and legislate it out of existence. 
Where that legislation breached the government’s 
prior contractual obligations regarding the treatment 
of supervisory goodwill, however, the government 
remains liable in money damages for the breach. 


Significantly, after the Winstar and Statesman 
cases were argued to this court sitting in banc, the 
D.C. Circuit in a later proceeding in the Transohio 
case reconsidered its earlier position. See Trans- 
capital Fin. Corp. v. Director, Office of Thrift 
Supervision, 44 F.3d 1023 (D.C. Cir. 1995). The court 
recognized that its prior decision concerned only the 
denial of injunctive relief, and stated that its 
“analysis has no bearing one way or the other on the 
merits of [Transohio’s} claim for compensation in the 
Federal Court of Claims [sic].” At 1026 (emphasis in 
the original). Thus the Trunsohio decision, as modi- 
fied, complements our decision. In Transohio, the 
thrift sought to enjoin the government on the basis of 
its contractual rights and the court ruled it could not 
do so. In the present case, the thrifts seek only 
money damages with no request to enjoin the 
government. Accordingly, the sovereign’s power to 
legislate is not here at issue, only money damages 


39a 


because the FIRREA legislation has breached the 
contracts. 


We are also persuaded, as the Court of Federal 
Claims held, that the Bank Board and the FSLIC, as 
the principal regulators of the thrift industry, were 
fully empowered to enter into the contracts at issue 
here. Since its inception, the FSLIC has had the 
power “[t]o make contracts.” 12 U.S.C. § 1725(c)(3) 
(repeaied). The FSLIC and its supervisory agency, 
the Bank Board, have had the authority both to extend 
assistance to acquirers of insolvent FSLIC-insured 
thrifts, 12 U.S.C. § 1729(f)(2)(A) (repealed), and to set 
minimum capital limits on a case-by-case basis, 12 
U.S.C. § 1730(t)(2) (repealed). Although the FSLIC’s 
authority to provide assistance could not exceed the 
cost of liquidating the thrift, in each of the tran- 
actions on appeal the government was saving millions 
of dollars over the cost of liquidation. 


2. Finally, the government argues that FIRREA 
was a public and general sovereign act and that the 
government’s contractual performance is excused 
when it is precluded by such an act. Citing the 
leading case on the sovereign acts doctrine, Horowitz 
v. United States, 267 U.S. 458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 344- 
45, 69 L.Ed. 736 (1925), the government contends that 
FIRREA was a public and general act that excused 
its contractual performance. We agree, however, with 
the Court of Federal Claims that the relevant 
sections of FIRREA are not public and general 
sovereign acts. Therefore, the sovereign acts 
doctrine does not apply. 

“(T)he United States when sued as a contractor 


cannot be held liable for an obstruction to the per- 
formance of the particular contract resulting from its 


40a 


public and general acts as a sovereign.” Horowitz, 
267 U.S. at 461 (citations omitted). The sovereign 
acts doctrine is a part of every contract with the 
government, whether the contract explicitly provides 
for it or not. Hughes Communications, 998 F.2d at 
958. Horowitz makes clear that the sovereign acts 
doctrine is intended to level the playing field between 
the government and its contractors. “In this court 
the United States appear simply as contractors; and 
they are to be held liable only within the same limits 
that any other defendant would be in any other court. 
Though their sovereign acts performed for the gen- 
eral good may work injury to some private contrac- 
tors, such parties gain nothing by having the United 
States as their defendants.” Horowitz, 267 U.S. at 
461, 45 S.Ct. at 345 (quoting Jones v. United States, 1 
Ct.Cl. 383, 384, 1865 WL 1976 (1865)). 


Not every governmental action, however, qualifies 
as a sovereign act within the meaning of the doctrine. 
Only those “public and general acts as a sovereign” 
qualify. While presumably all government action is 
enacted for the good of the public, government action 
whose principal effect is to abrogate specific con- 
tractual rights does not immunize the government 
from contractual liability under the doctrine. Everett 
Plywood Corp. v. United States, 651 F.2d 723, 731-32 
(Ct.Cl. 1981); Sun Oil Co. v. United States, 572 F.2d 
786, 817 (Ct.Cl. 1978). As noted by the Court of 
Federal Claims in its Winstar II decision: 


[W]here the government abrogates through a 
limited and focused action specific government 
obligations to a particular class of individuals or 
entities it has contracted with, the government is 
not afforded immunity. In these instances, the 


4la 


government acts not in its capacity as sovereign, 
but in its capacity as contractor. 


25 Cl. Ct. at 551 (citations omitted). 


The Court of Federal Claims determined with 
respect to the Winstar transaction: 


The pertinent sections of FIRREA at issue here, 
12 U.S.C. § § 1464(t)(3)(A) and (9)(B), preclude the 
application of the sovereign acts doctrine. Their 
very purpose was to take away plaintiffs’ rights to 
use supervisory goodwill because the Congress 
felt its use was no longer good policy. Courts 
assessing sovereign act claims have not granted 
immunity where the sole purpose of the govern- 
ment action is to reverse an earlier policy decision 
later deemed unwise. 


Id. at 552 (citations and footnotes omitted). The 
government argues the Court of Federal Claims 
erred in concluding that the pertinent FIRREA sec- 
tions were directed only at thrifts with agreements 
with the FSLIC. In its brief, the government con- 
tends “[t]he FIRREA goodwill restrictions apply to 
all thrifts, whether they previously had goodwill 
created or may undertake transactions that create 
goodwill in the future, and whether or not they had 
contracts assertedly freezing the prior regulatory 
treatment of goodwill.” (Emphasis in original.) 


The relevant provisions of FIRREA are 12 U.S.C. 
§§ 1464(t)(3)(A) and 1464(t)(9)(A)-(C). Section 1464(t)- 
(9)(A) defines “core capital” as that “defined by the 
Comptroller of the Currency for national banks, less 
any unidentifiable intangible assets. Goodwill is 
one form of an “unidentifiable intangible asset.” 
An exception to the rule against intangible assets 


42a 


being includable in core capital is set forth in the 
transition rule at § 1464(t)(3)(A). That section pro- 
vides In lotwithstanding paragraph 9(A), an eligible 
savings association may include qualifying supervi- 
sory goodwill in calculating core capital.” 12 U.S.C. § 
1464(t)(3)(A). The section then provides a table that 
limits the amount of qualifying supervisory goodwill 
until it is totally phased out in 1995. Section 
1464(t) 9% ) provides the definition of “tangible” 
capital, which excludes all intangible assets, in- 
cluding supervisory goodwill. Section 1464(t)(9\B) 
defines “qualifying supervisory goodwill” as supervi- 
sory goodwill existing on April 12, 1989 and limits the 
amortization period of qualifying supervisory good- 
will to the shorter of 20 years or the remaining 
amortization period in effect on April 12, 1989. 


The statute plainly singles out supervisory 
goodwill for special treatment, albeit treatment less 
harsh than other forms of intangible assets. Supervi- 
sory goodwill only results from a supervisory mer- 
ger, a merger that necessarily required the participa- 
tion of the FSLIC.” Thus, thrifts that underwent a 
supervisory merger, like appellants, are singled out 
for special treatment by the statute. The statute 
specifically limits their ability to include certain 


See House Report at 432, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 228: 


[The Committee intends the term “supervisory goodwill” 
to mean goodwill resulting from the acquisition, merger, 
consolidation, purchase of assets or other business com- 
bination of any savings association where the market value 
of the assets acquired was less than the market value of the 
liabilities at the time of the transaction and where the 
accounting treatment of the goodwill has been approved by 
the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. 


43a 


assets in their calculation of capital. Although there 
is no doubt Congress passed this legislation out of 
concern about the use of “accounting gimmicks” 
behind the insured deposits, the legislation quite 
specifically abrogates agreements the government 
had made at an earlier time when it had suggested and 
approved the use of such “gimmicks” to avoid bailing 
out failing thrifts. 

The legislative history behind FIRREA demon- 
strates that those debating the bill in Congress knew 
that some thrifts claimed o have contractual rights 
regarding the use of supervisory goodwill and that 
the subject provisions would breach those contracts. 
Three members of the House Committee on Banking, 
Finance and Foreign Affairs stated in response to the 
House version of FIRREA: 


Unfortunately, [FIRREA] was amended by the 
Full Committee to phase out the treatment of 
goodwill for capital purposes over a five year 
period. Simply put, the Committee has reneged on 
the agreements that the government entered into 


concerning supervisory goodwill. 


.. » Clearly, the agreements concerning the 
treatment of goodwill were part of what the 
institutions had bargained for. Just as clearly, 
the Committee is abrogating those agreements. 


House Report at 498, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 293-94 
(additional views of Reps. Annunzio, Kanjorski, and 
Flake). Representative Ackerman argued that 
“([FIRREA] would abrogate written agreements made 
by the U.S. Government to thrifts that acquired 
failing institutions by . . . no longer counting goodwill 
as capital after a 4-year transition period. In effect, 


44a 


the Government is saying ‘thanks for your help, but 
we don’t need you anymore, so we're breaking our 
promise.’” 135 Cong.Rec. H2783 (daily ed. June 15, 
1989). These remarks, which are by no means 
exhaustive, illustrate that many in Congress were 
concerned about FIRREA’s repudiation of the 
supervisory goodwill promises made in the thrift 
agreements. 


One of the dissents argues that because the per- 
tinent sections were part of a “comprehensive piece of 
national legislation” enacted by Congress, the sec- 
tions are general and public acts that excuse the 
government’s contractual performance. We disagree. 
First, the portions of FIRREA at issue in this case 
are not any less directed at thrifts that had 
supervisory mergers because they are part of 
“comprehensive” legislation. By definition, the per- 
tinent sections apply only to supervisory goodwill, 
which could only occur as a result of a supervisory 
merger, that was in existence on April 12, 1989. The 
legislation plainly singles out thrifts that underwent 
supervisory mergers for special treatment. 

Second, we do not find the dissent’s attempt to 
distinguish Sun Oil and Everett Plywood as cases 
limited to agency action persuasive. There is no 
reason to distinguish action by the legislative branch 
from that of the executive branch. Indeed, the 
agencies in the executive branch receive their power 
to enter into the contracts from the legislative 
branch. The contracts the agencies properly enter 
into are not binding only at the grace of the 
legislative branch. Thus the Horowitz case makes no 
distinction between the acts of the coordinate 


45a 


branches of government. See 267 U.S. at 461 (“be 
they legislative or executive”). 

Finally, we know of no authority for this dissent’s 
position that the government has a sovereign right to 
disavow its contractual obligations through compre- 
hensive national legislation. Such a proposition is not 
supported by Horowitz and cannot be reconciled with 
the decisions of the Supreme Court in Lynch v. 
United States, 292 U.S. 571, 54 S.Ct. 840, 78 L.Ed. 
1434 (1934) and Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 
55 S.Ct. 432, 79 L.Ed.912 (1935). These decisions belie 
the notion that the government may repudiate its 
contracts by merely claiming it is acting in its 
“sovereign” capacity. 

— f= the Court of Federal Claims, that 
FIRREA was enacted for the public welfare—pre- 
sumably all legislation is. We are convinced, however, 
that the FIRREA provisions at issue here targeted 
thrifts that had undergone supervisory mergers, 
financed in part with supervisory goodwill, with the 
approval and assistance of the federal government. 
Moreover, the undisputed reason for limiting the use 
of the supervisory goodwill was precisely the reason 
the government used it in the first place—it is a 
money equivalent, not money. The government has 
plainly sought to render its own performance 
impossible. This is not a public and general act. The 
sovereign acts doctrine does not apply. 


CONCLUSION 


There is nothing extraordinary about the contracts 
in these cases save for their subject matter and the 
potential liability to the government. It is well 
established that the government may enter into 
contracts with private individuals as parties. See 


46a 


Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 358, 55 S.Ct. 432, 
436, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935) (The right to make binding 
obligations is a competence attaching to sover- 
eignty.”) (footnote omitted). Our decision is con- 
sistent with long standing precedent that when the 
government enters into such contracts, “its rights 
and duties therein are governed generally by the law 
applicable to contracts between private individuals.” 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571, 54 S.Ct. 840, 
843, 78 L.Ed. 1434 (1934) (footnote omitted); see also 
Perry, 294 U.S. at 352, 55 S.Ct. at 435 (“When the 
United States, with constitutional authority, makes 
contracts, it has rights and incurs responsibilities 
similar to those of individuals who are parties to such 
instruments.”). 

We conclude the thrifts’ contracts are enforceable 
against the government and that the government 
bargained to allow the thrifts to count certain 
intangible assets created in their mergers as capital 
assets for specified periods of time. The government 
later exercised its sovereign prerogative to enact 
legislation to limit the use of these intangible assets 
towards meeting capital requirements. Although the 
government was free to legislate, it remains liable for 
breach of contract where its legislation is directed at 
repudiating its prior contractual agreements. We 
conclude FIRREA repudiated the government’s 
agreements with the plaintiff thrifts. Accordingly, 
we affirm the liability judgments of the Court of 
Federal Claims. 


AFFIRMED. 


47a 


Nis, Circuit Judge, dissenting. 


Following in banc rehearing, additional briefing, 
and Chief Judge Archer’s thoughtful opinion, I have 
reviewed my position in this appeal which is set out at 
994 F.2d 797-813. However, I cannot agree that Con- 
gress “breached” contracts between the plaintiffs and 
the “government,” that is, the Bank Board and 
FSLIC, by enacting FIRREA. The majority’s hold- 
ing impermissibly fuses “the two characters which 
the government possesses as a contractor and as a 
sovereign.” Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 458, 
461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 69 L.Ed. 736 (1925). In my view, the 
plaintiffs can assert only a claim for an alleged taking 
of their property by the legislation, a claim which 
remains to be litigated. This is not a mere 
technicality. The amount of damages for a “taking” 
by legislation and for breach of contract are 


significantly different. 

Further, I disagree that a breach of contract oc- 
curred even accepting that the Bank Board and the 
FSLIC were contractually bound to recognize super- 
visory goodwill* and particular amortization periods. 
While the regulators agreed to allow the thrifts to 
use their proposed accounting methods, that is as far 
as any contract with the “government” went. In the 
case of private parties, the burden of a change in the 
law is borne by the party on which it falls, unless 


* The “purchase method of accounting,” in some circum- 
stances, may be “generally accepted accounting practice,” but 
the thrifts could not use that practice to create nonexistent 
capital as a basis on which they could make loans. The bank 
regulators had to approve the practice for the thrifts to be able 
to use this practice for such purposes. 


48a 


responsibility is otherwise assigned in the contract. 
Contracting parties in that situation “gain nothing 
by having the United States as their defendants.” Id. 
As delineated in my prior opinion, no clause can be 
found in the contracts under which the Bank Board 
and the FSLIC promised to pay if Congress decided to 
step in and do away with the “purchase method of 
accounting,” a euphemism for spinning straw into 
gold, and other accounting gimmicks. In this highly 
regulated industry, the thrifts did not negotiate 
contracts that freed them from the risk of a change in 
regulations. 


No one forced the plaintiffs into the acquisitions of 
failing S & L’s. Each acted voluntarily for the pur- 
pose of making money, a legitimate purpose, but not 
one the public must underwrite. It turned out for 
some that the bargains they struck were disastrous. 
That was due to their management’s bad judgment, 
coupled with their decision to use the optional 
accounting practices. 


I see no reason for reprinting my prior lengthy 
opinion to make minor editorial changes, e. g., change 
“we” to “I” throughout. While vacated as a court 
decision, it remains in the books for anyone to read 
who may be interested. I will simply incorporate it 
here by reference. 


49a 


LOURIE, Circuit Judge, dissenting. 


I respectfully dissent. 


I have no quarrel with the majority’s conclusion 
that the government had a contractual obligation to 
permit the thrifts to count supervisory goodwill as 
regulatory capital and to accept the particular 
amortization periods. Moreover, there can be little 
doubt concerning the essential unfairness in Con- 
gress’s denial of those contractual rights in its 
enactment of FIRREA. 

However, I believe that the sovereign acts doctrine 
is a barrier to the thrifts’ recovery under a breach of 
contract theory. In Horowiiz v. United States, the 
Supreme Court held that “the United States when 
sued as a contractor cannot be held liable for an 
obstruction to the performance of la] particular 
contract resulting from its public and general acts as 
a sovereign.” Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 
458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 69 L.Ed. 736 (1925). An embargo 
placed by the Railroad Administration on shipments 
of silk by freight did not obligate the government for 
breach of its contract to ship silk which the Ordnance 
Department had sold to the petitioner. This case is 
no different in principle. 

The majority holds that the enactment of certain 
sections of FIRREA was not a “public and general” 
act because “legislation whose principal effect is to 
abrogate specific contractual rights does not immu- 
nize the government from contractual liability under 
the doctrine.” In support of this principle, the 
majority cites Everett Plywood Corp. v. United 
States, 651 F.2d 723, 731-32 (Ct. Cl. 415 (1981) and Sun 
Oil Co. v. United States, 572 F.2d 786, 817 (Ct. Cl. 
(1978). The majority also quotes the Court of Federal 


50a 


Claims’ decision in Winstar II stating that the 
government is not afforded immunity when it “acts 
not in its capacity as sovereign, but in its capacity as 
contractor.” Winstar Corp. v. U.S., 25 Cl. Ct. 541, 551 
(1992). In addition, the majority refers to Lynch v. 
United States, 292 U.S. 571, 54 S.Ct. 840, 78 L.Ed. 
1434 (1934), and Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 
55 S.Ct. 432, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935). 

Neither Everett nor Sun Oil, however, involved an 
act of general legislation as the asserted ground of 
contract breach. Everett dealt with an agency’s 
termination of a single logging contract. The Everett 
court specifically stated that “[i]t would have been an 
entirely different case if Congress had passed a law 
immediately prohibiting all cutting in public forests.” 
Everett, 651 F.2d at 732. Similarly, in Sun Oil the 
Secretary of the Interior denied a single drilling 
permit; there was no question of an alleged breach by 
legislation. In both Everett and Sun Oil the agency 
action was directed to a single contract, not all 
government contracts having a particular provision. 
Furthermore, unlike the legislation at issue in Lynch 
and Perry, FIRREA’s change in the regulatory 
treatment of supervisory goodwill did not repudiate a 
debt of the United States. No authority of which I am 
aware suggests that a comprehensive piece of 
national legislation such as FIRREA is not a “public 
and general” sovereign act of government. 

The majority, like the Court of Federal Claims, 
states that only certain sections of FIRREA are rele- 
vant to the issue at hand. Of course, defining the 
relevant governmental action narrowly focuses on the 
impact that FIRREA had on the particular parties 
before us. However, it also mischaracterizes the true 
nature of the governmental action. Congress did not 


5la 


act only against certain thrifts or contracts; it acted 
to deal with the entire thrift system in order to save 
it. Doing so required dealing with the problem of 
underfunded thrifts to which the treatment of 
goodwill was integrally related. 

Furthermore, I cannot see how Congress was 
acting in its contractual capacity, rather than in its 
role as sovereign, when it enacted FIRREA. The 
government was not buying goods or services when it 
acted. The legislation was intended to eliminate, 
nationally, practices that Congress thought were 
inconsistent with sound banking practice or that 
otherwise threatened the government’s ability to 
insure the depositors of the thrifts. FIRREA, in fact, 
reshaped the entire thrift industry on a national level. 
Thus, one can hardly characterize Congress’s act of 
passing FIRREA as “contractual” rather than sover- 
eign. Moreover, the enactment of FIRREA was 
public and general; it was broadly directed to the good 
of the general public, to the country’s financial sys- 
tem, rather than to a specific contract that it dis- 
approved. 

That some members of Congress argued that 
enactment of certain provisions of FIRREA would 
break promises made to the thrifts does not mean that 
Congress’s passage of FIRREA was not a sovereign 
act; it only states the problem and indicates the 
understandable distress felt by those members. Nor 
do such statements overcome the government’s sover- 
eign right to enact comprehensive national legisla- 
tion for the common good without liability for breach 
of particularly affected contracts. Thus, while the 
thrifts certainly were victimized when they made 
commitments in reliance on accounting treatment 
agreed to by the regulatory agencies, I am unable to 


52a 53a 


conclude that the government was powerless to enact 
appropriate legislation in order to restructure the 
U.S. thrift industry. 


APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


No. 92-5164 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, 
UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, 
STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CoRp., 
THE STATESMAN GROUP, INC. 
AND AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 


AND 


GLENDALE FEDERAL BANK, FSB, 
PLAINTIFFS-APPELLEES 


. 
THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT-APPELLANT 


May 25, 1993 
ORDER GRANTING REHEARING AND REHEARING 
EN BANC AND AMENDING OPINION; 
JUDGMENT VACATED AND OPINION WITHDRAWN 
AUG. 18, 1993 


Before: NikEs, Chief Judge, Rich and NEWMAN, 
Circuit Judges. 
NiEs, Chief Judge. 


In an opinion dated July 24, 1992, in Cases Nos. 
90-773C and 90-772C, the United States Claims 


54a 


Court! (Smith, C.J.) granted summary judgment in 
favor of plaintiffs Statesman Savings Holding Corp. 
and its affiliates and of plaintiff Glendale Federal 
Bank (FSB) on their breach of contract claims 
against the United States. Specifically, the court held 
that by enactment of the Financial Institutions Re- 
form, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 
(FIRREA), Pub. L. No. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183 (codified 
in relevant part at 12 U.S.C. § 1464), the United 
States breached the contractual obligations of the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board to the plaintiffs by 
changing regulatory capital standards.“ The court 
then consolidated these cases with Winstar Corp. v. 
United States, No. 90-8C, and certified for inter- 
locutory appeal, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b), its 
opinions granting summary judgment as to liability 
in the consolidated cases.’ Having granted the 
government permission to appeal, 979 F.2d 216 
(Fed.Cir.1992), we now reverse the judgment of lia- 
bility on the breach of contract claims of all plaintiffs 
and remand for further proceedings consistent 
herewith. 


I. 


Much of the history of the savings and loan (or 
“thrift”) industry consists of financial crisis followed 


| Effective October 29, 1992, the United States Claims Court 
was renamed the “United States Court of Federal Claims” by 
the Federal Courts Administration Act of 1992, Pub.L. No. 
102-572, § 902(a), 106 Stat. 4506, 4516 (1992). 

2 The court’s opinion is reported at Statesman Sav. Holding 
Corp. v. United States, 26 Cl. Ct. 904 (1992). 

The court’s opinion in the former case is reported as 
Winstar Corp. v. United States, 21 Cl. Ct. 112 (1990) (“Winstar 
10, modified, 25 Cl. Ct. 541 (1992) (“Winstar IT”). 


55a 


by regulatory response. During the Great Depres- 
sion, 40 percent of the nation’s $20 billion in home 
mortgages went into default, 1700 of approximately 
12,000 thrifts failed, and thrift depositors lost roughly 
$200 million. H.R. Rep. No. 54(1), 101st Cong., Ist 
Sess. 292 (1989), reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 86, 
88-89 (“House Report”). In response, Congress 
created the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (Bank 
Board) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation (FSLIC) to provide deposit insurance and 
to regulate the previously unregulated thrift indus- 
try. See Federal Home Loan Bank Act, Pub.L. No. 
72-304, 47 Stat. 725 (1932) (codified as amended at 12 
U.S.C. §§ 1421-1449 (1988)); Home Owners’ Loan Act 
of 1933, Pub.L. No. 73-43, 48 Stat. 128 (1933) (codified 
as amended at 12 U.S.C. §§ 1461- 1468 (1988)); and 
Title IV of the National Housing Act, Pub.L. No. 
73-479, 48 Stat. 1246 (1934) (codified as amended at 12 
U.S.C. §§ 1701-1750g (1988)). Pursuant to this and to 
subsequently enacted statutory authority, these 
agencies have “promulgated regulations governing 
‘the powers and operations of every Federal savings 
and loan association from its cradle to its corporate 
grave.’” Fidelity Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass’n v. De La 
Cuesta, 458 U.S. 141, 145, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 3017, 73 
L.Ed.2d 664 (1982) (citing California v. Coast Fed. 
Sav. & Loan Ass’n, 98 F.Supp. 311, 316 (S.D.Cal. 
1951)). During their corporate lifetimes, thrifts are 
subject to rules that restrict their lending and invest- 
ment activities, impose reporting and record-keeping 
requirements, limit (at times) interest paid on de- 
posits, and authorize their termination and burial by 
government-appointed receivers. In short, the thrift 
industry has become “one of the longest regulated and 
most closely supervised of public callings.” Cali- 


56a 


fornia Hous. Sec., Inc. v. United States, 959 F.2d 955, 
958 (Fed.Cir.), cert. denied,—U.S.—, 113 S.Ct. 324, 121 
L.Ed.2d 244 (1992) (quoting Fahey v. Mallonee, 332 
U.S. 245, 250, 67 S.Ct. 1552, 1554, 91 L.Ed. 2080 (1947)). 
This regulation and reform has converted the thrift 
industry into what Congress has described as “a fed- 
erally-conceived and assisted system to provide citi- 
zens with affordable housing funds.” House Report at 
292; 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 88. 

Since their creation, the Bank Board and FSLIC 
have set minimum capital requirements—the regula- 
tory function that is of interest in this appeal. As the 
Congress noted in the Committee Report on 
FIRREA: 


A sound tangible capital base is fundamental in 
promoting the safety and soundness of individual 
institutions and ultimately the stability of our 
financial system. Those institutions that operate 
without real capital are only risking the taxpay- 
ers’ funds. With solid capital, losses related to 
risky activities are absorbed by the institutions’ 
owners. Absent real and tangible capital, the first 
dollar lost is essentially an insurance fund 
dollar—with the losses ultimately borne by the 
taxpayer. 


House Report at 429, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 225. These 
requirements have been the subject of numerous 
statutory and regulatory changes over the years. 
See Garn-St. Germain Depository Institutions Act, 
Pub.L. No. 97-320, 96 Stat. 1469 (1982) (codified 
throughout 12 U.S.C.); Depository Institutions 
Deregulation and Monetary Control Act, Pub.L. No. 
96-221, 94 Stat. 132 (1980) (codified throughout 12 
U.S.C. and at 15 U.S.C. §§ 1601-67 (1988)); Emergency 


57a 


Home Finance Act, Pub.L. No. 91-351, 84 Stat. 450 
(1970) (codified throughout 12 U.S.C.). The regula- 
tions governing thrift capital reserve requirements 
changed three times in 1982 alone. See 47 Fed.Reg. 
3543 (codified at 12 C.F.R. § 563.13); id. at 31859 
(codified at 12 C. F. R. § 563.13); id. at 52961 (codified at 
12 C. F. R. § 563.13). 


The First“ S & L Crisis of the 1980's, and the Bank 
Board’s Response 

The Bank Board significantly changed its regula- 
tory capital standards in the early 1980's, in response 
to what was then the most severe industry crisis 
since the Great Depression. High inflation, coupled 
with a shift in Federal Reserve policy from stabil- 
izing interest rates to controlling the money supply, 
had caused a dramatic increase in interest rates with 
an equally dramatic increase in the cost of funds to 
thrifts. House Report at 294-95, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 
90-91. This meant that the thrifts had to pay more 
money to attract funds than they were earning on 
their long-term, fixed-rate mortgage portfolies. Id. 
For example, in August 1981, 53 percent of the 
thrift industry’s interest-bearing liabilities were in 
short-term certificates of deposit paying high market 
rates of interest, while 85 percent of its assets were 
long-term mortgages fixed at below market interest 
rates. Id. at 296, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 92. The result 
of this unfavorable interest rate mismatch is not 
surprising. Thrifts lost about $4.5 billion in both 1981 
and 1982. Eighty-one thrifts failed in 1981, 252 failed 
in 1982, and 102 failed in 1983. Id. FSLIC faced de- 
posit insurance liability that threatened to exhaust 
the insurance fund. See Beesley, FSLIC 1981 
Annual Report, FHLBB J., April 1982, at 16. 


>> 


58a 


In 1981, the Bank Board and FSLIC decided this 
problem could be alleviated with greater incentives 
for the acquisition of failing thrifts by profitable 
institutions. The Chairman of the Bank Board testi- 
fied that such acquisitions would result in “lower 
ultimate costs” to the FSLIC insurance fund than 
would a program of liquidation and payment of insured 
deposits. Competition and Conditions in the Finan- 
cial System: Hearings Before the Senate Comm. on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 97th Cong., 
Ist Sess., pt. 1, at 100 (1981). An important acqui- 
sition “incentive” provided by the Bank Board was a 
change in the regulatory accounting principles ap- 
plied to thrift acquisitions to include several signif- 
icant departures from generally accepted account- 
ing principles (GAAP). Before the enactment of 
FIRREA, the Bank Board had broad discretion to 
prescribe the accounting standards used to measure 
compliance with its regulatory capital requirements. 
See 12 U.S.C. § 1467 (Supp. V 1987). These changes 
were later characterized by the Congress as “ac- 
counting gimmicks.” House Report at 297-98, 1989 
U.S. C. C. A. N. at 93-94. 

One of these accounting gimmicks was “supervi- 
sory goodwill,” a concept that is explained by the 
Claims Court's opinion in Winstar J. 


Under [the purchase method of accounting] . . . 
the book value of the acquired thrift’s assets and 
liabilities was adjusted to fair market value at the 
time of the acquisition. Any excess in the cost of 
the acquisition (which included liabilities 
assumed by the acquirer) over the fair market 
value of the acquired assets was separately 
recorded on the acquirer’s books as “goodwill.” In 


59a 


other words, the government agreed to allow the 
plaintiffs and others in similar circumstances to 
treat what was a deficit in capital as an asset. 
Goodwill was considered an intangible asset that 
could be amortized on a straight-line basis over a 
number of years. The difference between the 
aggregate fair market value of liabilities assumed 
by the acquirer and the aggregate fair market 
value of the failing thrift’s assets was known as 
“supervisory goodwill,” in the context of a 
supervisory merger, and was recorded on the 
resulting institution’s balance sheet as an asset 
includable in capital for purposes of satisfying 
[the Bank Board's] minimum capital require- 
ments. 


21 Cl. Ct. at 113. With a wave of the accountant’s pen, 
liabilities could be magically converted into assets; 
and the worse off the acquired thrift, the more the 
“supervisory goodwill” that could be booked as a 
capital asset for purposes of meeting regulatory capi- 
tal requirements. 

The other practice involved in this appeal is 
“regulatory accounting practice” (RAP) goodwill. As 
the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit explained: 


When FSLIC provided cash assistance to the 
acquiror in connection with the acquisition, 
GAAP would have required that the amount of 
the assistance be treated as an asset of the 
acquired thrift, increasing that thrift’s net worth 
and correspondingly decreasing the amount of 
goodwill that otherwise would have been created 
in the acquisition. FHLBB departed from GAAP, 
however, by permitting some or all of FSLIC’s 
cash assistance to be recorded as a credit to the 


60a 


acquired thrift’s new worth, without requiring 
that the amount of pre- assistance goodwill to be 
reduced. An asset equaling the amount of GAAP 
goodwill that otherwise would have been lost was 
termed “RAP goodwill.” 


Security Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Director, Office of 
Thrift Supervision, 960 F.2d 1318, 1320 n. 5 (5th 
Cir.1992). Essentially, the RAP goodwill device 
permitted a double counting of any FSLIC monetary 
contribution—once as tangible capital, once as 
“goodwill” capital. 

Allowing potential acquirors of ailing thrifts to 
book the full amount of supervisory and/or RAP 
goodwill as a capital asset stimulated many acqui- 
sitions that would have otherwise run afoul of 
regulatory capital requirements. As former Bank 
Board Chairman Richard Pratt stated in testimony 
before Congress: 


The Bank Board was caught between a rock and a 
hard place. While it did not have sufficient 
resources to close all insolvent institutions, at 
the same time, it had to consolidate the industry, 
move weaker institutions into stronger hands and 
do everything possible to minimize losses during 
the transition period. Goodwill was an indispen- 
sable tool in performing this task. The GAAP 
approach to purchase method accounting mergers 
provided a bridge which allowed the Bank Board 
to encourage the necessary consolidation of the 
industry, while at the same time husbanding the 
financial resources which were then available to 
it. 

Savings and Loan Policies in the Late 1970’s and 

1980's: Hearings Before the House Comm. on 


6la 


Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, 101st Cong., 
2d Sess., No. 176, at 227 (1990). Each of the plaintiffs 
in this appeal participated in acquisitions whose via- 
bility was premised upon the Bank Board’s then ap- 
proved accounting practices. 
The Plaintiffs’ Acquisitions of Failing Thrifts 
Winstar (in combination with United Federal), 
Statesman (in combination with American Life and 
Casualty), and Glendale all acquired ailing thrifts 
under this program to encourage such acquisitions. 
Winstar and Statesman their acquisitions 
directly with the Bank Board and FSLIC;* Glendale’s 
merger was expressly conditioned on FSLIC ap- 
proval. In the Winstar and Statesman deals, the 
plaintiffs and FSLIC negotiated and fixed their 
respective cash contributions to the acquired thrift.’ 


Pursuant to statutory authorization, 12 U.S.C. §. 


1464(d)(11) (1982), the Bank Board reviewed and ap- 
proved all of the acquisitions, examining inter alia the 
thrifts’ projected compliance with regulatory capital 
requirements, 12 C.F.R. 55 546.2(h)(6), 563.13 (1982), 
in accordance with its accounting standards. 12 
C.F.R. § 545.20 (1982). 

Both Statesman and Winstar signed an “Assistance 
Agreement” with FSLIC. These agreements set 


In the case of Winstar, the acquired thrift had authorized 
the Bank Board to negotiate a merger or consolidation. In the 
case of Statesman, the acquired thrifts were all in FSLIC 
receivership. 

5 FSLIC contributed $5.5 million to the Winstar acquisition; 
Winstar contributed $2 million. FSLIC contributed $60 million 
to the Statesman acquisitions; Statesman contributed $21 mil- 
lion. FSLIC apparently made some cash contribution to the 
Glendale acquisition, but the specific amount is not of record. 


H 


62a 


forth FSLIC’s promised monetary contribution and 
its other contractual responsibilities. None of these 
agreements expressly mention either purchase 
method accounting or supervisory goodwill. Both 
agreements, however, contain an “integration” clause 
which expressly incorporates any resolutions or let- 
ters of the Bank Board concerning the acquisition or 
merger in connection with its approval. 

It is these letters and resolutions of the Bank 
Board that contain the only express reference to 
purchase method accounting or supervisory goodwill. 
On July 13, 1984, the Bank Board issued a “forbear- 
ance letter” confirming the following understanding 
respecting the Winstar acquisition: “For purposes of 
reporting to the Board, the value of any intangible 
assets resulting from accounting for the merger in 
accordance with the method may be amor- 
tized by [United Federal] over a period not to exceed 
35 years by the straight-line method.” Similarly, in 
its March 11, 1988, resolution conditionally approving 
the Statesman acquisitions, the Bank Board acknowl- 
edged that “(t]he value of any unidentifiable intang- 
ible assets resulting from accounting for the Acqui- 
sition and the Mergers in accordance with the pur- 
chase method of accounting may be amortized . . . over 
a period not in excess of twenty-five (25) years by the 
straight line method.” The “forbearance letter” 
issued to Statesman mentions the $26 million “regu- 
latory capital” credit for FSLIC’s cash contribution 
but not supervisory goodwill. 

Glendale acquired its failing thrift (First Federa!) 
in a different regulatory environment. Unlike the 
transactions involving Winstar and Statesman, this 
merger was negotiated between the thrifts without 
the participation of the Bank Board or FSLIC. How- 


63a 


ever, the Merger Agreement signed by Glendale and 
First Federal was expressly conditioned upon FSLIC 
approval. Shortly after the Merger Agreement was 
signed, FSLIC and Glendale signed a “Supervisory 
Action Agreement” that approved the merger and 
provided for financial assistance from FSLIC. This 
contract also contained an “integration clause” that 
incorporated contemporaneous resolutions and let- 
ters of the Bank Board. 

As in the case of Winstar and Statesman, the Bank 
Board issued resolutions and a forbearance letter but 
none of these expressly approve either purchase 
method accounting or supervisory goodwill. Reso- 
lution No. 81-710 does require that Glendale furnish a 
satisfactory accountant’s opinion within 60 days of 
the merger’s effective date which justifies the use of 
purchase method accounting, describes “any goodwill 
or discount of assets arising from the merger to be 
recorded on Glendale’s books,” and substantiates the 
reasonableness of amounts so booked and the result- 
ing amortization periods and methods. Glendale was 
further obligated to submit a stipulation that any 
goodwill arising from the merger be determined and 
amortized in accordance with a Bank Board memo- 
randum (R-31b) which describes its standards for the 
computation and use of supervisory goodwill arising 
from thrift mergers. On March 19, 1982, Glendale 
supplied the required opinion letter, setting forth its 
intention to amortize approximately $716 million of 
supervisory goodwill over a 40 year period and $18 
million over 12 years. There is no evidence that the 
government regulators found this proposal unsatis- 
factory. 

Supervisory goodwill was critical to all of these 
acquisitions. Even with the monetary contributions 


64a 


of Winstar and FSLIC, the GAAP net worth of the 
thrift created by the Winstar transaction amounted to 
approximately a negative $6.7 million dollars. This 
capital shortfall was met by the $10.6 million in 
goodwill that was created by the purchase method 
accounting applied to this transaction. Similarly, the 
thrift created by the Statesman acquisitions was able 
to meet regulatory capital standards only because of 
the $25.8 million in supervisory goodwill and the $26 
million regulatory capital credit generated in the 
transaction. The value of these “assets” is roughly 
equal to FSLIC’s potential liability had the four 
failing thrifts that Statesman acquired been liqui- 
dated. In the case of Glendale, even with its capital 
reserve of $277 million and with FSLIC’s contri- 
bution to the merger, the resulting thrift was left 
with an immediate GAAP capital deficiency of $460 
million, which was met by more than $700 million of 
supervisory goodwill generated by the merger. Had 
either Winstar, Statesman, or Glendale been unable to 
count this goodwill as capital, its newly created thrift 
would have been subject to immediate liquidation. 


The “Second” S & L Crisis of the 1980’s and 
FIRREA 


Subsequent to all these transactions, Congress 
enacted FIRREA. This sweeping reform of the thrift 
industry was compelled by the “precarious financial 
condition” of the FSLIC insurance fund and by wan- 
ing consumer confidence in the savings and loan 
industry. House Report at 302, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 
98. As of December 31, 1988, FSLIC was $56 billion in 
the red. Id. at 304, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 100. Con- 
sumer fears regarding the stability of the industry 
resulted in record withdrawals—$28.5 billion in the 


65a 


first quarter of 1989, compared with a previous record 
annual withdrawal of $25 billion in 1980. Id. at 305, 
1989 U.S. C. C. A. N. at 101. 

Among the reforms implemented in FIRREA were 
the abolition of FSLIC and the Bank Board, with a 
transfer of FSLIC’s insurance function to the Feder- 
al Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and a trans- 
fer of the Bank Board’s regulatory function to the 
newly created Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), 
under the supervision of the Department of the 
Treasury. Id. at 310, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 106. The 
abolition of the Bank Board was motivated in part by 
Congress’s perception that the Bank Board’s relaxed 
capital standards and sluggish regulatory enforce- 
ment, which contributed to the thrift crisis, were the 
product of an agency mission directed more toward 
promoting than toward regulating the industry. /d. at 
302, 1989 U.S. C. C. A. N. at 98. 

These capital standards were the target of specific 
legislation, and of congressional ire. Goodwill was 
described as “one of the remaining poisons of the sav- 
ings and loan industry.” 135 Cong.Rec. H2710 (daily 
ed. June 15, 1989) (statement of Rep. Price). As one 
member of Congress noted: 


Goodwill is not cash. It is a concept, and a 
shadowy one at that. When the Federal govern- 
ment liquidates a failed thrift, goodwill is simply 
no good. It is valueless. That means, quite simp- 
ly, that the taxpayer picks up the tab for the 
shortfall. 


Id. at H2571 (statement of Rep. Barnard). Intangible 
capital assets generated by the Bank Board’s use of 
accounting gimmickry “masked the worsening finan- 
cial condition of the industry, and the FSLIC, and 


66a 


enabled many weak institutions to continue operating 
with an increasingly inadequate cushion to absorb 
future losses.” House Report at 298, 1989 
U.S. C. C. A. N. at 94. At the time FIRREA was enact- 
ed, supervisory goodwill accounted for $18 billion in 
regulatory capital. Id. at 497, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 
293 (additional views of Reps. Annunzio, Kanjorski 
and Flake). 

FIRREA charged OTS with developing and imple- 
menting “uniformly applicable capital standards for 
savings associations.” 12 U.S.C.S. § 1464(t)(1)(A) 
(Law. Co-op.1992). But unlike previous legislation, 
FIRREA severely restricted the agency’s discretion 
to set these standards, requiring a “leverage limit,” a 
“tangible capital requirement,” and a “risk-based 
capital requirement.” Id. The “leverage limit” to be 
promulgated by OTS would require a thrift to “main- 
tain core capital in an amount not less than 3 percent 
of [its] total assets.” 12 U.S.C.S. § 1464(t)(2)(A). 
Similarly, OTS was obligated to set standards 
requiring thrifts “to maintain tangible capital in an 
amount not less than 1.5 percent of .. . total assets,” 
12 U.S. C. S. § 1464(t)(2)(B), and to meet risk-based 
capital requirements that were not materially lower 
than those applicable to national banks. 12 U.S. C. S. 
§ 1464(t(2)(C). FIRREA expressly excluded intan- 
gible assets such as goodwill from its definition of 
“tangible capital.” 12 U.S.C.S. § 1464(t)(9)(C). It also 
expressly limited the quantity of supervisory good- 
will (expressed as a percentage of total assets) that 
could be included in “core capital,” gradually reducing 
the allowed percentage to zero by the end of 1994, 12 
U.S.C.S. § 1464(t)(3), and limiting to twenty years the 
amortization period in the interim. 12 U.S.C.S. § 
1464(t)(9)(B). Subsequently, OTS promulgated capital 


67a 


regulations that included a similar phase-out sched- 
ule for the risk-based capital standards. 12 C.F.R. 
§ 567.6(a) (1991). 

With the passage of FIRREA, Winstar, Statesman, 
and Glendale had serious difficulties meeting the new 
statutory capital requirements. Both Winstar and 
Statesman are now in receivership.“ Glendale avoided 
noncompliance, and thus shutdown, only by under- 
going a costly and extensive restructuring.’ 


FIRREA Litigation in the District Courts 


A number of thrifts, which like the plaintiffs here 
had made acquisitions in the early to mid-1980’s, sued 
OTS in the district courts, seeking injunctions 
against the enforcement of the new statutory and 
regulatory capital standards against them. In each 
case, the thrifts advanced similar arguments. The 
thrifts contended that a savings provision of 
FIRREA, codified at 12 U.S.C. § 1437(a), prevented 
abrogation of the Bank Board’s “agreements,” as ex- 
pressed in the resolutions, forbearance letters, and 
the like, regarding the regulatory treatment of good- 
will assets generated in those mergers that it 
had approved. The thrifts argued further that, if 
FIRREA were construed to abrogate these “agree- 
ments,” enforcement of these new capital standards 
would constitute a taking without just compensation 


Even if Winstar had been able fully to count goodwill as 
regulatory capital, it may have failed nonetheless to meet the 
new statutory capital requirements. See Statesman, 26 Cl. Ct. 
at 924. 

Despite this restructuring, Giendale fell out of compliance 
with one of the regulatory capital standards in March of 1992. 
As of this date, it is still operating and has not been placed in 
receivership. 


68a 


in violation of the Fifth Amendment. A number of 
thrifts obtained short-lived victories in the district 
courts preventing OTS from enforcing these stand- 
ards against them. However, without exception these 
decisions were reversed on appeal. Guaranty Fin. 
Servs., Inc. v. Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 
742 F.Supp. 1159 (M.D.Ga.1990), rev’d, 928 F.2d 994 
(11th Cir.1991); Far W. Fed. Bank, S.B. v. Director, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 746 F.Supp. 1042 
(D.Or.1990), rev'd, 951 F.2d 1093 (9th Cir.1991); 
Security Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Director, Office of 
Thrift Supervision, 761 F.Supp. 1277 (S.D.Miss.1991), 
rev'd, 960 F.2d 1318 (5th Cir.1992); Carteret Sav. 
Bank, F.A. v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 762 
F.Supp. 1159 (D.N.J.1991), rev’d, 963 F.2d 567 (3d 
Cir.1992).” 

Following the lead of the Courts of Appeals for the 
Eleventh Circuit in Guaranty Fin. Servs., Inc. v. 
Ryan, 928 F.2d 994, 996 (11th Cir.1991), and for the 
Sixth Circuit in Franklin Fed. Sav. Bank v. Direc- 
tor, Office of Thrift Supervision, 927 F.2d 1332 (6th 
Cir.1991), the courts of appeals have unanimously held 
that FIRREA’s “savings provision” does not exempt 
from its regulatory capital standards the supervisory 
goodwill created by these alleged “agreements” with 
the Bank Board. See Security Sav. & Loan; see also 
Charter Fed. Sav. Bank v. Office of Thrift Super- 
vision, 976 F.2d 203 (4th Cir.1992); Carteret Sav. 


In one case, a district court held that these forbearances 
were contractual obligations of the government, breached by 
FIRREA, and ordered recision as an appropriate remedy. 
Charter Fed. Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Super- 
ae ag F.Supp. 809 (W.D.Va.1991), rev'd, 976 F.2d 203 (4th 

ir. ). 


69a 


Bank, F. A. v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 963 F.2d 
567 (3d Cir.1992); Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 967 F.2d 598 
(D.C.Cir.1992); Far W. Fed. Bank, S.B. v. Director, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 951 Fd 1093 (9th 
Cir.1991). With respect to the requests for 
injunctions, the courts of appeals were nearly unani- 
mous in declining to address the merits, holding that 
a claim for damages under the Tucker Act would be 
the appropriate remedy, if any, for an asserted 
takings claim. Carteret, 963 F. 2d at 581-83, Franklin 
Fed., 927 F.2d at 1341; Far V. Fed. Bank, 951 F.2d at 
1100. Cf. Transohio, 967 F.2d at 612-13 (finding juris- 
diction in the district courts over claims for specific 
(rather than monetary) relief under contract and tak- 
ings theories). The two courts of appeals that have 
addressed a breach of contract-related issue held that 
the thrifts before them had not contracted with the 
government for the specific regulatory treatment of 
previously authorized supervisory goodwill. Trans- 
ohio, 967 F.2d at 618-24; Charter Fed., 976 F.2d at 
210-213. 


Court of Federal Claims Litigation 


As the government was accumulating its victories 
in the courts of appeals, Winstar, Statesman, Glen- 
dale, and a number of other thrifts similarly situated 
were prosecuting suits in the United States Claims 
Court, now the Court of Federal Claims. The plain- 
tiffs claim, inter alia, that FIRREA’s regulatory 
capital requirements, as implemented by OTS, 
breached their contracts with the government by 
repudiating the regulatory treatment of goodwill that 
they had been promised by the Bank Board. 


70a 


Winstar’s contract claim was the first decided. On 
cross-motions for summary judgment, the trial court 
ruled that Winstar had an implied-in-fect contract 
with the government under which it “would be per- 
mitted to continue to treat supervisory goodwill as a 
capital asset and to amortize it for 35 years, regard- 
less of changes in generally accepted accounting prin- 
ciples (GAAP) or in regulatory policy.” Winstar J. 21 
Cl. Ct. at 115.“ The court concluded that this contract 
did not impair the power of Congress to regulate, but 
Winstar was entitled to damages for the resulting 
breach of the contract. Id. at 116. The court analo- 
gized Winstar’s claim to a suit for compensation 
under the Fifth Amendment, in which one accepts the 
power of Congress to regulate but requests compen- 
sation for the exercise of that power. Id. 

After additional briefing, and on the government’s 
request for clarification, the court issued a second 
opinion, affirming its previous holding that an implied 
in fact contract existed giving Winstar a right to 
treat supervisory goodwill as a capital asset for 35 
years and holding that the government breached this 
right when Congress enacted FIRREA limiting the 
amortization period to 20 years. Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. 
at 549. The court discussed at length and disting- 
uished the Supreme Court’s decision in Bowen v. 
Public Agencies Opposed to Social Sec. Entrapment, 
477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 2390, 91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) 
(POSSE), on the ground it did not involve a contract. 


The court did not rely upon the Assistance Agreement in 
reaching this conclusion. Rather, it cited the forbearance 
letter, as well as several internal Bank Board documents, as 
evidence of the government’s intent.“ Winstar I, 21 Cl. Ct. at 
115. 


71a 


In POSSE, the Court held that Congress could 
abrogate, as it did, the right a state previously had to 
withdraw from the Social Security system. Id. 
Finally, the Claims Court concluded that because the 
regulatory capital reforms of FIRREA were enacted 
“to take away the plaintiffs’ rights to use supervisory 
goodwill” and not for the public good, the government 
was not absolved of contract liability under the 
“Sovereign Acts Doctrine.” 25 Cl. Ct. at 551- 53. 
Applying its Winstar analysis, the trial court also 
granted summary judgment in favor of Statesman and 
Glendale in Statesman Sav. Holding Corp. v. United 
States, 26 Cl. Ct. 904 (1992). In these instances, how- 
ever, the court found express, rather than implied-in- 
fact contracts. Specifically, the court found that the 
integration clause of the Statesman Assistance 
Agreement incorporated contemporaneous Bank 
Board resolutions into the contract. Statesman, 26 
Cl. Ct. at 912. Because the Bank Board resolution 
approving the Statesman merger provided for the use 
of the purchase method of accounting, “the govern- 
ment and Statesman had an express contract for the 
use of that accounting method.“ Id. The court 
similarly found, based upon the contemporaneous 
documents in the Glendale transaction, that the 
government had entered into an express contract 
under which the Bank Board “agreed to forebear from 
exercising its authority to bring enforcement 
proceedings against Glendale for failure to meet 
regulatory capital standards.” Id. at 913. Finding 
that “the government possessed no contractu- 
ally-based right allowing it to abrogate without 
liability the parties’ express contract,” the court held 
the enactment of FIRREA to be a breach of these 
contracts not within the scope of the Sovereign Acts 


72a 


Doctrine. Id. at 915. The court then consolidated 
these cases with Winstar and certified for interloc- 
utory appeal its decisions holding the government 
liable on the plaintiffs’ breach of contract claims. Id. 
at 924. 


The government does not dispute that the Bank 
Board and FSLIC understood that the purchase 
method of accounting would be applied to these mer- 
gers, that the resulting supervisory goodwill would 
be booked as regulatory capital, and that amortization 
over a period longer than 20 years was approved. Nor 
does it dispute this understanding was memorialized 
in contemporaneous documents—the resolutions and 
forbearance letters. Conversely, the thrifts do not 
dispute that the government allowed them to proceed 
in accordance with their understanding until enact- 
ment of FIRREA. The dispute here concerns not 
what was agreed to at that time but whether the 
parties further agreed that there would be no change 
in accounting and capital requirements.” 

The government contends these documents were 
made in the exercise of the Bank Board’s regulatory 
function and represent a statement of compliance 
with then-existing statutory and regulatory require- 
ments which requirements, however, were subject to 
change. The plaintiffs contend and the Claims Court 
found that these documents were generated by the 
Bank Board acting in a contractual capacity and that 
the statements therein regarding the amortization of 
supervisory goodwill over periods of twenty to forty 
years constituted an unconditional promise by the 


Editors Note: Amended on Rehearing, see p. [104a). 


73a 


Bank Board to that time period which was specifically 
bargained for by the plaintiffs and subsequently 
breached by Congress. 

The syllogism advanced by the plaintiffs and the 
Claims Court is that the “government” entered a 
contract and the “government” breached a contract 
by enacting FIRREA, treating both the legislative 
and the executive branches as the contracting entity 
labelled the “government.” If we assume the “govern- 
ment” (Bank Board, FSLIC) promised that the plain- 
tiffs could continue the treatment of the “goodwill” 
created by the merger as regulatory capital, the 
“government” (Congress) then reneged by enacting 
FIRREA’s capital reforms. Quod erat demon- 
strandum. However, the merger of the Bank Board’s 
purported obligations under these contracts with the 
exercise of Congress’s power to legislate for the 
general public good is too simplistic. As the Supreme 
Court has admonished, “(T]he two characters which 
the government possesses as a contractor and as a 
sovereign cannot be thus fused.” Horowitz v. United 
States, 267 U.S. 458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 344, 69 L.Ed. 736 
(1925) (quoting Jones & Brown's Case, 1 Ct. Cl. 383, 
384, 1865 WL 1976 (1865)). Congress frequently 
enacts legislation affecting the performance of con- 
tracts (both private and governmental), creating addi- 
tional benefits to and/or burdens upon the contracting 
parties. In the case of private parties, the burden of 
such a change in the law (or the benefit) is usually 
borne (or enjoyed) by the party on which it falls, 
unless responsibility is otherwise assigned in the 
contract.” Similarly, when the United States is sued 


0 See Northern Indiana Public Serv. Co. v. Carbon County 
Coal Co., 799 F 2d 265, 278 (7th Cir.1986); Connick v. Teachers 


— oO — 


74a 


as a contractor, the “Sovereign Acts Doctrine” 
absolves it of liability “for an obstruction to the 
performance of the particular contract resulting from 
its public and general acts as a sovereign.” Horowitz, 
267 U.S. at 461, 45 S.Ct. at 344 (Railroad Adminis- 
tration embargo on shipments of silk); see also Atlas 
Corp. v. United States, 895 F.2d 745, 754-55 (Fed.Cir.), 
cert. denied, 498 U.S. 811, 111 S.Ct. 46, 112 L.Ed.2d 22 
(1990) (the Urarium Mill Tailings Radiation Control 
Act); Tony Downs Foods Co. v. United States, 209 
Ct. Cl. 31, 530 F.2d 367 (1976) (Executive Order lifting 
price freeze); J.B. McCrary Co. v. United States, 114 
Ct.Cl. 12, 84 F.Supp. 368 (1949) (Executive Order 
freezing labor wages); Gothwaite v. United States, 
102 Ct.Cl. 400, 1944 WL 3658 (1944) (regulations of 
War Production Board). 

Unlike the doctrine of sovereign immunity, the 
Sovereign Acts Doctrine does not confer a privilege 
upon the government that would not be enjoyed by 
private parties. To the contrary, it ensures that par- 
ties contracting with the government will not have 
rights against the government that the same contract 
would not afford against a private party. As the 
Supreme Court explained: 


In this court the United States appear simply as 
contractors; and they are to be held liable only 


Ins. & Annuity Ass'n, 784 F.2d 1018, 1022 (9th Cir.), cert. 
denied, 479 U.S. 822, 107 S.Ct. 91, 98 L.Ed.2d 43 (1986); Haby v. 
Stanolind Oil & Gas Co., 228 F.2d 298, 306 (5th Cir. 1955); 
Sabine Corp. v. ONG W., Inc., 725 F.Supp. 1157, 1177 
(W.D.Okla.1989); Hanover Petroleum Corp. v. Tenneco Inc,, 521 
So.2d 1234, 1240 (La.App. 3d Cir.), cert. denied, 526 So.2d 800 
(La.1988); Sheldon-Seatz, Inc. v. Coles, 319 Mich. 401, 29 
N.W.2d 832, 835 (1947). 


75a 


within the same limits that any other defendant 
would be in any other court. Though their sover- 
eign acts performed for the general good may 
work injury to some private contractors, such 
parties gain nothing by having the United States 
as their defendants. 

Horowitz, 267 U.S. at 461, 45 S.Ct. at 344 (quoting 

Jones, 1 Ct.Cl. at 384). 

A private party does not necessarily promise that 
Congress will act only for the benefit of his prom- 
isee’s interests under the contract. He is liable for 
detrimental actions only to the extent provided for in 
the contract. Likewise, the sovereign acts of the 
government are not automatically swept within the 
scope of performance to which it is bound by the 
promises of its contracting agents. Warranties as to 
the state of the law are not implied between private 
parties. Nor may such warranties be implied against 
the government when it acts in its contracting role. 
As in the case of private parties, the government 
bears responsibility for FIRREA’s change in regu- 
latory capital standards only to the extent that the 
plaintiffs, the Bank Board, and FSLIC have provided 
in their contracts. 

On the other hand, every act of Congress does not 
ipso facto fall within the Sovereign Acts Doctrine. 
The United States cannot repudiate its contractual 
obligations with impunity merely by acting through 
Congress. See Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 
55 S.Ct. 432, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935) (invalidating legis- 
lation authorizing the redemption of United States 
Liberty Bonds in currency other than gold); Lynch v. 
United States, 292 U.S. 571, 54 S.Ct. 840, 78 L.Ed. 
1434 (1934) (invalidating legislation repudiating the 


76a 


government's obligation to pay war risk insurance 
benefits to veterans). 

The Claims Court found that the purpose of 
FIRREA “was to take away plaintiffs’ rights to use 
supervisory goodwill,” Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 552 
(emphasis added). We cannot agree. Rather we con- 
clude that FIRREA’s capital reforms are “general 
and public” acts which the Sovereign Acts Doc- 
trine applies. Congress found that At jo a considerable 
extent, the size of the thrift crisis resulted from the 
utilization’ of capital gimmicks that masked the 
inadequate capitalization of thrifts.” House Report at 
310, 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 106. In addition to banning 
future gimmickry, Congress chose to “unmask” that 
which had been practiced in the past. As Con- 
gressman Schumer noted in his Additional Views to 
the Committee Report: 


Not counting goodwill would cause some thrifts 
that appear to have adequate capital with goodwill 
counted not to be in compliance with the 
standards. These thrifts argue that by not includ- 
ing goodwill in capital, the government would be 
taking healthy thrifts and making them unheal- 
thy. But whether a thrift is financially healthy 
does not depend on how capital is defined. Clearly, 
lowering the capital standards so that all thrifts 
no matter how weak are in compliance would not 
magically make all weak thrifts strong. Simi- 
larly, allowing undercapitalized thrifts to count 
gimmicks as capital does not make them any 
better capitalized nor any less of a threat to the 
taxpayers. 


1929 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 408. The touchstone of the cases 
recognizing a sovereign act is that the congressional 


77a 


action had general applicability for the public good. 
That is the case here. Plaintiffs were not singled out 
as targets." The accounting methods which had been 
approved were disapproved for all of the industry 
because of the perceived harm to the public. Nor, we 
might add, did all thrifts which had taken over failing 
thrifts fail as a result of this general legislation. 

In any event, concluding as we do that the FIRREA 
legislation falls within the Sovereign Acts Doctrine 
does not end the inquiry here. As indicated, where a 
change in the law affects performance under a con- 
tract between private parties, a court must review the 
contract to determine which party bore the risk of 
such change. Thus, we must make a similar analysis 
of the subject agreements, the matter to which we 
now turn. 


"The following two cases cited by the dissent which 
addressed an agency defense to a clear breach of contract (not 
congressional action) on the ground that it falls within the 
Sovereign Acts Doctrine are inapt. As indicated, the Sover- 
eign Acts Doctrine may not be invoked where only particular 
contracts are the targets of legislation repudiating a govern- 
ment obligation to a specific party. The same would be true of 
agency action. See Everett Plywood Corp. v. United States, 227 
Ct.Cl. 415, 651 F.2d 723, 732 (1981) (Agency’s termination of 
single logging contract for environmental reasons not sover- 
eign act. IIt] would have been an entirely different case if 
Congress had passed a law immediately prohibiting all cutting 
in all publie forests”); Sun Oil Co. v. United States, 215 Ct. Cl. 
716, 572 F.2d 786, 817 (1978) (Secretary of Interior’s actions 
were not “actions of public and general applicability, but were 
actions directed principally and primarily at plaintiff's contrac- 
tual right to install a (particular oil] platform.“). 


Py, 


78a 


III. 


Contract interpretation presents a question of law 
that we review de novo. Reliance Ins. Co. v. United 
States, 931 F.2d 863, 865 (Fed.Cir.1991). The govern- 
ment contends that the contracts between the 
plaintiffs, FSLIC, and the Bank Board cannot be con- 
strued so as to obligate the Bank Board to measure 
regulatory capital in a manner inconsistent with 
what Congress later required in FIRREA. We agree. 

In concluding that contracts similar to those 
present in this case did not obligate the Bank Board 
to regulate contrary to FIRREA, the Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit applied 
“the rule of construction laid down by the Supreme 
Court, that one who wishes to obtain a contractual 
right against the sovereign that is immune from the 
effect of future changes in law must make sure that 
the contract confers such a right in unmistakable 
terms.” Transohio, 967 F.2d at 618 (quoting Western 
Fuels-Utah, Inc. v. Lujan, 895 F.2d 780, 789 
(D.C.Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 811, 111 S.Ct. 47, 112 
L.Ed.2d 24 (1990)). Accord Charter Fed., 976 F.2d at 
212 (applying rule to Bank Board resolutions); 
Guaranty Fin. Servs., 928 F.2d at 998-1000 (applying 
rule to Bank Board forbearance letter referenced in 
Capital Maintenance Agreement between the thrift 
and FSLIC). This “unmistakeability” doctrine is de- 
rived primarily from the decision of the Supreme 
Court in POSSE, supra, in which certain State and 
public agencies argued they had contract rights 
(arising from so-called “Section 418 Agreements” 
with the Secretary of Health and Human Services) to 
withdraw from the Social Security System that were 
breached by Congress’s enactment of section 103 of 


79a 


the Social Security Amendments Act of 1983, Pub.L. 
No. 98-21, 97 Stat. 71 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 418(g) 
(1988)). 477 U.S. at 50, 106 S.Ct. at 2395. In rejecting 
this contention, the Court noted that “sovereign 
power, even when unexercised, is an enduring pres- 
ence that governs all contracts subject to the sover- 
eign’s jurisdiction, and will remain intact unless 
surrendered in unmistakable terms.” POSSE, 477 
U.S. at 52, 106 S.Ct. at 2396 (quoting Merrion v. 
Jicarilla Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130, 148, 102 S.Ct. 
894, 907, 71 L.Ed.2d 21 (1982)). Construing the Section 
418 Agreements “to avoid foreclosing exercise of 
sovereign authority,” POSSE, 477 U.S. at 53, 106 
S.Ct. at 2397, the Court concluded these Agreements 
were subject to Congress’s power to alter the Social 
Security law. Id. at 54, 106 S.Ct. at 2397. 

The plaintiffs posit that this rule of construction is 
applicable only where Congress has expressly 
reserved its power to amend a statute, see 
Sinking-Fund Cases, 99 U.S. (9 Otto) 700, 720-21, 25 
L.Ed. 496 and 504 (1879), or where the subject 
contract expressly incorporates a statute that is 
subject to amendment. See POSSE, 477 U.S. at 53-54, 
106 S.Ct. at 2397. The first proposition is ludicrous. 
An express reservation of the power to amend, be it in 
the Banking Code, the Internal Revenue Code, the 
Lanham Act or any other congressional enactment, is 
not a prerequisite to the exercise of that power. 
Congress may amend statutes as part of its consti- 
tution?” authority to legislate. This authority is 
ubiqu'.ous even if not expressly acknowledged or 
reserved. See Education Assistance Corp. v. 
Cavazos, 902 F.2d 617, 629 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 
U.S. 896, 111 S.Ct. 246, 112 L.Ed.2d 205 (1990) (citing 
POSSE and recognizing Congress’ power to amend a 


80a 


statute). The plaintiffs were on notice that Congress 
had altered in the past and could alter in the future 
the statutory/regulatory burdens to which they were 
subject. California Hous. Sec., 959 F.2d at 959. Nor 
was it incumbent upon the parties to expressly 
acknowledge that their performance, whether con- 
tractual or otherwisc, must conform to applicable law. 

For a regulatory agency like the Bank Board to 
abdicate by contract its duty to regulate in accor- 
dance with subsequent acts of Congress requires, at 
the very least, an unmistakable statement of its 
intent to do so. But we question whether even this 
would suffice. The Court has stated that the govern- 
ment’s power as a sovereign “cannot be contracted 
away.” North Am. Commercial Co. v. United States, 
171 U.S. 110, 137, 18 S.Ct. 817, 828, 43 L.Ed. 98 (1898). 
More recently, it has noted, in the context of the 
Contract Clause, that a State need not “adhere to a 
contract that surrenders an essential attribute of its 
sovereignty.” United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 
431 U.S. 1, 23, 97 S.Ct. 1505, 1518, 52 L.Ed.2d 92 (1977). 
As Justice Brennan stated in dissent: 


One of the fundamental premises of our popular 
democracy is that each generation of represen- 
tatives can and will remain responsive to the 
needs and desires of those whom they represent 
.... The Framers fully recognized that nothing 
would so jeopardize the legitimacy of a system of 
government that relies upon the ebbs and flows of 
politics to “clean out the rascals” than the 
possibility that those same rascals might perpet- 
uate their policies simply by locking them into 
binding contracts. 


8la 


United States Trust, 431 U.S. at 45, 97 S.Ct. at 1529; 
see also Transohio, 967 F. 2d at 620-24. To this we add 
our own observation that because private parties 
cannot hope to curtail by contract the sovereign acts 
of Congress, Horowitz and its progeny would suggest 
that the government’s agents of the executive branch, 
acting by way of contracting authority, cannot do so 
either. 

We need not decide here, however, whether an 
agency’s putative waiver of sovereign authority would 
ever be enforceable. None of the contracts in this 
appeal contain language that, under the strict rule of 
construction in POSSE, would obligate the Bank 
Board to regulate in a manner inconsistent with 
subsequent acts of Congress. The plaintiffs assert 
and the Claims Court found such an obligation in the 
forbearance letters and Bank Board resolutions 
supra, in which the government recognized that in- 
tangible assets could be counted as regulatory capital. 
At most, these statements acknowledge the permis- 
sibility at that time of that accounting procedure. 
They do not commit the Bank Board to a future 
course of performance under an immutable regulatory 
standard. The thrifts point to the approved amorti- 
zation periods for supervisory goodwill of several 
decades as precluding a change. However, the length 
of the amortization periods of these intangible assets 
simply reflects compliance with the Bank Board’s 
then-existing regulations and accounting standards.” 
The Bank Board’s acknowledgment that these time 


2 For example, the Bank Board’s Statement of Financial 
Accounting Standards No. 72 provided that goodwill be 
amortized over a period no greater than the estimated remain- 
ing life of the long-term, interest- bearing assets. 


N 


82a 


periods were acceptable at the time of the mergers is 
not an acknowledgement that the law or even 
regulations would allow treatment of supervisory 
goodwill as regulatory capital throughout the entire 
amortization periods. See Charter Fed., 976 F.2d at 
211 (“The resolutions issued by the [Bank Board] in 
connection with the mergers merely granted the 
agency’s approval of the merger and the accounting 
practices employed by Charter in connection 
therewith.”) No promise was made committing the 
Bank Board to maintenance of the same capital treat- 
ment over the various amortization periods. See 
Transohio, 967 F.2d at 619 (passive language in 
forbearance letters too ambiguous to satisfy the 
POSSE rule). 

To the contrary, we conclude that the plaintiffs 
assumed the risk that the law would change. The 
Supervisory Assistance Agreement with Glendale 
acknowledges that Inlothing in this Agreement shall 
require any unlawful action or inaction by either of 
the parties hereto.” Similarly, both the Winstar and 
the Statesman Assistance Agreements provide that 
Injothing in this Agreement shall require any 
unlawful action or inaction by either party.” The 
thrifts contend and the Claims Court found that the 
“unlawful action” clauses must be read to require 
compliance: only with then-existing law, otherwise 
the government would be free to modify the Agree- 
ments by statute, counter to the provision of these 
Agreements requiring that modifications be executed 
in writing by the parties. Statesman, 26 Cl. Ct. at 914. 
This improperly mixes the sovereign and contracting 
functions of the government. FIRREA was not a 
modification of their contracts. It was a sovereign act 
of Congress that modified the regulatory environ- 


83a 


ment in which the thrifts and OTS (the Bank Board’s 
successor) would act. Furthermore, to limit these 
unqualified “unlawful action” clauses to then- 
existing laws and regulations would violate the rule 
of POSSE that waivers of sovereign authority must, 
at least, be explicit. The plaintiffs, the Bank Board 
and FSLIC all agreed to act in accordance with the 
law. They did not limit this obligation to those laws 
in effect at that time or laws that made their contract 
less burdensome or more profitable. 

In addition, the “Accounting Principles” clauses in 
the Assistance Agreements of Statesman and Glen- 
dale, while not specifically addressing the issue here, 
show a recognition by the contracting parties that 
“the governing regulations and the accounting 
principles” would be subject to clarification, interpre- 
tation, or amendment by the Bank Board or its 
successor (here, OTS).” There is no restriction on 


8 As an example, the “Accounting Clause” in the Assis- 
tance Agreement of Statesman reads: 


[AJny computations made for the purposes of this 
Agreement shall be governed by generally accepted 
accounting principles as applied on a going concern basis 
in the savings and loan industry, except that where such 
principles conflict with the terms of this Agreement, 
applicable regulations of the Bank Board or [FSLIC], or 
any resolution or action of the Bank Board approving or 
adopted concurrently with this Agreement, then this 
Agreement, such regulations, or such resolution or action 
shall govern. In the case of any ambiguity in the 
interpretation or construction of any provision of this 
Agreement, such ambiguity shall be resolved in a manner 
consistent with such regulations and the Bank Board’s 
resolution or action. If there is a conflict between such 
regulations and the Bank Board’s resolution or action, the 
Bank Board’s resolution or action shall govern. For the 


84a 


what regulations were subject to amendment. In any 
event, the regulations here involved are essentially 
irrelevant to this case. The plaintiffs’ quarrel is with 
the new statute, FIRREA, which did away with 
accounting gimmicks and extended amortization 
periods. The regulations merely conform to the 
statute.” 

Recognizing the difficult, if not insurmountable, 
burden of showing that their contracts obligated the 
Bank Board to adhere to the regulations in effect at 
the time of the mergers notwithstanding subsequent 
acts of Congress, the plaintiffs argue that, while the 
capital requirements could be changed by Congress, 
their contract claims remain viable. Per the 
plaintiffs, it is irrelevant that their contracts do not 
restrict the Bank Board’s duty to regulate in accor- 
dance with subsequent acts of Congress since they 
seek money damages for breach not specific 
performance. 


purposes of this section, the governing regulations and the 
accounting principles shall be those in effect on the 
Effective Date or as subsequently clarified, interpreted, or 
amended by the Bank Board or the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (“FASB”), respectively, or any 
successor organization. [Emphasis added.] 


By lifting the third sentence out of context, the dissent 
finds an express agreement that the negotiated forbearance 
and accounting procedures were guaranteed to continue de- 
spite a change in the law. It is not surprising that no party 
makes the argument that the right asserted by Statesman and 
Glendale to use purchase method accounting and extended 
amortization time periods involve an “ambiguity .. . in this 
[Assistance] Agreement.” It does not. Moreover, the change 
was the enactment of a new statute not a mere administrative 
change in a regulation. 

Editor's Note: Amended on Rehearing, see p. 104a. 


85a 


This distinction in remedies, though significant to 
the law of takings, is not relevant to the plaintiffs’ 
claims for breach of contract. A breach requires a 
binding promise. 11 Samuel Williston, A Treatise on 
the Law of Contracts § 1290 (3d ed. 1968). Specific 
performance and damages are merely alternative 
remedies for breach, for which damages is the pri- 
mary remedy. Id. at § 1338. Where no contractual 
duty exists, no breach of contract is possible and no 
judgment for damages can be obtained. 5 Arthur 
Linton Corbin, Corbin on Contracts § 993 (1964). 
Because these contracts did not obligate the Bank 
Board (or OTS) to regulate in a manner inconsistent 
with FIRREA, the change in treatment of goodwill 
does not violate a contractual duty and cannot support 
a claim for damages for breach. 


IV. 


The appellants and amici“ raise numerous 
overlapping and intertwining arguments, all of which 
have been considered although not specifically 
discussed. Several merit at least comment. The 
“illusory” contract argument is one. The Claims 
Court concluded that construing these contracts to 
permit the Bank Board (or OTS) to regulate as 


“The Chamber of Commerce of the United States, The 
Aerospace Industries Association of America, The Electronic 
Industries Association, The Shipbuilders Council of America, 
Inc., Litton Industries, Inc., Amwest Savings Association, The 
Adam Corporation/Group, The Globe Savings Bank (FSB), 
Phoenix Capital Group, Inc., Old Stone Bank (FSB), Old Stone 
Corporation, Franklin Federal Bancorp, The Long Island 
Savings Bank (FSB), The Long Island Savings Bank of 
Centereach (FSB), Keystone Holdings, Inc., and American 
Savings Bank (FA). 


86a 


subsequently mandated by FIRREA would render the 
contracts “illusory” because the Bank Board “would 
in effect be agreeing to abide by its promises only so 
long as it unilaterally decided to keep those prom- 
ises.” Statesman, 26 Cl. Ct. at 914-15. The court 
suggested that a contract which permits the “govern- 
ment” to perform at its “unrestricted pleasure” is 
really not a contract at all. Jd. (quoting 17 C.J.S. 
Contracts § 98 (1963)). 

As previously indicated, these contracts are no 
more “illusory” than a contract between private par- 
ties whose profitability is affected or determined by 
subsequent legislative action. A promisee whose 
contract was rendered unprofitable by FIRREA 
cannot hold his promisor accountable, unless the 
contract assigned the burden of such legislation to 
the latter. See note 10, supra. Contractors that de- 
sire to immunize their bargains from the vagaries and 
uncertainties of future legislation have developed a 
variety of devices for doing so. A force majeure 
clause is one such device. Northern Ind., 799 F.2d at 
274-75. Price floors and price ceilings are another. 
Id. at 278. Indemnity provisions are yet another. 
Similarly, a contractor may expressly fix its perfor- 
mance to correspond to then-existing regulations. 
Hills Materials Co. v. Rice, 982 F.2d 514 
(Fed.Cir.1992). But a contract that lacks any of these 
(or similar) devices and thus leaves a private party 
vulnerable to changes in the law that render its per- 
formance unprofitable is not “illusory.” It is merely 
unprofitable. 

For the reasons discussed in section II supra, 
contracts between a private party and a contracting 
agent of the government are no different. We have 
concluded that under the POSSE rule of construc- 


87a 


tion, the Bank Board, in all of these contracts, did not 
bind the “government” generally or itself partic- 
ularly to regulate plaintiffs only in accordance with 
past legislation. Merely by signing these contracts, 
the Bank Board did not assume responsibility for the 
effects of subsequent legislation. The plaintiffs could 
have obtained an enforceable promise shifting the risk 
to the government. But they did not do so. See, e.g., 
Amino Bros. Co. v. United States, 178 Ct.Cl. 515, 372 
F. 2d 485, 491, cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846, 88 S.Ct. 98, 19 
L.Ed.2d 112 (1967) (“The Government cannot make a 
binding contract that it will not exercise a sovereign 
power, but it can agree in a contract that if it does so, 
it will pay the other contracting party the amount by 
which its costs are increased by the sovereign act.”); 
Piggly Wiggly Corp. v. United States, 112 Ct.Cl. 391, 
81 F.Supp. 819, (1949) (sovereign acts may harm 
party that has contracted with government unless 
contracting party protected against price in the event 
of the act). Although others appear to have dealt with 
the risks of future changes in the law in their con- 
tracts, plaintiffs here did not. Brief for Amici Curiae 
Keystone Holdings, Inc. and American Savings Bank, 
F.A. at 12. There is no force majeure clause in any of 
the plaintiffs’ contracts. There is no clause that lim- 
its the plaintiffs’ future capital contribution (for 
purposes of meeting regulatory capital standards) to a 
fixed sum. There is simply no clause that obligates 
FSLIC to indemnify any of the plaintiffs against fu- 
ture regulatory changes in the capital standards.” 


In the Winstar Assistance Agreements and in the Glendale 
Supervisory Action Agreement, the government did promise 
to indemnify the thrifts against undisclosed liabilities and 
litigation challenging the merger. The Glendale contract also 


Ga 


Because nothing in these contracts shifts that risk to 
the Bank Board, that risk must be borne by the 
plaintiffs. 


V 


We conclude that the plaintiffs had no contract 
right to have the goodwill generated by their acqui- 
sition(s) treated as regulatory capital. All of the 
subject contracts left the Bank Board (and OTS) free 
to regulate in accordance with subsequent acts of 
Congress, specifically FIRREA. Thus, there was no 
contractual promise by the government which could 
be breached. Because none of the contracts assigned 
to FSLIC or the Bank Board the risk of any subse- 
quent change in capital standards by Congress, the 
plaintiffs bear that burden here. We, therefore, re- 
verse the Claims Court’s judgment of liability in each 
of these consolidated cases. 

Our disposition of these appeals does not dispose of 
all claims for recovery asserted by the plaintiffs. In 
particular, plaintiffs have asserted constitutional 
claims for just compensation for the taking of their 
property. To the extent a plaintiffs other claims are 
not premised upon the taking of a contract right to 
continue to use goodwill as regulatory capital, such 
claims remain for decision. Accordingly, their cases 
are remanded for further proceedings consistent 
herewith. 


VI 


Each party will bear its own costs. 
REVERSED AND REMANDED. 


states which party would bear the risk of change in interest 
rates. These indemnification obligations are not involved here. 


89a 


PAULINE NEWMAN, Circuit Judge, dissenting. 


There has been a good deal of litigation engendered 
by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
Enforcement Act of 1989 (“FIRREA”), including 
litigation arising out of arrangements similar to 
those of the three cases here consolidated, wherein 
solvent banks and other investors were encouraged by 
the government to enter into merger arrangements 
for the purpose of salvaging failing or failed thrift 
institutions. Such salvage operations included the 
infusion of substantial sums of private as well as 
governmental money. The solvent banks contributed 
their resources on the promise by the government 
that the capital requirements of the merged banks 
could be met, inter alia, by capitalization of “super- 
visory goodwill” and the long-term amortization of 
the capital account. These promises were me- 
morialized in lengthy contracts that set forth the 
details and integrated the arrangements, including 
the implementing forbearance letters and Bank Board 
resolutions. These documents were explicit as to the 
financial and other obligations of all parties, the con- 
ditions and mutual promises by which these com- 
mitments involving many millions of dollars were 
made. It is not disputed that these arrangements 
would not have been entered into but for the con- 
ditions that were agreed to by the government, after 
extensive negotiation. These conditions, which 
enabled these arrangements, were made illegal 
by FIRREA or by the regulations implementing 
FIRREA. 

In the three cases at bar the merger agreements 
were made in 1981, 1984, and 1988. After enactment of 
FIRREA in 1989 the government required these 
merged thrift institutions to conform with the new 


90a 


accounting standards and capital requirements. In 
two of the three cases these changed requirements 
immediately placed the merged banks into non- 
compliance, and these institutions were promptly 
placed in receivership. 

The panel majority, in a lengthy analysis, 
determines that these banks are not entitled to 
specific performance of their preexisting arrange- 
ments. That question, although stressed in the 
government’s briefs, is not at issue in this case. That 
question was extensively litigated in the regional 
district and circuit courts, in connection with various 
other banks’ requests for relief in the form of specific 
performance of the particular arrangements between 
such banks and the relevant government agency. 
However, that remedy is not within the Court of 
Federal Claims’ Tucker Act authority, and the issue 
of specific performance is not before the Federal 
Circuit. Nor are any contracts other than those of 
these three sets of plaintiffs. 

Although litigation has been extensive, the 
regional circuits did not reach the question of the 
financial consequences of the enactment of FIRREA 
and of the resultant impossibility of performance of 
the various arrangements. The regional circuits 
uniformly held that these questions of money damag- 
es are excluded from their purview. The issues and 
remedies of financial recompense are decided for the 
first time in these suits in the Court of Federal 
Claims. 

In these three appeals the plaintiff banks do not 
dispute that Congress has the power to enact 
FIRREA and to foreclose continued performance of 
these contracts. The issue, as the Court of Federal 
Claims made clear, is whether the government is 


9la 


liable for the financial consequences of these acts, not 
whether the government had the authority to act. 

The panel majority, rejecting the reasoning and 
conclusions of the Court of Federal Claims, holds that 
there is no governmental liability because there were 
no contracts between the government and these thrift 
institutions. The panel majority also holds that if 
there were contracts, the entire risk of impossibility 
of performance must be borne by the nongovern- 
mental party. The rationale for this latter ruling ap- 
pears to be that the government may abrogate con- 
tracts without liability, under the “sovereign acts 
doctrine”. 

Since there are indeed contracts as to all three of 
these thrift groups, and immunity under the 
sovereign acts doctrine is not warranted in these 
cases, the Court of Federal Claims correctly decided 
that the government is liable for the financial conse- 
quences of its acts. Indeed, governmental respon- 
sibility is not a new idea in this nation’s law, and the 
reasoning of the Court of Federal Claims is solidly 
supported in contract law and in the application of the 
sovereign acts doctrine to this case. 


A 


The sovereign acts doctrine appeared in Court of 
Claims jurisprudence early in that court’s existence, 
in Deming v. United States, 1 Ct.Cl. 190, 1865 WL 
2004 (1865). It relates to acts of government in 
exercise of the responsibility to make and administer 
laws for the general welfare. As a “doctrine” it is an 
apothegm for the principle that there is a distinction 
between governmental acts for general and public 
benefit, and acts of government when dealing with 
specific persons and businesses. When the govern- 


92a 


ment acts as a contractor with a specific private 
entity, this doctrine provides no immunity: 


The United States are as much bound by their 
contracts as are individuals. If they repudiate 
their obligations, it is as much repudiation, with 
all the wrong and reproach that term implies, as 
it would be if the repudiator had been a State or a 
municipality or a citizen. 
Sinking-Fund Cases, 99 U.S. (9 Otto) 700, 719, 25 
L.Ed. 496 and 504 (1879). However, when the 
government acts as legislator/regulator in further- 
ance of the general welfare, an incidental and unin- 
tended impact on specific preexisting contracts to 
which the government is a party does not thereby 
increase the responsibility or liability of the govern- 
ment as contractor. As the Supreme Court explained, 
public and general acts of government that are not 
directed to particular contracts do not impose lia- 
bility upon the gove,nmment beyond that which it has 
as a party to the contract: 


It has long been held by the Court of Claims that 
the United States when sued as a contractor 
cannot be held liable for an obstruction to the 
performance of the particular contract resulting 
from its public and general acts as a sovereign 
.... “The two characters which the government 
possesses as a contractor and as a sovereign 
cannot be thus fused; nor can the United States 
while sued in the one character be made liable in 
damages for their acts done in the other. 
Whatever acts the government may do, be they 
legislative or executive, so long as they be public 
and general, cannot be deemed specially to alter, 
modify, obstruct or violate the particular con- 


93a 


tracts into which it has entered with private 
persons.” 


Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 
344, 344-45, 69 L.Ed. 736 (1925) (quoting Jones v. 
United States, 1 Ct.Cl. 383, 384-85, 1865 WL 1976 
(1865)). Illustrations are seen, e.g., in Amino Bros. 
Co. v. United States, 178 Ct.Cl. 515, 372 F.2d 485, 491, 
cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846, 88 S.Ct. 98, 19 L.Ed.2d 112 
(1967) (action by the Army Corps of Engineers in 
flood control on the Smoky Hill River held a 
sovereign act for public benefit; there was no express 
or implied promise to contractor working downriver 
that the flood control power would not be exercised); 
Piggly Wiggly Corp. v. United States, 112 Ct. Cl. 391, 
419-433, 81 F.Supp. 819, 823 (1949) (price control and 
allocation of plywood by the Office of Price Admin- 
istration was a sovereign act; it was proper for 
Quartermaster Corps of War Department to termi- 
nate contract for convenience with appropriate 
recompense to contractor.) 

It is quite clear that the sovereign acts doctrine 
does not mean that the government can walk away 
from any contract to which it is a party, avoiding all 
contractual liability, whenever there is intervening 
legislative or regulatory action. The sovereign acts 
doctrine “is not a boundless justification for govern- 
mental non-liability.” Peter S. Latham, The Sover- 
eign Act Doctrine in the Law of Government 
Contracts: A Critique and Analysis, 7 U. Tol. L. Rev. 
29, 41 (1975). In Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 
55 S.Ct. 432, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935) the Supreme Court 
considered the application of the sovereign acts 
doctrine to a congressional resolution that declared 
that payment in gold was “against public policy” and 


Sy ae oe 


94a 


that all past and future governmental obligations 
would be paid with then legal tender. The Court held 
that persons holding Treasury bonds that provided for 
payment in gold coin had a binding and enforceable 
contract, and that: 


Congress can [not] disregard the obligations of 
the Government at its discretion .... We do not 
so read the Constitution. 


Perry, 294 U.S. at 350, 55 S.Ct. at 434. In Freedman 
v. United States, 162 Ct.Cl. 390, 320 F.2d 359 (1963) 
the Court of Claims explained that the sovereign acts 
doctrine 


does not relieve the government from liability 
where it has specifically undertaken to perform 
the very act from which it later seeks to be 
excused. 


Id. at 402, 320 F.2d 359. According to these precepts, 
acts of government that directly abrogate existing 
contractual obligations, even if undertaken for rea- 
sons of general welfare, are not immune from lia- 
bility. E.., Everett Plywood Corp. v. United States, 
227 Ct.Cl. 415, 651 F.2d 723, 731-32 (1981) (cancellation 
of timber contract due to government’s concern for 
environment is not immune from liability as a 
sovereign act); Sun Oil Co. v. United States, 215 
Ct.Cl. 716, 572 F.2d 786, 817 (1978) (government’s 
denial of drilling permit and consequent breach of 
drilling lease due to government’s environmental 
concerns is not immune as a sovereign act). 

Applying precedent, the Court of Federal Claims 
held that the abrogation of the arrangements the 
government had entered into with these banks was 
not immune from liability as a sovereign act. As 


95a 


further discussed, no error in this analysis or 
conclusion has been shown. 


B 


It can not be seriously disputed that in its 
arrangements with these banks the government acted 
as a contractor. These were commercial arrange- 
ments, entered into after extensive arms-length 
negotiations and upon mutual exchanges of consider- 
ation. They are embodied in lengthy documents, with 
all requisite governmental approvals, signed by auth- 
orized persons, and including the specific accounting 
and amortization terms that were essential condi- 
tions. Pertinent documents were integrated and 
cross-referenced, in textbook compliance with the 
rules of contract. There is no asserted ambiguity.’ 
Indeed, it will come as a surprise to the many lawyers 
involved in these multi-million dollar transactions 
that they did not, after all, succeed in making a 
contract. The government’s disavowal of having made 
binding contracts comes with poor grace, not only in 
view of the government’s encouragement of these 
arrangements when they were made, ht also because 
performance was accepted by the government for 
several years. 

The Court of Federal Claims, considering the 
question of the relationship of these arrangements to 
the enactment and administration of FIRREA, found 
that the various banks that had merged with failed or 
failing thrifts, and the terms of the mergers whereby 
the existing capital requirements were met, were 
well known to the legislators. Recognition of these 


The panel majority appears to misapprehend my position, 
for there is no issue of ambiguity. 


96a 


arrangements pervades the legislative record. E. g., 
H.R.Rep. No. 54, 101st Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 1, at 498 
(1989), reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 86, 293-94 
(additional views of Mr. Annunzio, Mr. Kanjorski and 
Mr. Flake): 


Simply put, [FIRREA] has reneged on the 
agreements that the government entered into 
concerning supervisory goodwill .... Clearly, the 
agreements concerning the treatment of goodwill 
were part of what the institutions had bargained 
for. Just as clearly, [FIRREA] is abrogating 
those agreements. 


H.R.Rep. No. 54, 101st Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 5, at 27-28 
(1989), reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 397, 410-11 
(additional views of Mr. Hyde): 


Overnight, as the accounting standards are re- 
legislated, [institutions with supervisory good- 
will agreements] will become ‘unsafe and 
unsound’ for purposes of federal banking law 
....{TyJhe current terms of [FIRREA] could end 
up punishing the very institutions that came to 
the aid of taxpayers in the early part of this 
decade. I believe that many of these 
institutions have a case based in law, in equity, 
and in fundamental fairness. 


135 Cong.Rec. H2706 (daily ed. June 15, 1989) 
(Statement of Rep. Crane): 


In the early 1980’s a number of savings and loans 
were asked by our government to acquire ailing 
thrifts in order to help the government and the 
taxpayers avert paying billions of dollars in 
bailout funds. . How many institutions will 


97a 


trust the government after seeing Congress 
abrogate these deals? 


135 Cong.Rec. H2783 (daily ed. June 15, 1989) 
(Statement of Rep. Ackerman): 


In its present form, [FIRREA] would abrogate 
written agreements made by the U.S. govern- 
ment to thrifts that acquired failing institutions 
by changing the rules in the middle of the game 


Criticisms such as the following reinforce the view 
that these contracts were targeted, and not an. inci- 
dental side-effect of a general and public law. 135 
Cong.Rec. H2705 (daily ed. June 15, 1989) (statement 
of Rep. Gonzalez): 


In blunt terms, the bank Board and FSLIC 
Insurance fund managers entered into bad deals 
I might even call them steals. 


Recognizing that it was abrogating these agree- 
ments, Congress sought advice on the consequences 
of enactment of FIRREA; the record shows that it 
received inconsistent advice. Compare Letter from 
the Comptroller General of the United States to the 
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban 
Affairs (August 27, 1990), advising that there could be 
liability for breach of contract and unconstitutional 
taking of property, with the statement of Rep. 
Gonzalez, at 135 Cong.Rec. H2705 (daily ed. June 15, 
1989) that the Department of Justice advised that 
FIRREA would result in no contractual or consti- 
tutional claims. This record is pertinent today be- 
cause it shows that Congress knew of these arrange- 
ments, and knew that their performance would be 
affected by the new requirements set by FIRREA. 


98a 


There is no error in the ruling of the Court of 
Federal Claims that the effect on these banks was a 
foreseen and intended consequence of the legislation 
and its regulatory implementation, thus negating 
immunity as a sovereign act. 

It is an unwarranted criticism of the Court of 
Federal Claims to state that it improperly mixed the 
sovereign and contracting functions of government, 
for it is clear that the Court understood and correctly 
applied the distinction. The sovereign act doctrine 
does not mean that the legislative branch is somehow 
a different “government” than the executive branch, 
and that the United States is not liable for con- 
tract-affecting actions of the executive in adminis- 
tering legislation. To the contrary, the protection of 
persons who contract with the government through 
its agencies is essential to the nation’s operations. 
The Court of Federal Claims correctly concluded that 
the government could not, without liability, abrogate 
the specific contracts that the government had made 
with thrift institutions. The court stressed that the 
issue under the Tucker Act is solely of financial 
liability. ü 

The government, and the panel majority, rely 
heavily on Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to 
Social Security Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 
2390, 91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (“POSSE”) wherein the 
Court held that Congress could remove the right of 
state government to withdraw from the Social 
Security system. However, POSSE did not hold that 
Congress could simply abrogate any contract right. 
In POSSE the Court held that there was no 
bargained-for consideration, and therefore no con- 
tract right to start with. 477 U.S. at 55-56, 106 S.Ct. 
at 2398. The Court stressed that the provision of 


99a 


Social Security benefits to state employees was a 
gratuitous benefit bestowed upon the states by 
Congress. Although the government here presses a 
far broader interpretation, POSSE does not hold that 
Congress may without liability abrogate contracts 
between the United States and others except for 
situations where the government made an “unmis- 
takable” promise not to do so. 

The Court of Federal Claims did not make the 
mistake of confusing the government’s right to 
legislate in the public interest with the government’s 
obligations in specific contractual commitments. 
This distinction is a necessary implementation of the 
principles by which our government does business 
with its citizens. These principles are fundamental to 
our history. In Murray v. Charleston, 9% U.S. (6 
Otto) 432, 24 L.Ed. 760 (1878) the Court rejected the 
theory, offered then as it is now, that a contractual 
promise can be abrogated through the exercise of 
inherent sovereign authority. In Perry v. United 
States, discussed supra, the Court quoted Alexander 
Hamilton as follows: 


[ Wmen a government enters into a contract with 

an individual, it deposes, as to the matter of the 
contract, its constitutional authority, and ex- 
changes the character of legislator for that of a 
moral agent, with the same rights and obligations 
as an individual. Its promises may be justly 
considered as excepted out of its power to 
legislate unless in aid of them. It is in theory 
impossible to reconcile the idea of a promise 
which obliges, with the power to make a law 
which can vary the effect of it. 


100a 


294 U.S. at 351 n. 2, 55 S.Ct. at 435 n. 2 (citing 3 
Hamilton’s Works, 518, 519). As the Court in Perry 
reaffirmed, although the government can not agree 
not to exercise its sovereign power in the future, “the 
right to make binding obligations is a competence 
attaching to sovereignty.” 294 U.S. at 353, 55 S.Ct. at 
436. 


C. 


The contracts here at issue were entered into after 
extensive negotiation, with concessions and commit- 
ments by both sides. The contracts in the three suits 
differ in their terms, for each is specific to the cir- 
cumstances of the acquired and acquiring banks. 

The Court of Federal Claims correctly held that 
these elaborate, lengthy, detailed contemporaneous 
documents, including documents incorporated by 
reference, are contracts. Both the government and 
the banks so treated them during the years of 
performance in accordance with their terms. Both 
the government and the banks transferred many 
millions of dollars on the basis of these arrangements. 
On the “mere signing”, as the panel majority puts it, 
Winstar and United Federal together contributed two 
million dollars and assumed additional millions in 
liabilities; Statesman Savings and American Life and 
Casualty together contributed twenty-one million 
dollars and assumed additional millions in liabilities; 
and Glendale Federal assumed $734 million in 
liabilities. All of these commitments were con- 
ditioned on the specific accounting procedures and 
amortization requirements that were negotiated and 
agreed to in order to enable these thrifts to survive 
while new funds and new management sought to 
resuscitate them. Further, the government does not 


10la 


dispute that it has retained the funds contributed by 
the private banks. 

I will not repeat the careful analysis by the Court 
of Federal Claims of these three sets of documents. I 
take note of the panel majority’s apparent belief that 
documents incorporated by reference, or conditions 
subsequent, or integration clauses, do not a contract 
make. Indeed, it is curious to see the panel majority 
treat as meaningless the negotiated amortization 
periods on the reasoning that these periods “complied 
with the Bank Board’s then-existing regulations.” 
These amortization terms were essential to the 
viability of each bank’s investment. That they were 
not illegal when adopted is not surprising. To hold 
that their legality when adopted means that they “do 
not commit the Bank Board”, despite their explicit 
incorporation in contract documents with and by the 
Bank Board, is a strange view of contract law. 

The government argues that the banks simply 
gambled that the law governing these mergers would 
not change, and thus are not entitled to redress when 
the law did change. The contracts show that the 
parties indeed recognized this possibility, and pro- 
vided for it in various ways. Thus the “Accounting 
Principles” clauses in the Winstar and the Statesman 
agreements reflect the parties’ recognition that the 
accounting principles might in the future be “subject 
to clarification, interpretation or amendment”, and 
provide that “[iJf there is a conflict between such 
regulations and the Bank Board’s resolution or action 
[adopted concurrently with this agreement], the 
resolution or action shall govern.” 


2 Although the panel majority states that this language is 
“lifted” out of context, the context in the Accounting Clause 


102a 


The government thus expressly agreed that in the 
event of regulatory change, the negotiated forbear- 
ances and accounting procedures would govern. This 
is surely not an assumption of risk by the contractor, 
an acceptance of the “vagaries and uncertainties of 
future legislation”, quoting the panel majority. It is a 
negotiated contract provision that removed this 
foreseen risk by dealing specifically with an aspect 
that was critical to the viability of the venture. 

D 


These contract terms, and the bargained-for 
consideration on both sides, illuminate a basic flaw in 
the panel majority’s reasoning with respect to the 
sovereign acts doctrine. For if the enactment of 
FIRREA is viewed as a sovereign act for the general 
welfare, unencumbered by specific contractual 
arrangements, then the relationship between the 
government as contractor, on the one hand, and these 
banks on the other hand, would be the same as for any 
other set of contracting parties. In such case, when 
the contract is no longer capable of performance on 
its agreed terms, (whether because of legislative or 
agency action or Act of God) the laws of contract do 
not automatically place the burden of accommodation 
on one side only. See Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 272 (discussing forms of available relief 
such as rescission when contract performance has 


reinforces the intent that the contract terms shall prevail in 
case of future conflict. This clause states a straightforward 
commercial understanding of what the parties intended should 
a foreseeable event occur. This is simply good contract drafts- 
manship, for it was fundamental that it was the accounting 
principles that made the arrangements viable. 


103a 


become impracticable), § 264 (governmental regu- 
lation can render performance impracticable and be 
subject to relief), and § 377 (remedy of restitution in 
cases of impracticability and frustration of contrac- 
tual purpose). The government is not simply excused 
from further obligations without liability. Thus even 
if the enactment of FIRREA were treated as a 
sovereign act it would be incorrect to place on these 
banks the entire burden of impossibility of 
performance of their contracts, as has here been done. 

However, if the enactment or administration of 
FIRREA is not viewed as a sovereign act with 
respect to these contracts, in that it was known and 
expected that this law would interfere with or make 
impossible the continued performance of specific 
contracts by changing the rules of capital compliance, 
then the government has made performance of its own 
contracts impossible: not by force majeure, as the 
majority suggests, but by governmental act. That the 
government may be empowered to legislate in this 
way, and that a desired public policy is served, does 
not mean that it can be done without liability to those 
with whom the government had made a different 
commitment. The government is not exonerated of 
responsibility with respect to specific commercial 
contracts to which it is a party, whether the breach is 
by executive or legislative action. 

Thus, on any application of the sovereign acts 
doctrine, these plaintiffs have a remedy for breach of 
contract. I would affirm the decisions of the Court of 
Federal Claims in these three cases. 


104a 


ORDER 
Aug. 18, 1993. 


The appellees, Glendale Federal Bank, FSB, and 
Statesman Savings Holding Corp., The Statesman 
Group, Inc., and American Life and Casualty 
Insurance Co., filed separate petitions for rehearing 
and suggestions for rehearing in banc. Upon 
consideration by the panel of the petitions for 
rehearing and of the responses filed by the appellant 
at the request of the panel, and the supplemental 
submissions, it is: 

ORDERED that the petitions for rehearing are 
GRANTED, but only to make the following changes 
in the text of the opinion: 


Page 20: 


lines 16-17: Delete “agreed to” and insert 
therefor—understood respecting how goodwill 
would be treated— 


line 17: Delete “further” 
Page 32: 


lines 2-3: Delete “quarrel is with” and 
insert—arguments focus on 


line 4: After “periods” insert-—-not on the 
regulations— 


lines 4-5: Delete “the regulations merely .. . 
statute.” 


Judge Newman’s comments on the changes are 
attached hereto. 

Upon consideration of the suggestions for 
rehearing in banc thereafter by the circuit judges 


105a 


who are in regular active service, the suggestions are 
ACCEPTED. 


It is FURTHER ORDERED that the judgment of 
the court entered on May 25, 1993, is vacated and that 
the opinion of the court, as amended, accompanying 
the said judgment is withdrawn. 

The parties will be advised in due course if 
additional briefing is needed and of the date of hearing 
in banc. 

NEwMaAN, Circuit Judge, commenting on the Order 
amending the text of the majority opinion. 

The reasons for the panel majority’s changes are 
not stated. Thus I write separately to point out that: 


(1) These cases do not turn on whether the written 
arrangements between these banks and the govern- 
ment are designated as “understandings” instead of 
“agreements”. Such semantics do not control the 
fundamental issues raised. 


(2) The now-deleted sentence that “The regulations 
merely conform to the statute” was indeed incorrect. 
However, the further statement that the regulations 
were not placed at issue is also incorrect, for this 
litigation unambiguously relates to the statute as 
implemented by the regulations. 


ee 


106a 


APPENDIX C 


UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


Nos. 90-773C, 90-772C 


STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CoRp., ET AL., 
AND GLENDALE FEDERAL BANK, FSB, PLAINTIFFS 


*. 


THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT 


Filed July 24, 1992] 


OPINION 
SMITH, Chief Judge. 


Plaintiffs Statesman Savings Holding Corp. 
(Statesman) and Glendale Federal Bank, FSB (Glen- 
dale) both acquired failing savings and loan institu- 
tions prior to the enactment of the Financial Institu- 
tions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 
(FIRREA). Both Statesman and Glendale, like the 
plaintiffs in Winstar Corp. v. United States, 21 Cl. Ct. 
112 (1990) (Winstar J), claim that the enactment of 


Pub. L. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183 (Aug. 9, 1989). FIRREA is 
codified at various sections of Title 12 of the United States 
Code. 


107a 


FIRREA breached their contracts with the govern- 
ment and effected a taking in violation of the fifth 
amendment. Presently before the court are States- 
man’s and Glendale’s Motions for Summary Judgment 
as to Liability. After careful consideration of the 
briefs submitted by the parties, and after oral argu- 
ment, the court grants both motions. The court 
defers consideration of Statesman’s and Glendale’s 
taking claims under the well-established principal 
that constitutional claims should be addressed only if 
a plaintiff’s other bases for recovery do not afford 
complete relief. See Sun Oil Co. v. United States, 572 
F.2d 786, 215 Ct.Cl. 716, 769 (1978). The court also 
consolidates these cases with Winstar Corp. v. 
United States, No. 90-8C, and certifies them, with 
Winstar, for interlocutory appeal to the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. 


FACTS 
On April 21, 1992, this court issued its opinion in 
Winstar Corp. v. United States, 25 Cl. Ct. 541 (1992) 


(Winstar IT), a case presenting legal issues identical 
to those in dispute here and in other related cases.” 


2 As of the date of this opinion, complaints have been filed in 
fifteen other cases besides Winstar, Statesman and Glendale: 
La Van v. United States, No. 90-581C (filed June 28, 1990); 
Barron Bancshares, Inc. v. United States, No. 90-830C (filed 
Aug. 28, 1990); Hometown Financial, Inc. v. United States, 
No. 90-8430 (filed Aug. 30, 1990); Hughes v. United States, No. 
90-878C (filed Sept. 5, 1990); Suess v. United States, No. 90- 
981C (filed Sept. 14, 1990); Castle v. United States, No. 
90-1291C (filed Sept. 25, 1990); American Heritage Bancorp v. 
United States, No. 90-3982C (filed Dec. 3, 1990); Anderson v. 
United States, No. 91-34C (filed Jan. 10, 1990); Karnes County 
Savings v. United States, No. 91-9930 (filed Mar. 7, 1991); 
Globe Savings Bank, FSB v. United States, No. 91-1550C (filed 


108a 


In Winstar II, the court considered the nature 
and effect of pre-FIRREA negotiated agreements be- 
tween acquiring savings and loans, such as States- 
man and Glendale, and the government, acting 
through the Federal Home Loan Bank Board 
(FHLBB) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insur- 
ance Corporation (FSLIC). This court ruled in 
Winstar I that the agreement between the govern- 
ment and the acquiring savings and loan in that case 
constituted a contract. This court held in Winstar IJ 
that the contract was a traditional one, like those 
upheld by the Supreme Court in Perry v. United 
States, 294 U.S. 330, 55 S.Ct. 432, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935) 
and Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571, 54 S.Ct. 840, 
78 L.Ed. 1434 (1934), and not a government grant as 
found in Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to Social 
Sec. Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 2390, 91 
L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE). This court further found 
that the enactment of FIRREA breached that con- 
tract in light of the sovereign acts doctrine. This 
court deferred consideration of the Winstar plaintiffs’ 
taking claim. See Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 543 n. 4. 

On the day it issued its opinion in Winstar II, the 
court ordered the parties in all Winstar-related cases 
to address how the court’s opinion impacted upon the 
existence of a contract and the breach of that contract 
in their particular cases. In a status conference on 


Oct. 29, 1991); California Federal Bank, FSB v. United States, 
No. 92- 138C (filed Feb. 28, 1992); Secor Bank, FSB v. United 
States, No. 92-247C (filed Apr. 8, 1992); Republic Savings 
Bank, FSB v. United States, No. 92- 265C (filed Apr. 13, 1992); 
Glass v. United States, No. 92-428C (filed June 25, 1992); and 
Coast Federal Bank, FSB v. United States, No. 92-466C (filed 
July 9, 1992). 


109a 


May 4, 1992, the court further ordered that an 
expedited briefing schedule be set in the Statesman 
and Glendale cases so that the court could promptly 
rule on the two plaintiffs’ pending motions for sum- 
mary judgment and thereby enable the parties to seek 
an interlocutory appeal before the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit with 
Winstar II. Although Statesman and Glendale moved 
for summary judgment independently, the court heard 
oral argument on both motions on June 23, 1992 
because Statesman and Glendale present common 
legal issues not treated in Winstar II. The court re- 
solves Statesman’s and Glendale’s motions in one 
opinion. 

I. Statesman 


At issue in this case is Statesman’s 1988 acqui- 
sition of four insolvent savings and loans, one in West 
Palm Beach, Florida, First Federated Savings Bank, 
and three in Waterloo, Iowa, First Federal Savings, 
Peoples Savings & Loan, and The Perpetual Savings 
& Loan. The acquisition was a result of year-long 
negotiations between Statesman and FHLBB and 
FSLIC. The negotiations began in 1987 when States- 
man approached the FHLBB about acquiring a sub- 
sidiary of an insolvent savings and loan institution in 
Florida, First Federated. In response to Statesman’s 
proposal, FSLIC advised Statesman that the govern- 
ment could assist Statesman in its acquisition of the 
subsidiary only if it acquired First Federated itself. 
FSLIC also advised Statesman that under then- 
existing regulations entities such as Statesman 
(which were affiliated with investment banking 
companies) could acquire a failing savings and loan 
only if the acquired thrift’s assets exceeded $500 


110a 


million. To reach this asset level, FSLIC offered to 
combine Statesman’s acquisition of First Federated 
with three other thrifts located in Iowa. Statesman 
accepted FSLIC’s offer. 

As part of the transaction, FSLIC agreed to provide 
Statesman with a cash contribution of $60 million. A 
portion of that contribution, $26 million,’ was to be 
permanently credited to Statesman’s regulatory capi- 
tal for purposes of meeting FHLBB’s minimum 
capital requirements. This $26 million figure has 
been referred to throughout the litigation as a 
“capital eredit.“ FSLIC also agreed to allow States- 
man to employ the purchase method of accounting for 
the transaction. Under this method, Statesman was 
permitted to report as an asset includible in capital 
for purposes of satisfying minimum capital require- 
ments the difference between the aggregate fair mar- 
ket value of liabilities assumed by Statesman and the 
aggregate fair market value of the assets of the four 
acquired institutions (including the $60 million cash 
contribution made by FSLIC). See generally 
Winstar I, 21 Cl. Ct. at 113. This difference in value, 
known as “supervisory goodwill,” was $25.8 million. 
Statesman was permitted to amortize this intangible 
goodwill asset on a straight-line basis over a 
twenty-five year period. In addition to agreeing to 
acquire the four insolvent thrifts, Statesman agreed 


Part of the capital contribution, $5 million, was in the form 
of a 10-year subordinated debenture delivered to FSLIC by 
Statesman. Statesman was obligated under the terms of that 
debenture to pay back $5 million of the $26 million total capital 
contribution made to Statesman by FSLIC. 

* “Capital credit” has been a part of only one other 
Winstar-related case before the court, Globe Savings Bank, 
FSB v. United States, No. 91-1551. 


llla 


to contribute $21 million in cash to the thrifts’ capital 
base. 

The terms of the agreement between the govern- 
ment and Statesman were memorialized in an Assis- 
tance Agreement. A key provision of the Agreement 
was an “integration clause,” which specified the doc- 
uments that would control the interpretation of the 
parties’ agreement. 


This Agreement, together with any resolutions 
adopted by the Bank Board [FHLBB)] and docu- 
ments delivered at closing .. constitutes the 
entire agreement between the parties and 
supersedes all prior agreements .. . excepting 
only the Acquisition Agreement, the Merger 
Agreements and any resolutions or letters 
concerning the Acquisition, the Mergers of this 
Agreement issued by the Bank Board or the 
[FSLIC] in connection with the approval of the 
Acquisition, the Mergers and this Agreement, 
provided, however, that in the event of any 
conflict, variance, or inconsistency between this 
Agreement and the Acquisition Agreement or the 
Merger Agreements, the provisions of this 
Agreement shall govern and be binding on all 
parties insofar as the rights, privileges, duties, 
obligations, and liabilities of the parties are 
concerned. 


Assistance Agreement at 96-97 (March 11, 1988) 
(emphasis in original). One of the documents deemed 
controlling by the Assistance Agreement was 
FHLBB Resolution 88-169, which was issued con- 
temporaneously with the Assistance Agreement. In 
that Resolution, the government expressly agreed to 


rr 


112a 


provide Statesman with the aforementioned capital 
eredit. 


Twenty-one million dollars of the initial 
contribution by [FSLIC] to [Statesman], and five 
million dollars of the principal amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture issued to the FSL IC. 
shall be credited to the regulatory capital account 
of [Statesman]... . 


FHLBB Resolution 88-169 at 19 (March 11, 1988); see 
also Assistance Agreement at 45 (“$26 million of the 
contribution made [by FSLIC].. . shall be credited to 
[Statesman's] regulatory capital account and shall 
constitute regulatory capital... .). In that same 
Resolution, the government also expressly assented 
to the use of the purchase method of accounting for 
the acquisition. 


The value of any unidentifiable intangible assets 
[goodwill] resulting from accounting for the 
Acquisition and the Mergers in accordance with 
the purchase method of accounting may be 
amortized by [Statesman] over a period not in 
excess of twenty-five (25) years by the straight 
line method 


FHLBB Resolution No. 88-169 at 20. In accordance 
with the terms of the Assistance Agreement, the 
parties consummated the transaction on March 11, 
1988. 

In 1989, FIRREA became law. FIRREA altered 
existing regulations both to reduce the amount of 
supervisory goodwill includible in calculating core 
capital and to permit supervisory goodwill to be 


113a 


amortized for no more than 20 years.“ See 12 U.S.C. 
§§ 1464(t)(3)(A) and (9)(B); Winstar J, 21 Cl. Ct. at 114. 
FIRREA also established new regulatory capital 
standards.“ After FIRREA took effect, Statesman 
fell below the three new capital standards established 
by the Act: $13.8 million below the tangible capital 
standard; $13.2 million below the core capital stan- 
dard; and $14.5 million below the risk-based capital 
standard. But for FIRREA, Statesman would be $10.8 
million above the tangible capital standard; $11.4 
million above the core capital standard; and $7.7 


5 FIRREA mandates the phasing out of the use of 
supervisory goodwill in calculating core capital. Prior to Janu- 
ary 1, 1992, the amount of supervisory goodwill includible in 
core capital cannot exceed 1.5% of total assets. Thereafter, the 
amount of supervisory goodwill includible in core capital 
declines each year, so as not to exceed 1.0% of total assets 
through December 31, 1992; not to exceed 0.75% of total assets 
through December 31, 1993; and not to exceed 0.375% of total 
assets through December 31, 1994. 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(3)(A). 


„ FIRREA requires federally insured thrifts to satisfy three 
capital standards: “tangible,” “core,” and “risk-based” capital. 
12 U.S.C. §§ 1464(t)(1), (2) and (3). Thrifts must maintain 
“tangible” capital in an amount not less than 1.5% of assets 
excluding supervisory goodwill. 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(2)(B). 
Thrifts must maintain “core” capital in an amount not less than 
3% of assets. 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(2)(A). Supervisory goodwill 
may be used in calculating “core” capital, but subject to the 
schedule set forth in 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(3)(A), which decreases 
the includible amount. See note 5, supra. Thrifts must main- 
tain “risk-based” capital in an amount not “materially” less 
than that required by the Comptroller of the Currency for 
national banks. 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(2C). Supervisory goodwill 
is includible for purposes of calculating “risk-based” capital. 
Id. 


14a 


million above the risk-based capital standard.“ As a 
result of Statesman’s failure to meet the FIRREA 
capital standards, the Office of Thrift Supervision 
(OTS) appointed the Resolution Trust Corporation 
(RTC) as receiver for Statesman on July 26, 1990. 
Thus, but for the enactment of FIRREA, Statesman 
would be operating today. 


II. Glendale 


The transaction at issue in this case is Glendale’s 
1981 acquisition of a failing savings and loan insti- 
tution in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, First Federal 
Savings and Loan Association of Broward County. 
Unlike the transactions at issue in Winstar and 
Statesman, Glendale negotiated the merger of First 
Federal into Glendale without initial input from 
FHLBB or FSLIC. Presumably motivated by econ- 
omic necessity, First Federal initiated the trans- 
action by contacting Glendale about a possible mer- 
ger. After negotiation, the parties executed on No- 
vember 12, 1981 a Merger Agreement pursuant to 
which the merger ultimately occurred. 

The Merger Agreement was expressly conditioned 
on FSLIC’s approval of the merger and its assent to 
allowing Glendale to use the purchase method of 
accounting. On November 19, 1981, seven days after 
the Merger Agreement was signed, Glendale and 
FSLIC entered into a Supervisory Action Agree- 
ment, which manifested the government’s approval of 


By contrast, the court notes that even if the government 
had honored its obligation to the Winstar plaintiffs, Winstar 
would still most likely have fallen below the three new 
FIRREA capital standards. 


1l5a 


the terms of the merger as set forth in the Merger 
Agreement. 


[Broward] had incurred significant losses and its 
financial condition is such that remedial action 
must be taken. 


FSLIC has decided . . . to provide assistance as 
set forth in this Agreement, having determined 
that [Broward] is in danger of default and that the 
nature and/or amount of such assistance would be 
less than the losses FSLIC would sustain upon 
the liquidation of [Broward] through a receiver- 
ship accompanied by the payment of insurance of 
accounts. 


Supervisory Action Agreement at 1-2 (November 19, 
1981). As was the case in the Statesman transaction, 
the Agreement between Glendale and FSLIC con- 
tained an integration clause which specified the 
documents that would control the interpretation of 
the parties’ agreement. The clause provided: 


This Agreement, together with an interpretation 
thereof or understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement 
between the parties thereto and supersedes all 
prior agreements and understandings of the 
parties in connection herewith, excepting only the 
Agreement of Merger and any resolutions or 
letters issued contemporaneously herewith by the 
FHLBB or the FSLIC, provided, however, that in 
the event of any conflict, variance or incon- 
sistency between this Agreement and the Agree- 
ment of Merger, the provisions of this Agreement 
shall govern and be binding on all parties insofar 


ll6a 


as the rights, privileges, duties, obligations, and 
liabilities of the FSLIC are concerned. 


Supervisory Action Agreement at 14 (emphasis in 
original). One of the documents FHLBB issued 
contemporaneously with the Agreement was a “for- 
bearance letter” dated November 19, 1981. In that 
letter, the government manifested its intention to 
forbear from exercising its authority to bring en- 
forcement proceedings against Glendale for failing to 
satisfy regulatory capital requirements “following 
the merger.” FHLBB forbearance letter (November 
19, 1981). The letter, however, did not specifically 
address the use of the purchase method of accounting 
for the merger. 

Another document designated in the Agreement as 
controlling the parties’ relationship, FHLBB Resolu- 
tion 81-710, however, did reflect the government’s 
understanding that supervisory goodwill would be 
part of the transaction. That resolution provided: 


Not later than sixty days following the effective 
date of the merger, Glendale shall furnish an 
opinion from its independent accountant, satis- 
factory to the Supervisory Agent, which (a) 
indicates the justification under generally ac- 
cepted accounting principles for use of the 
purchase method of accounting for its merger 
with Broward, (b) specifically describes, as of the 
Effective Date, any goodwill or discount of assets 
arising from the merger to be recorded on Glen- 
dale’s books, and (c) substantiates the reason- 
ableness of amounts attributed to goodwill and 
the discount of assets and the resulting amor- 
tization periods and methods; and 


117a 


Glendale shall submit a stipulation that any 
goodwill arising from this transaction shall be 
determined and amortized in accordance with 
FHLBB Memorandum R-31b;.. . 


FHLBB Resolution 81-710 at 2 (November 19, 1981) 
(emphasis added). The FHLBB Memorandum R 31b 
referenced in the Resolution specifically dealt with 
the use of supervisory goodwill in acquisitions of 
failing or insolvent thrifts. In its first paragraph, the 
Memorandum stated that its purpose was to 


set{] forth guidelines for the staff of the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board in reviewing the prop- 
osed accounting, under generally accepted 
accounting principles, for goodwill arising in the 
acquisition of a savings and loan association. 
This intangible asset generally results when the 
purchase price for an institution exceeds the fair 
value of the assets acquired, reduced by the fair 
value of any liabilities assumed. It only arises 
when the accounting for a business combination 
is in accordance with the purchase method. 


FHLBB Memorandum R 31b at 1 (September 1, 1981). 
The Memorandum also established forty years as 
the maximum amortization period for supervisory 
goodwill. Id. at 2. 

On March 19, 1982, Glendale supplied to FHLBB 
the opinion letter outlining the amount of supervisory 
goodwill used in the merger as required by FHLBB 
Resolution 81-710. The opinion letter stated: 


Pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement of 
Merger between [Glendale] and Broward dated 
November 20, 1981 and the Supervisory Action 
Agreement between [Glendale] and the Federal 


118a 


Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 
(FSLIC) dated November 20, 1981, upon the 
effective date of November 20, 1981, [Glendale] 
accounted for the acquisition using the “Pur- 
chase Method” of accounting. . . $18,000,000 of 
the resultant goodwill is associated with the 
savings deposit base and will be amortized on a 
straight line basis over 12 years, the estimated 
life of the savings deposit base. The remaining 
goodwill of $716,666,000 will be amortized on a 
straight line basis over 40 years as [Glendale] 
believes that the remaining goodwill has an 
indefinite life since it is related to expansion of 
operations into an entirely new market area. 


Letter from David T. Hansen of Glendale to FHLBB 
(March 19, 1982) (forwarding Peat, Marwick, Mitchell 
& Co. letter to Glendale). The government does not 
dispute that the terms of the opinion letter were 
deemed “satisfactory to the Supervisory Agent” as 
required by FHLBB Resolution 81-710. It is also 
uncontroverted that the government manifested its 
approval of the terms set forth in the opinion letter 
prior to the effective date of the Supervisory Action 
Agreement. In a letter from H. Brent Beesley, 
then-Director of FSLIC, to FHLBB dated November 
19, 1981, FSLIC recommended the use of the purchase 
method of accounting for the merger. Beesley ex- 
plicitly referred to a Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. 
opinion letter dated November 10, 1981 setting forth 
the specific amount of supervisory goodwill projected 
to be amortized pursuant to the merger, assuming the 
use of the purchase method of accounting. It was only 
after sending this letter that FSLIC entered into the 
Supervisory Action Agreement. Taken in conjunc- 


119a 


tion with contemporaneously issued FHLBB letters 
and resolutions, then, the Supervisory Action Agree- 
ment called for the use of the purchase method of 
accounting and the amortization of an intangible 
supervisory goodwill asset over periods of twelve and 
forty years. See FHLBB Press Release at 3 
(November 20, 1981) (“Glendale Federal will account 
for this merger under the purchase accounting 
method which provides that assets and liabilities will 
be recorded at a fair value on the effective date 
(11/19/81). Any excess of fair value of liabilities over 
fair value of assets will be recorded as goodwill. A 
portion of the goodwill has been associated with the 
savings deposit base and amortized over the 12-year 
estimated life of the savings base. Remaining good- 
will will be amortized on a straight line basis over 40 
years.“). 

After the enactment of FIRREA in 1989, Glendale 
remained in compliance with all three new regulatory 
capital standards set forth in the Act, the “tangible,” 
“core,” and “risk-based” capital requirements as 
defined by 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(2). As of March 31, 1992, 
however, Glendale has fallen out of compliance with 
the “risk-based” capital standard. In addition, in cal- 
culating these three capital amounts, Glendale has 


The only cash payment involved in the transaction was 
made pursuant to the interest rate protection provision of the 
Agreement. Under that provision, Glendale and FSLIC agreed 
that each would make payments to the other (according to 
terms set forth in the Agreement) for a five-year period 
depending on whether the interest rates rose or fell from the 
time of the merger. If interest rates rose, FSLIC would pay 
Glendale; conversely, if they dropped, Glendale would pay 
FSLIC. Pursuant to this provision, Glendale ultimately paid 
FSLIC $18.4 million. 


120a 


been required by FIRREA to exclude considerable 
amounts of supervisory goodwill. In calculating its 
“tangible” capital, Glendale has been required to 
exclude from the original $734.6 million of super- 
visory goodwill agreed to by the parties all goodwill 
not amortized prior to the enactment of FIRREA. See 
12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(2)(B). In calculating its “core” and 
“risk-based” capital, Glendale has been required un- 
der 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(3)(A) to deduct all but approx- 
imately $185 million of the $734.6 million of goodwill 
originally contemplated by the parties. Because of 
FIRREA, Glendale also cannot amortize over forty 
years the amount of goodwill that is allowable under 
the Act. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1464(t)(3)(A) and (9)(B). 
FIRREA has also caused Glendale to suffer monetary 
loss. The exclusion of supervisory goodwill has: 
required Glendale to implement costly measures to 
compensate for the loss of goodwill from its regula- 
tory capital amounts; constrained capital resources 
and thereby restricted business opportunities; and 
adversely affected the confidence of Glendale’s 
investors. 


DISCUSSION 
I. The Existence of a Contract 
A. Statesman 


In Winstar J, this court examined the various 
documents memorializing the parties’ intentions and 
determined that an implied-in-fact contract existed. 
Winstar J. 21 Cl. Ct. at 114-15. Here, by contrast, the 
government readily concedes that an express 
contract existed, at least in regard to the $26 million 
capital credit extended by the government to States- 
man. In regard to the supervisory goodwill at issue, 
the government simply argues that because there was 


121a 


an express contractual relationship, embodied in the 
Assistance Agreement, the absence of any reference 
in that Agreement to the use of the purchase method 
of accounting necessarily implies that there was no 
contractual agreement as to that term. Plaintiff 
conversely argues that, taken together, the 
documents comprising the parties’ relationship 
expressly provide for the use of supervisory goodwill. 

The issue of whether a contractual right to use 
supervisory goodwill existed turns on a proper inter- 
pretation of the integration clause in the Assistance 
Agreement. As noted above, the integration clause 
provided that the parties’ contractual relationship 
was defined not only by the Assistance Agreement, 
but also by contemporaneously issued FHLBB reso- 
lutions and documents relevant to the transaction: 
“This [Assistance] Agreement, together with any 
resolutions adopted by the Bank Board [FHLBB] and 
documents delivered at closing . . . constitutes the 
entire agreement between the parties and supersedes 
all prior agreements ....” Assistance Agreement at 
96-97. The plain language of this clause indicates that 
all FHLBB resolutions delivered at closing con- 
stituted binding provisions of the parties’ express 
contract. The clause thus clearly encompasses 
FHLBB Resolution 88-169 which was issued the same 
day as the Assistance Agreement. Accordingly, be- 
cause FHLBB Resolution 88-169 provided for the use 
of the purchase method of accounting, the court finds 
that the government and Statesman had an express 
contract providing for the use of that accounting 
method. This reading of the integration clause finds 
support from those courts construing similar assis- 
tance agreements. See, e.g., Hansen Savings Bank v. 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 758 F.Supp. 240, 245 


122a 


(D.N.J.1991) (finding an FHLBB resolution and 
forbearance letter incorporated by an integration 
clause as part of the parties’ agreement); Transohio 
Savings Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Super- 
vision, 967 F.2d 598, 617-18 (D.C.Cir.1992) (same); 
Carteret Savings Bank, FA v. Office of Thrift 
Supervision, 762 F.Supp. 1159, 1171-72 (D.N.J.1991) 
(same), reud on other grounds, 963 F.2d 567 (3d 
Cir.1992). 


B. Glendale 


Although the specific terms of the agreement 
between the government and Glendale are not as 
easily derived from the relevant documents as is the 
case in Statesman, the court nonetheless is compelled 
to reach the same conclusion: that an express con- 
tract existed between the government and Glendale. 
As in Statesman, the government and Glendale en- 
tered into an express agreement (the Supervisory 
Action Agreement) regarding the government’s 
approval and role in Glendale’s acquisition of a failing 
savings and loan. Also like Statesman, the express 
agreement refers explicitly to documents calling for 
the use of the purchase method of accounting. 

The government maintains, however, that there 
was no contractual relationship, express or implied, 
between the government and Glendale. As it does in 
the Statesman case, the government argues that the 
Supervisory Action Agreement constitutes the only 
expression of the parties’ understanding concerning 
the merger of Glendale and Broward and the govern- 
ment’s role in that merger. In support of its position, 
the government points to the language of the 
integration clause, which is materially the same as 
the one at issue in Statesman. 


123a 


This Agreement, together with an interpretation 
thereof or understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement 
between the parties thereto and supersedes all 
prior agreements and understandings of the 
parties in connection herewith, excepting only 
the Agreement of Merger and any resolutions or 
letters issued contemporaneously herewith by 
the FHLBB or the FSLIC.... 


Supervisory Action Agreement at 14 (emphasis 
added). The government contends that the FHLBB 
resolutions and letters issued contemporaneously 
with the Agreement do not reflect actual terms of the 
parties’ contractual relationship. The government 
argues that these resolutions should not be read in 
conjunction with the Supervisory Action Agreement 
because that Agreement only incorporates “interpre- 
tation[s]” and “understanding[s}] agreed to in writing 
by the parties.” 

This reading of the integration clause, however, if 
not totally wooden, is directly at odds with the 
clause’s plain language. The government ignores the 
“excepting” phrase of the clause and argues that all 
documents other than the Supervisory Action Agree- 
ment must, to be part of the parties’ agreement, 
interpret an “understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties.” The “excepting” phrase, however, 
exempts both the Agreement of Merger and “any 
resolutions or letters issued contemporaneously” by 
FHLBB or FSLIC from such a qualification. These 
documents, as the language of the integration clause 
makes clear, are specifically excepted from the first 
phrase of the clause and need only be relevant to the 


124a 


Agreement and the merger transaction to have mean- 
ing in regard to the contractual terms and intentions 
of the parties. The government thus cannot suggest 
that the integration clause precludes the court from 
considering these FHLBB resolutions and forbear- 
ance letters in construing the nature and terms of the 
contractual relationship between the government and 
Glendale. 

The government also attempts to distinguish this 
case from Winstar by arguing that the forbearance 
letter in this case differs materially from the one 
found critical to determining the nature of the 
parties’ agreement in Winstar I. The Winstar for- 
bearance letter explicitly “confirmed” the parties’ 
“understanding” in regard to the use of supervisory 
goodwill. See Winstar I, 21 Cl. Ct. at 115. The 
Glendale forbearance letter, by contrast, does not 
mention the use of supervisory goodwill. This fact 
alone, however, does not contradict the court’s finding 
that an express contract existed in regard to the use 
of the purchase method of accounting. The court’s 
ultimate finding in regard to the existence of a 
contract is based not only on the forbearance letter, 
but on the other contemporaneous documents flowing 
between the parties. As discussed above, these 
documents—the Supervisory Action Agreement, 
FHLBB Resolution 81-710, FHLBB Memorandum R 
31b, the November 10, 1981 and March 19, 1982 Peat, 
Marwick, Mitchell & Co. opinion letters, and the 
November 19, 1981 letter from the Director of FSLIC, 
H. Brent Beesley to FHLBB—reflect the parties’ 
express understanding regarding the use of super- 
visory goodwill amortized over twelve-year and 
forty-year periods of time. The forbearance letter 
merely confirms what is eminently clear from these 


125a 


other documents: that FHLBB agreed to forbear from 
exercising its authority to bring enforcement 
proceedings against Glendale for failure to meet 
regulatory capital standards. 


II. Contract Breach 


A. Statesman 


In Statesman, as in Winstar, the issue of contract 
breach is a relatively straightforward one. By enact- 
ing FIRREA, the government “altered existing regu- 
lations both to reduce the amount of supervisory 
goodwill includible in calculating core capital and to 
permit supervisory goodwill to be amortized for no 
more than twenty years.” Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 
549. As this court held in Winstar II, the act of alter- 
ing the terms of the parties’ original agreement, 
“absent a countervailing contractual right to do so,” 
constituted a breach of contract entitling Statesman 
to damages or restitution. Id. at 550. 

The government contends, however, for the first 
time in this two year-old litigation, that in this case, 
unlike in Winstar, the government possessed such a 
countervailing contractual right to alter the terms of 
the parties’ original agreement.’ The provision of 
the Assistance Agreement which accords the govern- 
ment this right, the government argues, is the so- 
called “unlawful inaction clause.” The clause 
provides: 


The government raised this argument for the first time in 
Statesman on June 12, 1992, in its Response to Plaintiffs’ 
Status Report. In Glendale, the government first raised this 
argument in its October 15, 1990 Motion to Dismiss. To date, 
the government has not raised this argument in Winstar. 


126a 


This Agreement and the parties’ rights and 
obligations under it shall be governed by the law 
of the State of Iowa, to the extent that Federal 
law does not control. Nothing in this Agreement 
shall require any unlawful aciion or inaction by 
either party. 


Assistance Agreement at 96 (emphasis added). The 
government maintains that this clause unambig- 
uously provided that, although the government agreed 
that Statesman could treat the $26 million capital 
credit and $25.8 million in supervisory goodwill as 
capital for purposes of satisfying minimum regu- 
latory capital standards, the government made no 
commitment that Statesman could continue to do so if 
statute or regulation later provided to the contrary. 
The government argues that a failure by OTS to give 
effect to FIRREA’s provisions would have consti- 
tuted “unlawful inaction” on the government's part. 
After examining both the language and location of 
the clause, however, the court must reject the 
government’s interpretation of the “unlawful inaction 
clause.” The clause, embedded within the Governing 
Law section of the Assistance Agreement, is a 
boilerplate clause which is contained within several of 
the Assistance Agreements at issue in the Winstar- 
related cases presently before this court, including 
Winstar itself. The fact that the government has 
made this argument in only one other case, Glendale, 
and only at this late juncture in Statesman certainly 
undermines the government's contention that this 
clause constituted a specially negotiated and unam- 
biguous contractual right to alter the terms of the 
parties’ original agreement. In the Statesman case 
alone, this identical clause is contained within the 


127a 


four merger agreements by which Statesman ac- 
quired the four insolvent thrifts. In the drafting of 
those four documents, Statesman and the four 
insolvent thrifts had no concerns, as the government 
and Statesman did in the context of drafting the 
Assistance Agreement, about continuing obligations 
or executory terms that might be subject to a future 
change in law. It defies logic to suggest that the 
“unlawful inaction clause” has one meaning in the 
context of the four merger agreements and a differ- 
ent, and in this case dispositive, meaning in the 
context of the Assistance Agreement. Moreover, if 
this clause is given the meaning the government 
urges, the clause would contradict another provision 
of the Assistance Agreement providing that Ino 
amendment or modification of this Agreement shall be 
binding unless executed in writing by the parties or 
their successors.” Assistance Agreement at 97. If 
the parties thus had agreed not to modify or vary the 
terms of the agreement without mutual consultation 
and bargain, it would flout reason to believe that the 
parties had also agreed to allow the government to 
retain the power to alter the terms of the agreement 
at will. 

A narrower reading of the clause is more plausible 
and logical under the circumstances of this and other 
Winstar-related cases. The clause was designed to 
ensure that the contract would not be read to reqvire 
a violation of any then-existing state or federal laws. 
No party in any Winstar-related case would contest 
the fact that the transactions at issue were complex 
and negotiated under severe time pressures. In this 
regard, the Statesman case is typical. The trans- 
action involved four thrifts located in two states. The 
clause was undoubtedly included within the governing 


128a 


law section of the assistance agreements as a protec- 
tive measure to ensure that the parties had not 
inadvertently agreed to violate laws in effect at the 
time the parties contracted. 

Moreover, to read the clause as the government 
suggests would require the court to view the 
agreement as an illusory bargain. If the clause in fact 
reserved to the government the right to cancel 
without liability its obligations should Congress or 
FHLBB in the future change the relevant statutory 
or regulatory scheme, then the contract could not be 
binding. Under such a contract, the government 
would in effect be agreeing to abide by its promises 
only so long as it unilaterally decided to keep those 
promises. A contract so construed would not be an 
enforceable contract. See Flagship Fed. Sav. Bank 
v. Wall, 748 F.Supp. 742, 748 (S.D.Cal.1990) (finding an 
agreement between the government and an acquiring 
savings and loan “illusory” because the government 
“had the right at any time to cancel its side of the 
bargain” without liability); see also 17 CJS. 
Contracts § 98 (“[A] promise, the performance of 
which depends on the mere option, will, inclination, or 
discretion of the promisor, as where the promisor is 
free to perform his promise or withdraw from the 
arrangement at his unrestricted pleasure, is merely 
illusory, and is insufficient consideration for the 
promise made by the other party.“). The court will 
not read contracts, negotiated with care over many 
months as illusory, based upon a boilerplate clause. 
As the Supreme Court observed in quoting Alexander 
Hamilton, a contract with the government so con- 
strued would 


129a 


involve two contradictory things: an obligation to 
do, and a right not to do—an obligation to pay a 
certain sum, and a right to retain it in the shape 
of a tax. It is against the rules, both of law and of 
reason, to admit by implication in the construc- 
tion of a contract a principle which goes in de- 
struction of it. 


Murray v. Charleston, 96 U.S. 432, 445, 24 L.Ed. 760 
(1877). 

Even assuming that the government considered 
reserving the right to unilaterally cancel its 
obligations without liability, the court points out that 
the government knew exactly how to make such a 
reservation when that was its intent. In Guaranty 
Financial Services v. Ryan, 928 F.2d 994, 999 (11th 
Cir.1991), the parties’ agreement provided that “[a]ll 
references to regulations of the [FHLBB] or the 
FSLIC used in this Agreement shall include any 
successor regulation thereto, it being expressly 
understood that subsequent amendments to such 
regulations may be made and that such amendments 
may increase or decrease the Acquiror’s obligation 
under this Agreement.” (Emphasis supplied by the 
court). Similarly, in Flagship Fed. Sav. Bank v. 
Wall, 748 F.Supp. at 748, the forbearance letter 
expressly incorporated as part of the parties’ 
agreement provided that “the FHLBB specifically 
reserves a right to cancel the forbearance at any time 
if it should find that the forbearance is unsafe or 
unsound or otherwise actually or potentially 
detrimental to Flagship.” The government, there- 
fore, knew how to reserve to itself the right to change 
the contract based on a change of law. The govern- 
ment in fact negotiated for that right in some cases. 


1 a 
Eee - 


130a 


The court accordingly finds that the government 
possessed no contractually-based right allowing it to 
abrogate without liability the parties’ express 
contract. The government thus could not be immune 
from the consequences of its breach unless the 
enactment of FIRREA was found to be a sovereign 
act within the meaning of the sovereign acts doctrine. 
The court concluded in Winstar II, however, that 
FIRREA was not a sovereign act. Winstar II. 25 
Cl. Ct. at 550-53. As the court noted, under the 
sovereign acts doctrine, “the government is not 
contractually liable, absent an express agreement to 
the contrary, for the consequences of acts performed 
in its sovereign capacity.” Jd. at 550. The doctrine, 
however, could not apply in that case, and by the same 
reasoning in the present cases, because | 


taking away plaintiffs’ rights in [§§ 1464(t)(3)(A) 
and (9)(B)] of FIRREA was not the necessary 
means to a broad public end, rather it was the 
government’s end goal. On the government’s 
reasoning, any statute breaching a contract 
would be immune under the doctrine merely 
because its purpose was to breach the contract. 
This court has never granted government im- 
munity on such a basis .... Although the court 
accepts as given that the government sought to 
promote the public welfare in enacting FIRREA 
as a whole, those specific provisions of the Act 
altering the capital treatment of supervisory 
goodwill were intended to, and did, impact only 
upon plaintiffs and those similarly situated 
entities who had acquired savings and loan 
institutions. This fact compels the conclusion 


131a 


that sovereign act immunity cannot adhere in 
this and related cases. 


Id. at 552 (emphasis in original). In enacting 
FIRREA, the government therefore became liable to 
plaintiff for damages or restitution. 

In making this finding, the court notes that it is 
irrelevant for purposes of determining liability that 
the government’s promise in this case included a 
capital credit. In Winstar, the government’s consid- 
eration for the agreement only included its assent to 
the use of supervisory goodwill in satisfying regu- 
latory capital requirements. Here, by contrast, the 
government agreed not only to allow the use of 
supervisory goodwill, it also promised to allow a 
capital credit of $26 million to Statesman. Although 
FIRREA is silent in regard to capital credits, the 
government has read FIRREA as disallowing their 
use in meeting minimum capital requirem nts. The 
court cannot find any reason for treating capital 
credits differently than supervisory goodwill: the 
government is liable to Statesman for its decision not 
to honor either of these promises. 


B. Glendale 


As in Statesman, the government hinges its 
contention that FIRREA does not constitute a breach 
on the “unlawful inaction clause” contained within 
the parties’ Supervisory Action Agreement. The 
clause in this case, also embedded within the Govern- 
ing Law section of the Agreement, contains the same 
language as the clause at issue in Statesman. 

This Agreement and the rights and obligations of 
the parties hereunder shall be governed by the 
law of the State of California, to the extent that 


| 
} 


132a 


Federal law does not control. Nothing in this 
Agreement shall require any unlawful action or 
inaction by either of the parties hereto. 


Supervisory Action Agreement at 15 (emphasis 
added)“ The government’s arguments regarding the 
meaning and effect of this clause mirror those put 
forward in Statesman. Thus for the reasons set forth 
in Statesman above, the court accordingly holds that 
the “unlawful inaction clause” in the parties’ Agree- 
ment did not afford the government a contract- 
ually-based right allowing it to abrogate without 
liability the parties’ express contract. The govern- 
ment, therefore, is liable to Glendale for damages or 
restitution.” 


% The Supervisory Action Agreement, as the one in 
Statesman, contained an express limitation on the ability of the 
parties to vary the terms of the original Agreement: “{nJo sub- 
sequent modification or termination of this Agreement shall be 
binding unless set forth in writing and executed by the parties 
or their proper successors.” Supervisory Action Agreement at 
15. 


"In its Motion to Dismiss, the government argued that 
Glendale’s claims for monetary damages were not ripe as 
Glendale admittedly met FIRREA's capital requirements at 
the time it filed its complaint. As of March 31, 1992, however, 
Glendale has fallen out of compliance with the “risk-based” 
capital standard set forth in FIRREA. (Glendale was $43 
million short of meeting that standard as of March 31, 1992.) 
As a result, Glendale was required to submit to OTS on June 1, 
1992, a capital restoration plan for returning Glendale to 
capital compliance. A failure by Glendale to comply with that 
plan subjects it to regulatory sanctions, including seizure. See 
12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(6). As noted above, FIRREA has also 
caused Glenda‘e to suffer monetary loss. Without the inclusion 
of supervisory goodwill in calculating its capital amounts, 


133a 


III. Transohio Savings Bank v. Director, Office of 
Thrift Supervision 

In these and all other Winstar-related cases, the 
government has interpreted the Supreme Court’s 
ruling in Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to 
Social Security Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 106 S. Ct. 
2390, 91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE ), to mandate that a 
contract cannot exist between the plaintiffs and the 
government. In support of this position, the 
government has invoked the United States Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit’s recent 
decision in Transohio Savings Bank v. Director, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 967 F.2d 598 
(D.C.Cir.1992). In that decision, the court affirmed 
the district court’s denial of a preliminary injunction 
sought by an acquiring savings and loan similarly 
situated to Winstar, Statesman and Glendale. The 
injunction, if granted, would have enjoined OTS from 
enforcing those provisions of FIRREA disallowing 
and reducing the use of supervisory goodwill in the 
context of regulatory mergers.” Although the 


Glendale has been forced to: implement costly measures to cum- 
pensate for the loss of goodwill; constrain capital resources; and 
lose business opportunities and investor confidence. Glendale, 
therefore, has suffered an injury sufficiently ripe for adjudi- 
cation in this court. 

2 All four United States Courts of Appeals which have 
reviewed preliminary injunction motions seeking to enjoin OTS 
have ruled against such motions. See Carteret Sav. Bank, FA 
v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 963 F. 2d 567 (3d Cir.1992); Far 
West Fed. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 951 
F.2d 1093 (9th Cir.1991); Guaranty Fin. Servs., Inc. v. Ryan, 
928 F.2d 994 (llth Cir.1991); Franklin Fed. Sav. Bank v. 


134a 


Transohio court explicitly acknowledged that the 
district court did not have jurisdiction over the 
acquiring thrifts “pure contract claims,” see 
Transohio, at 601 (“We find ... that the district court 
did not have jurisdiction over Transohio’s pure 
contract claims because only the Tucker Act, 28 
U.S.C. § 1491(a)(1), waives sovereign immunity for 
Transohio’s contract claims, and the Tucker Act 
provides for jurisdiction in the Claims Court alone.”), 
the court considered the merits of the plaintiff's 
contract arguments in evaluating the acquiring 
thrifts’ statutory and due process claims. Id. In 
reaching the merits, the Transohio court upheld, and 
in some respects expanded upon, the position taken by 
the government on the teaching of POSSE in the 
present litigation, a position obviously at odds with 
the conclusions reached by this court in Winstar II. 
See Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 545 (The [Supreme] 
Court’s holding in POSSE in no way precludes this 
court from finding the existence of a contract 
between the government and plaintiffs. As is evident 
from its opinion, the Court in POSSE recognized that 
the government has the power to enter into contracts 
which confer vested rights—rights which the govern- 
ment has a duty to honor.”). As the parties here have 
argued the Transohio decision in their briefs, it is 
therefore this court’s duty to consider its reasoning. 
While this court is only bound by the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit’s precedent 
(and of course that of the Supreme Court), it certainly 


Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 927 F.2d 1332 (6th Cir.), 
cert. denied,—U.S.—, 112 S.Ct. 370, 116 L.Ed.2d 322 (1991). 


135a 


gives due consideration to the views of other courts 
when not inconsistent with our circuit. 


A. The Issues 


In reviewing the district court’s denial of a motion 
for a preliminary injunction filed by the acquiring 
thrift, the Transohio court recognized that a contract 
existed between the acquiring thrift, Transohio Sav- 
ings, and the government. Transohio, at 618 (“We 
agree with Transohio [Savings] ... that the circum- 
stances of the mergers support a finding that the 
transaction reflected a voluntary bargain, the terms 
of which were freely negotiated by the parties and 
binding on them.”). Having recognized the existence 
of a contract, the court proceeded to address two 
issues raised in the present litigation: (1) whether, in 
light of the POSSE decision, that contract was one 
which could bind Congress’ power to regulate and (2) 
whether FHLBB and FSLIC possessed the power to 
enter into such a contract. Id. at 617. After exam- 
ining the terms of the parties’ contract and the 
statutory language delegating contracting authority 
to FHLBB and FSLIC, the court found that the 
answer to the above framed issues was “no.” Id. at 
620, 624. This court addresses these issues and the 
Transohio court’s analysis of them in turn. 


B. “Alleged Power of Agency to Bind Congress” 


The Transohio analysis of plaintiffs’ contract 
claims offers a novel conception of government 
structure which is inconsistent with how this court 
has historically viewed the creation of rights in our 
constitutional system. Whether an agency has the 
power to bind Congress is a false issue in all of the 
Winstar cases. Under our constitutional structure, 
each branch of government has its respective role and 


r . ² ee eee ee ee 


136a 


each is equally bound by the Constitution and the 
laws established by the constitutional process. See 
J. N. S. v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 951, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 
2784, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983) (“The Constitution sought 
to divide the delegated powers of the new Federal 
Government into three defined categories, Legis- 
lative, Executive, and Judicial, to assure, as nearly as 
possible, that each branch of government would con- 
fine itseif to its assigned responsibility.”). All 
agencies of the executive branch, other than the 
President, are established by the Congress, with 
certain powers and certain duties. By exercising 
these powers and fulfilling these duties an agency 
immediately and continuously creates legal effects on 
private rights. This exercise of power in no way 
“binds” Congress as a legislative body. It can, how- 
ever, and continuously does, create rights on the part 
of private individuals that are held against and 
restrict government action. Once a salary check is 
paid, a surplus auto sold, a grant finally delivered, a 
license issued, a promotion secured, a contract let, or 
a title transferred, a legal right is created that under 
the Constitution binds the government. That prop- 
erty right cannot be taken away or diminished by the 
government without process of law, and in many cases 
even with process of law, it is immune to recapture. 
To suggest, then, that an agency action cannot confer 
rights which the government must honor is to 
suggest a notion that is as novel as it is anathema to 
our constitutional system. The power of Congress to 
legislate is no more bound by the contracts in these 
cases than it is by the sale of a piece of land by an 
agency that was authorized by Congress to sell that 
land. Once the land or action has been taken, Con- 
gress cannot return, absent a common law legal right 


137a 


to do so, to the pre-existing legal condition. Once the 
land is sold or the right granted there is a new legal 
reality. 


On this point, James Madison observed: 


It is agreed on all sides that the powers properly 
belonging to one of the departments ought not to 
be directly and completely administered by either 
of tae other departments. It is equally evident 
that none of them ought to possess, directly or 
indirectly, an overruling influence over the 
others in the administration of their respective 
powers. It will not be denied that power is of an 
encroaching nature and that it ought to be 
effectually restrained from passing the limits 
assigned to it. After discriminating, therefore, in 
theory, the several classes of power, as they may 
in their nature be legislative, executive, or 
judiciary, the next and most difficult task is to 
provide some practical security for each, against 
the invasion of the others. 


THE FEDERALIST No. 48 (James Madison). 


In the present cases, as in Transohio, what the 
acquiring thrifts were in fact required to show was 
that FHLBB and FSLIC unmistakably contracted 
with them regarding the use of supervisory goodwill 
and, in some cases, the use of capital credit. This 
court, as the Transohio court, has found that the 
rights the acquiring thrifts rely on for recovery 
“were freely negotiated by the parties and binding on 
them.” Transohio, at 618. As the Transohio court 
made clear, “(t]he agencies had no power to compel 
Transohio to purchase the insolvent thrifts; nor do 
the banking regulators’ promises to Transohio 


138a 


amount to a mere benefit bestowed on the thrift by the 
largesse of the government.” Jd. The rights at issue 
here are thus akin to those at issue in Perry and 
Lynch. In exchange for legally binding consideration, 
the government entered into unmistakable contracts 
conferring vested rights. 

In recognizing that binding contractual rights 
were created and that those rights must be honored, 
the court stresses what the contrary conclusion 
entails. The Transohio court interpreted the con- 
tract between the government and the acquiring 
thrifts as embodying nothing more than a gamble: 
“(W]e interpret the contract provisions at issue to 
mean that the agencies would allow [the acquiring 
thrift] to treat supervisory goodwill as regulatory 
capital only as long as the regulatory regime 
permitted the agencies to do so.“ Transohio, at 620; 
see also Guaranty, 928 F.2d at 999 (“By signing the 
contract, [the acguiring thrift] took that chance, in 
effect wagering the chance that the rules would be 
changed against the potential return if they were 
not.”). Such an interpretation runs counter to the 
purpose behind the establishment and continued 
existence of this court. The Claims Court and its 
predecessor, the Court of Claims, was formed with 
the purpose of instilling confidence in dealing with 
the federal government that the government would 
honor its obligations to its citizens. The court was 
thus conceived pursuant to the idea, eloquently 
expressed by President Abraham Lincoln, that “i]t is 
as much the duty of government to render prompt 
justice against itself, in favor of citizens, as it is to 
administer the same, between private individuals.” W. 
Cowen, P. Nichols, Jr. and M. Bennett, The United 
States Court of Claims: A History, reprinted in 216 


139a 


Ct. Cl. 1, 20-21 (1978) (quoting 62 Cong. Globe, 37th 
Cong., 2d Sess., App. at 2 (1862) (President Lincoln’s 
1861 Annual Message to Congress) (emphasis omit- 
ted)). To conelude that all dealings with the 
government constitute nothing more than “a very 
elaborate and expensive form of gambling,” Winstar 
II. 25 Cl. Ct. at 548, is thus at variance with the very 
ideal upon which this court, the Tucker Act, and 
ultimately the rule of law is based. 


C. The Unmistakability Doctrine 


In determining whether the contract between the 
government and Transohio Savings could bind Con- 
gress’ power to regulate, the T'ransohio court looked 
to the language of the parties’ agreement. The 
Transohio court proceeded from the assumption that 
“ ‘one who wishes to obtain a contractual right 
against the sovereign that is immune from the effect 
of future changes in law must make sure that the 
contract confers such a right in unmistakable terms.’ 
“ Transohio, at 618 (quoting Western Fuels-Utah, 
Inc. v. Lujan, 895 F.2d 780, 789 (D.C.Cir.), cert. 
denied,—U.S.—, 111 S.Ct. 47, 112 L.Ed.2d 24 (1990)). 
The court labelled this principle the “unmistakability 
doctrine,” a “specia! rule of contract interpretation 
that applies to contracts with the government.” 
Transohio, at 619. Examining the language of the 
parties’ contract, the court concluded that there was 
“no unmistakable waiver of Congress’ regulatory 
power” and that therefore the government was free to 
enact FIRREA and breach the parties’ contract 
without liability. Jd. at 620. 

In so construing the unmistakability principle, the 
Transohio court severed the doctrine from its 
historic moorings. The doctrine has stood for the 


a 


140a 


proposition that any obligation to a private party on 
the part of the government cannot be implied or 
presumed, but must be “expressed in terms too plain 
to be mistaken.” Jefferson Branch Bank v. Skelly, 66 
U.S. (1 Black) 436, 446, 17 L.Ed. 173 (1861). In the 
Contract Clause” cases from which the doctrine 
arose, it was consistently held to mean that courts 
must strictly construe contract terms to ensure that 
any sovereign power of the state, specifically its 
power to tax, is not constrained without an express 
intention by the state to bind itself. See, eg., 
Providence Bank v. Billings, 29 U.S. (4 Pet.) 514, 
561-63, 7 L.Ed. 939 (1830) (“That the taxing power is of 
vital importance; that it is essential to the existence 
of government; are truths which it cannot be 
necessary to reaffirm. As the whole community is 
interested in retaining it undiminished; that 
community has a right to insist that its abandonment 
ought not to be presumed, in a case in which the 
deliberate purpose of the State to abandon it does not 
appear.”); Keefe v. Clark, 322 U.S. 398, 396-97, 64 
S.Ct. 1072, 1073-74, 88 L.Ed. 1346 (1944) (“Before we 
can find impairment of a contract we must find an 
obligation of the contract which has been impaired. 
Since the contract here relied upon is one between a 
political subdivision of a state and private individuals, 
settled principles of construction require that the 
obligation [to not levy a tax in the future] alleged to 


% The Contract Clause of the Constitution provides that 
“{njo State shall ... pass any... Law impairing the Obligation 
of Contracts. U.S. CONST. art. I, § 10. The Clause has 
been understood as “limit{ing] the power of the States to 
modify their own contracts as well as to regulate those between 
private parties.” United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 
U.S. 1, 17, 97 S.Ct. 1505, 1515, 52 L.Ed.2d 92 (1977). 


141a 


have been impaired be clearly and unequivocally 
expressed... The continued existence of a govern- 
ment would be of no great value, if, by implications 
and presumptions, it was disarmed of the powers 
necessary to accomplish the ends of its creation,’ 
“(quoting Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge, 
36 U.S. (11 Pet.) 420, 548, 9 L.Ed. 773 (1837))). In other 
words, courts must examine whether, in regard to the 
sovereign power alleged to be constrained, “[ajll the 
basic elements of contract formation [are] present: 
capacity and mutual intent te contract, arms length 
negotiation, and the exchange of real obligations for 
real benefits.” Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 547. 

The purpose of the doctrine in the context of the 
Contract Clause was obviously to safeguard the 
sovereign power of states. The Court recognized that 
a state’s ability to exercise its sovereign powers is so 
important to the welfare of the general public that 
any limitation on that ability must be expressed in 
clear and explicit terms. The Court, however, never 
held that states could not be bound when they entered 
into unmistakable contracts. In Jefferson Branch 
Bank, for example, the Court considered whether a 
bank’s state-granted charter created a contract right 
exempting the bank from taxation imposed by a subse- 
quent statute. In holding that the bank possessed 
such a right, the court invoked the unmistakability 
doctrine’s historic purpose: 

[Tjhe vital importance of a State’s right to tax 
was considered, and the relinquishment of it by a 
State has never been presumed. That language of 
the court has always been cautious, and 
affirmative of the right of the State to impose 
taxes, unless it has relinquished by unmistakable 


L — , ⏑—˖Ü— 


142a 


words, clearly indicating the intention of the 
State to do so. This court has always said and 
acted upon it: We will not say that a State may 
not relinquish its right to tax in particular 
cases, or that a consideration sufficiently valuable 
to induce a partial increase of it may not exist, 
but as the whole community is interested in 
preserving it undiminished, it has a right to 
insist that its abandonment ought not to be 
presumed in a case in which the deliberate 
purpose of a State to abandon it does not appear. 


Id. 66 U.S. (1 Black) at 447, 17 L.Ed. at 179 (emphasis 
added). 

The purpose animating the. unmistakability doc- 
trine makes it clear that the doctrine controls how 
contractual rights with the government are created, 
i.e. whether the government has agreed in unmis- 
takable terms to be contractually bound. The 
doctrine never has been understood as controlling, as 
the government has alleged in the Winstar-related 
cases, the effect of the government’s breach of a 
contract. See United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 
431 U.S. at 23, 97 S.Ct. at 1518 (“Thfe] [unmistak- 
ability] doctrine requires a determination of the 
State’s power to create irrevocable contract rights in 
the first place, rather than an inquiry into the 
purpose or reasonableness of the subsequent impair- 
ment.”). The doctrine solely goes to whether a party 
possesses contractual rights which are binding and 
for which damages may be given. 

Thus, in Winstar and the instant cases, there has 
been little serious dispute that the government 
granted the acquiring thrifts, in the clearest possible 
terms, the right to certain types or regulatory capital 


143a 


treatment. Likewise, the acquiting thrifts have 
never contended in this court that the government is 
bound to specifically perform on this obligation. 
Rather, the dispute has primarily raged over the 
question of breach. Namely, whether the government 
must pay damages or provide restitution for its 
breach, or whether it is excused from such damages 
by an interpretation of POSSE or the sovereign acts 
doctrine. The historical understanding of the 
unmistakability doctrine is not applicable to this 
issue. 

This court’s understanding of the unmistakability 
doctrine is thus at odds with the Transohio court’s 
analysis. The Transohio court held that the govern- 
ment always possesses the power to amend its laws 
(even if in exercising that power the government 
alters the terms of an agreement with a private 
individual) except where the private individual has 
secured in unmistakable terms the government’s 
promise to waive that power in the future. Transohio, 
at 618. In other words, the government has the power 
to breach a contract with a private individual unless it 
unambiguously waives that right to breach in the 
contract itself. This analysis fails to recognize that 
the “unmistakability” requirement relates to the 
nature of an agreement between the government and a 
private individual, i.e. whether it is contractual or 
not. This is also the teaching of POSSE. If an 
agreement of the government to forbear from the 
exercise of one of its sovereign powers is 
unmistakably found to be a term of a contract with a 
private individual, then the government cannot breach 
the contract without liability. See Sinking-Fund 
Cases, 99 U.S. 700, 719, 25 L.Ed. 496, 504 (1878) (“The 
United States are as much bound by their contracts 


R -w —_ 


144a 


as are individuals. If they repudiate their obligations, 
it is as much repudiation, with all the wrong and 
reproach that term implies, as it would be if the 
repudiator had been a State or municipality or a 
citizen.”). 

The Supreme Court has never interpreted the 
unmistakability doctrine as requiring an explicit 
reference in the contract to the waiver of Congress’ 
power to legislate in the future. In Perry, for 
example, the Court found a binding contractual 
obligation on the part of the government, which could 
not be altered by subsequent legislation, even though 
the bond forming the basis of the parties’ agreement 
never referred to Congress’ power to legislate. The 
government’s obligation as expressed in the bond 
merely provided that It he principal and interest 
hereof are payable in United States gold coin of the 
present standard of value.” Perry, 294 U.S. at 347, 55 
S.Ct. at 433; Act of September 24, 1917, ch. 56, 40 Stat. 
288 (1917). No words in the bond referred explicitly to 
the fact that the government had bound Congress’ 
power to alter the terms of the bond in the future. See 
also Lynch, 292 U.S. at 577-79, 54 S.Ct. at 842-44 
(finding that Congress could not abrogate without 
paying compensation a contract to provide war risk 
insurance where the statute constituting the con- 
tract, Act of October 6, 1917, ch. 105, Sec. 402, 40 Stat. 
409 (1917), made no reference to Congress’ power to 
legislate); United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 
U.S. at 9-10, 97 S.Ct. at 1511-12 (finding that New 
Jersey and New York could not abrogate the terms of 
bonds held by private individuals where the statute 
defining the terms of the bonds did not mention the 
power of either state to legislate). To read the 
unmistakability doctrine as requiring explicit refer- 


145a 


ence to Congress’ sovereign power in the contract is 
to exalt the words of a contract over the substance of 
an unmistakable bargain struck between the 
government and its citizens. 
D. Statutory Delegation and the Unmistakability 
Doctrine 
In determining whether FHLBB and FSLIC 
possessed the power to enter into a contract which 
could “bind” Congress’ power to regulate, the court 
applied its interpretation of the unmistakability 
doctrine to statutory delegations of power to execu- 
tive branch agencies. The court ruled that 


lim the context of contracts entered into by 
administrative agencies . the unmistakability 
doctrine has two components: the contract 
relinquishes Congress’ power to regulate only 
when (1) the agency, in the contract, has 
unmistakably waived Congress’ regulatory 
authority, and (2) Congress, in a statute, has 
unmistakably delegated to the agency the power 
to surrender Congress’ regulatory authority. 
Transohio, at 621 (emphasis added). The court 
reasoned that the only alternative to requiring an 
unmistakable delegation by Congress to agencies 
concerning Congress’ regulatory authority would be 
“reading broad congressional delegations of power as 
including the power to preclude future congressional 
regulatory legislation,” an alternative which “would 
seriously undermine the constitutional scheme of 
separation of powers.” Id. at 622. The Transohio 
court conjectured that such broad delegations would 
erode the separation of powers between the executive 
and legislative branches because they “would allow 


| 


146a 


federal agencies to supplant congressional policy- 
making by contracting away Congress’ power to 
legislate.” Id. 

This analysis, however, must be rejected because of 
its assumption that the acquiring thrifts in these 
cases claim to have bound Congress’ power to 
regulate. They make no such claim. The acquiring 
thrifts merely assert that they entered into unmis- 
takable contracts with the government regarding the 
treatment of supervisory goodwill. As this court 
ruled in Winstar II. 


the government’s power to regulate must operate 
within the context of plaintiffs’ contract rights. 
While Congress clearly may alter the regulatory 
treatment of supervisory goodwill, it must also 
honor the plaintiffs’ rights. The government may 
breach the contract, but it must pay for the 
damages the plaintiffs suffer. Any alteration of 
this principle would undercut our democratic 
system. It would allow governmental policies to 
be paid for with a minority’s rights. 


Winstar II, 25 Cl. Ct. at 549. In extending an 
unmistakability requirement to the statutory 
delegation of authority to FHLBB and FSLIC, the 
Transohio analysis creates new law at odds with 
historic contract interpretation. 

FSLIC’s clear statutory mandate also belies the 
conclusion that only explicit delegations surrend- 
ering Congress’ power to regulate can create real 
rights. FSLIC was given broad authority by Con- 
gress to assist and participate in acquisitions of 
unhealthy or insolvent thrifts by healthy and solvent 
ones. 


147a 


In order to facilitate a merger or consolidation of 
an insured institution ... with another insured 
institution or the sale of assets of such insured 
institution and the assumption of such insured 
institution’s liabilities by another insured insti- 
tution, [FSLIC] is authorized, in its sole discre- 
tion and upon such terms and conditions as 
[FSLIC] may prescribe— 


(iii) to guarantee such other insured institution 
... against loss by reason of such other insured 
institution’s merging or consolidating with or 
assuming the liabilities and purchasing the 
assets of such insured institution 


12 U.S.C. § 1729(f)(2)A) (emphasis added). This 
statutory delegation, in conjunction with FSLIC’s 
congressionally authorized power to enter contracts, 
see 12 U.S.C. § 1725(c)(3) (FSLIC “shall have power 
... to make contracts”), makes it clear that FSLIC 
possessed the power to enter into binding agreements 
with acquiring savings and loan institutions. The 
Transohio court’s expressed concern that if FSLIC 
indeed had the authority to enter into contracts with 
acquiring thrifts that “agencies would be making 
laws not pursuant to congressional direction, but over 
Congress’ objections” is therefore unpersuasive. It is 
also a concern that the Congress obviously rejected 
when it authorized FSLIC to enter into these trans- 
actions and execute these contracts. It is hardly the 
function of courts to provide Congress advice on the 
political dangers of delegating legal authority to 
federal agencies. In according FSLIC the authority 
to contract, Congress made a policy decision to give 
FSLIC the power to bind the government. FSLIC, 


% ² V1. ] tt et ee 
2 é — — 


148a 


therefore, cannot be held to have exceeded its 
authority because it possessed, by an act of Congress, 
the power to bind the government and thereby confer 
vested contractual rights. 

Perhaps at the core of this court’s difficulty with 
accepting Transohio's reasoning is that decision’s 
conception of government structure. Congress under 
our system makes law, it does not deal with an 
executive agency as if that agency was under its 
bureaucratic direction. The teaching of Chadha 
makes it clear that the Congress operates only by 
legislating, not by administering. See National R.R. 
Passenger Corp. v. Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe 
Ry., 470 U.S. 451, 466, 105 S.Ct. 1441, 1451, 84 L.Ed2d 
432 (1985) (The principal function for the 
legislature is not to make contracts, but to make laws 
that establish the policy of the state.”), 

Just as agencies cannot be thought of as common 
law agents of the Congress under our constitutional 
system, they cannot bind Congress as an agent may 
sometimes bind its principal. The government is 
always and continuously bound by the legal effects of 
all previous legislation as well as the Constitution. 
The very concept of Congress contracting away some 
of its sovereign power as the Transohio court 
suggests—” We assume without expressing a view 
that Congress might, in a contract, surrender aspects 
of its regulatory authority—though the Supreme 
Court has recently said that a state may not contract 
away ‘essential’ attribute[s] of its sovereignty,’ 
United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 U.S. 1, 23, 
97 S.Ct. 1505, 1518, 52 L.Ed.2d 92 (1977), and long ago 
suggested that Congress may not either, see North 
Am. Commercial Co. v. United States, 171 U.S. 110, 
137, 18 S.Ct. 817, 828, 43 L.Ed. 98 (1898),” Transohio 


149a 


at 621—is so strange precisely because Congress 
does not act as Congress through contracting. Only 
in Congress’ internal housekeeping does it act by 
contracting. In this capacity it acts not as one of the 
branches of the triune sovereign, but as another 
government agency. Any theory to the contrary 
diminishes the role of Congress in our government by 
turning it into a part of the bureaucratic system 
rather than as the repository of “{aJll legislative 
Powers herein granted... U.S. CONST. art. I, § 1. 


E. Congressional Policy 


In reaching its conclusion that the agreements 
between the government and the acquiring thrifts 
constituted nothing more than gambling transac- 
tions, the T'’ransohio court invoked as support policy 
statements criticizing the use of supervisory good- 
will made by members of Congress and the 
Administration. Transohio, at 619-20. The govern- 
ment has also invoked such policy statements in 
arguing that the government cannot be bound by 
these agreements. This court again seeks to make it 
clear that policy considerations have ro part in 
evaluating whether the acquiring thrifts possessed 
contractual rights which must be honored. As this 


court noted in Winstar II. 


The duty of this court, like any other court, is 
solely limited to determining the respective 
rights of the particular parties before it and 
granting relief to the parties where appropriate. 
It would be highly improper for this court to 
consider, as the government seems to suggest it 
do, the effect of this decision on the government’s 
savings and loan policy. Courts are not 
established to make policy. Our Constitution, and 


150a 


the people who established that great document, 
gave the policy-making powers to the executive 
and legislative branches. 


Winstar II, 25, Cl. Ct. at 550. 


IV. Consolidation and Certification for Inter- 

locutory Appeal 

Winstar was the first of eighteen cases filed to date 
in the Claims Court which require a determination of 
the legal impact of FIRREA on the claimed contract 
rights of acquiring thrifts. In each of the remaining 
fifteen cases, the court is called upon to consider, as it 
has done in Winstar and again in the present cases, 
the nature and effect of pre-FIRREA negotiated 
agreements between acquiring thrifts and the 
government. Although some of the remaining cases 
present issues not addressed in Winstar, Statesman 
or Glendale, the outcome of all the Winstar-related 
cases will be settled in favor of the government if this 
court has incorrectly ruled in Winstar, Statesman, 
and Glendale that (1) the Supreme Court’s decision in 
POSSE does not affect the binding nature of the 
agreements entered into between the government and 
the acquiring thrifts and (2) FIRREA does not 
constitute a sovereign act within the meaning of the 
sovereign acts doctrine. 

Based on the fact that this court’s conclusions on 
these two legal issues affect eighteen very large and 
complex cases, this court raised with the parties in 
Winstar, Statesman, and Glendale at a status 
conference on May 4, 1992 the possibility that an 
interlocutory appeal might be the appropriate means 
by which potentially to prevent the wasting of 
considerable resources, not only of the court, but of 


151a 


the parties in those three cases and the remaining 
fifteen cases before the court. The court suggested 
that the Winstar, Statesman, and Glendale cases be 
the cases taken up on appeal because, considered 
together, they present a number of different factual 
variations on the legal issues that must ultimately be 
decided. In regard to the agreements alleged to 
constitute a contract, Statesman involves an express 
contract which the government has conceded it 
entered into (at least in regard to capital credit); 
Glendale involves an express contract which the 
government does not concede it entered into; and 
Winstar involves an implied-in-fact contract. In 
regard to the effect of FIRREA on the acquiring 
thrifts, Glendale involves a thrift which, even after 
FIRREA, is solvent and in operation; Statesman 
involves an insolvent thrift that, but for FIRREA, 
would be solvent; and Winstar involves an insolvent 
thrift which would still most likely be insolvent even 
if FIRREA had not been enacted. Further, these are 
the only three cases which have reached the stage of a 
final determination of liability. 

After resolving the liability stages of Statesman 
and Glendale today, the court finds that it is 
appropriate, and indeed the court’s duty, to make it 
possible for the parties in Winstar, Statesman, and 
Glendale to seek an interlocutory appeal before the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Federal 
Circuit. To that end, the court hereby orders: 


(1) Statesman and Glendale are consolidated 
with Winstar Corp. v. United States, No. 90-8C. 
The cases will be captioned under the case name 
Winstar Corp. v. United States; 


152a 


(2) Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b), the court 
hereby certifies that this court’s opinions grant- 
ing summary judgment as to liability in the 
consolidated cases Winstar Corp. v. United 
States, No. 90-8C, Statesman Savings Holding 
Corp. v. United States, No. 90-773C, and Glendale 
Federal Bank, FSB v. United States, No. 772C, 
involve controlling questions of law as to which 
there is substantial ground for difference of opin- 
ion and that an immediate appeal from these opin- 
ions may materially advance the ultimate termin- 
ation of this and related litigation. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, the court grants 
Statesman’s and Glendale’s Motions for Summary 
Judgment as to Liability. The court also denies the 
government’s pending Motions to Dismiss in both 
cases. If the parties do not seek an interlocutory 
appeal, these cases will move forward to determine 
plaintiffs’ injury, if any, and the appropriate measure 
of damages or manner of restitution. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


153a 


APPENDIX D 
IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-8C 


WINSTAR CORPORATION AND UNITED FEDERAL 
SAVINGS BANK, PLAINTIFFS 


V. 


THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT 


[Filed April 21, 1992] 


OPINION 


SMITH, Chief Judge. 


In its order of February 21, 1992, 25 Cl.Ct. 147, the 
court granted in part defendant’s Motion for Clarifi- 
cation of the Issues Remaining to be Briefed Respec- 
ting the Government’s Alleged Contract Breach in 
order to clarify certain outstanding issues in this and 
related cases. This opinion elaborates upon the 
court’s February 21 order. 


FACTS’ 


This case involves Congress’ passage of the 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and En- 


The factual background of the case is more fully set forth 
in the court’s opinion of July 27, 1990, Winstar Corp. v. United 
States, 21 Cl. Ct. 112 (1990). 


—_ 7 


154a 


forcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) and the effect of 
that Act on plaintiffs’ 1984 acquisition of a failing 
savings and loan institution. Plaintiffs acquired the 
failing savings and loan, Windom Federal Savings & 
Loan Association, pursuant to a negotiated agree- 
ment with the Federal Home Loan Bank Board 
(F HLBB) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insur- 
ance Corporation (FSLIC). The linchpin of the par- 
ties’ agreement was the government’s assent to allow 
plaintiffs to employ the purchase method of account- 
ing for the purposes of satisfying regulatory mini- 
mum capital requirements. As the court noted in its 
earlier decision, “the promise of continued treatment 
of goodwill as a capital asset that could be amortized 
over 35 years was a negotiated and critical term of 
this particular transaction. It was critical because it 
was clear that without it no purchaser would have 
engaged in this transaction.” Winstar, 21 Cl. Ct. at 
115. Under this purchase method of accounting, 


the book value of the acquired savings and loans’ 
assets and liabilities was adjusted to fair market 
value at the time of the acquisition. Any excess in 
the cost of the acquisition (which included 
liabilities assumed by the acquirer) over the fair 
market value of the acquired assets was separ- 
ately recorded on the acquirer’s books as 
“goodwill.” In other words, the government 
agreed to allow the plaintiffs and others in simi- 
lar circumstances to treat what was a deficit in 
capital as an asset. Goodwill was considered an 
intangible asset that could be amortized on a 


2 Pub. L. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183 (Aug. 9, 1989). FIRREA is 
codified at various sections of Title 12 of the United States 
Code. 


155a 


straight-line basis over a number of years. The 
difference between the aggregate fair market 
value of the failing thrift’s assets was known as 
“supervisory goodwill,” in the context of a super- 
visory merger, and was recorded on the resulting 
institution’s balance sheet as an asset includable 
in capital for purposes of satisfying FHLBB’s 
minimum capital requirements. 


Id. at 113. The terms of the final agreement accepted 
by the government provided for a thirty-five year 
period for the amortization of this supervisory 
goodwill asset. 

The passage of FIRREA in 1989, however, altered 
the arrangement struck between plaintiffs and the 


government. The new law provided that supervisory 


goodwill could be amortized over a period of no more 
than twenty years, and provided that the amount of 
goodwill included could not exceed a specified percen- 
tage of the savings and loan’s assets.’ Plaintiffs 
subsequently filed a complaint in this court on 
January 1, 1990, alleging that the exclusion under 
FIRREA of at least some of plaintiffs’ supervisory 


The applicable sections of FIRREA provided that certain 
savings and loan institutions could “include qualifying super- 
visory goodwill in calculating core capital.” 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1464(t3)(A) (Supp.1991). “Qualifying supervisory goodwil!” 
was defined by the statute as “supervisory goodwill existing on 
April 12, 1989, amortized on a straight-line basis over the 
shorter of—({i) 20 years, or (ii) the remaining period for amorti- 
zation in effect on April 12, 1989.“ 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(9)(B) 
(Supp. 1991); see Winstar, 21 Cl Ct. at 114. In plaintiffs’ case, 
the shorter period for allowable amortization was the twenty 
year period. 


2 
7 
; 


7 3 


156a 


goodwill constituted a breach of contract and, 
alternatively, a taking of plaintiffs’ contract rights.“ 

On March 28, 1990, the government filed a Motion to 
Dismiss or, in the Alternative, for Summary Judg- 
ment. In its motion, the government contended that 
no contractual relationship existed between the par- 
ties. Relying primarily on Bowen v. Public Agencies 
Opposed to Social Security Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 
106 S.Ct. 2390, 91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE), the 
government also argued that plaintiffs’ claim, if 
granted, would have the effect of improperly binding 
the government’s power to regulate. On March 30, 
1990, plaintiffs filed a Motion for Summary Judgment 
as to Liability. After entertaining the arguments 
proffered by the parties in their briefs and at oral 
argument, the court ruled on July 27, 1990 that an 
implied-in-fact contract existed between the parties. 
Winstar, 21 Cl. Ct. at 116-17. The court, however, 
stopped short of granting plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment, indicating that further briefing 
would be necessary on the following issues: whether a 
breach occurred; if so, whether it resulted in injury; 
and if so, the type and measure of relief appropriate. 
Id. at 117. 

In August 1990, the government filed a Motion for 
Clarification of the Issues Remaining to be Briefed 
Respecting the Government’s Alleged Contract 
Breach. Following that motion the court heard oral 


* The court does not reach the merits of plaintiffs’ taking 
claim at this juncture. See Sun Oil Co. v. United States, 572 
F.2d 786, 215 Ct. Cl. 716, 769 (1978) (where a plaintiff presents 
alternative theories of recovery based on contract and fifth 
amendment taking rights, recovery on one theory precludes 
recovery on the other). 


157a 


argument in a number of other cases on similar and 
related claims.’ This opinion and the court’s order of 
February 21, 1992 constitute the court’s disposition of 
the government’s Motion for Clarification. As of May 
24, 1990, the date of oral argument, plaintiffs’ bank had 
been placed into receivership. 


DISCUSSION 
I. The existence of a contract 


In its Motion for Clarification, the government 
reiterates its position that, absent an expressed con- 
tract right granting plaintiffs an exemption from fu- 
ture legislation regarding the capital treatment of 
goodwill, plaintiffs’ contract breach claim must fail. 
In support of its position, the government relies on 
Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to Social 
Security Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 2390, 91 
L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE). In POSSE, the state of 
California and employees of several of its public 
agencies brought suit against the Secretary of the 
Department of Health and Human Services to prevent 
implementation of a 1983 amendment to the Social 
Security Act. The amendment, if implemented, would 
revoke states’ then-existing “right” to withdraw 
their participation in the social security system. 


Oral argument was held on plaintiffs’ motions for sum- 
mary judgment and the government’s motions to dismiss in 
Statesman Savings Holding Corp. v. United States, No. 
90-773C (February 8, 1991) and Barron Bancshares, Inc. v. 
United States, No. 90-830C (May 30, 1991). Oral argument was 
held on the government’s motions to dismiss in Glendale 
Federal Bank, FSB v. United States, No. 90-772C (February 
28, 1991), Hometown Financial, Inc. v. United States, No. 
90-843C (April 4, 1991), and Suess v. United States, No. 
90-981C (June 6, 1991). 


* 


158a 


Since the inception of the social security system in 
1935, every state, including California, had volun- 
tarily participated in the program. California, and the 
other plaintiffs, argued that the original Act under 
which they and other states had participated had 
created an independent contractual right to withdraw 
from the system. This withdrawal right, the plain- 
tiffs contended, constituted a protected property 
interest under the fifth amendment. This property 
interest, they asserted, was insulated from the reach 
of another statutory provision in the original Act 
granting Congress “the right to alter, amend, or 
repeal any provision” of the Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1304. In 
enacting the 1983 amendment cancelling that with- 
drawal right, the plaintiffs argued, the government 
had taken plaintiffs’ protected property interests in 
violation of the fifth amendment.“ 

The Supreme Court, however, rejected plaintiffs’ 
claim. Emphasizing the inclusion of the “alter, amend 
or repeal” power granted in the original Act, the 
Court held that Congress possessed the power to 
implement the contested amendment. In so holding, 
the Court sought to clarify the nature of contractual 
relationships where the government is a party. 


While the Federal Government, as sovereign, has 


the power to enter contracts that confer vested ~ 


rights, and the concomitant duty to honor those 
rights, see Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330, 
350-354 [55 S.Ct. 432, 434-36, 79 L.Ed. 912] (1935); 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571 [54 S.Ct. 
840, 78 L.Ed. 1434] (1934), we have declined in the 


The fifth amendment provides that “nor shall private 
property be taken for public use without just compensation.” 
U.S. CONST., amendment V. 


159a 


context of commercial contracts to find that a 
“sovereign forever waives the right to exercise 
one of its sovereign powers unless it expressly 
reserves the right to exercise that power in” the 
contract. Merrion v. Jicarilla Apache Tribe, 455 
U.S. 130, 148 (102 S.Ct. 894, 907, 71 L.Ed.2d 21 
(1982). Rather, we have emphasized that Iwlith- 
out regard to its source, sovereign power, even 
when unexercised, is an enduring presence that 
governs all contracts subject to the sovereign’s 
jurisdiction, and will remain intact unless sur- 
rendered in unmistakable terms.” Ibid. There- 
fore, contractual arrangements, including those 
to which a sovereign itself is a party, “remain 
subject to subsequent legislation” by the sover- 
eign. Id., at 147 (102 S.Ct. at 907]. 


POSSE, 477 U.S. at 52, 106 S.Ct. at 2396-97. 
Underscoring these tenets of contract interpretation, 
the Court noted its “often-repeated admonition I] that 
contracts should be construed, if possible, to avoid 
foreclosing exercise of sovereign authority.” Id. at 
53, 106 S.Ct. at 2397. 

Contrary to the assertions of the government, the 
Court’s holding in POSSE in no way precludes this 
court from finding the existence of a contract 
between the government and plaintiffs. As is evident 
from its opinion, the Court in POSSE recognized that 
the government has the power to enter into contracts 
which confer vested rights—rights which the govern- 
ment has a duty to honor. See Perry v. United 
States, 294 U.S. 330, 351, 55 S.Ct. 432, 435, 79 L.Ed. 912 
(1935) (“To say that the Congress may withdraw or 
ignore [its] pledge, is to assume that the Constitution 
contemplates a vain promise, a pledge having no other 


= 


160a 


sanction than the pleasure and convenience of the 
pledgor. This Court has given no sanction to such a 
conception of the obligations of our Government.”); 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571, 580, 54 S.Ct. 
840, 844, 78 L.Ed. 1434 (1934) (“Congress was free to 
reduce gratuities deemed excessive, But Congress 
was without power to reduce expenditures by abrogat- 
ing contractual obligations of the United States. To 
abrogate contracts, in the attempt to lessen govern- 
ment expenditure, would be not the practice of 
economy, but an act of repudiation.”),’ 

In POSSE, however, unlike the case here, no such 
vested rights were created as the basic elements of 
contract formation were absent. In contracts involv- 
ing the government, as with all contractual relation- 
ships, rights vest and contract terms become binding 
when, after arm’s length negotiation, all parties to 


The court rejects the government's 
argument that the 
Perry and Lynch decisions are not controlling in this case 
because the obligation owed by the government in those cases 
was purely a financial one whereas the obligation owed here is a 


the one at issue here wherein the government asks a private 
party to engage in a certain activity (e.g., build an airport or 
purchase an insolvent savings and loan) in exchange for money 
or some equivalent consideration upon Ahich a fixed value can 
be placed. In both contractual situations, the legal consider- 


damages for breaching the contract can be fixed in monetary 
terms. Therefore, in this case, as was the case in Perry and 
Lynch, the government can be held liable for monetary 
damages. 


161a 


the contract agree to exchange real obligations for 
real benefits.” In POSSE, the Court determined that 
such vested contract rights did not exist. POSSE, 
477 U.S. at 52, 54-55, 106 S.Ct. at 2396, 2397.98. 
Although the Court did not explicitly so state, the 
facts of POSSE make it clear that the provisions of 
the original Social Security Act were not promul- 
gated after negotiation, arm’s length or otherwise, 
between Congress and the plaintiffs who filed suit. 
As is the case with all legislation, the only “negotia- 
tions” or bargaining involved in the enactment of the 


The validity of all contracts to which the government is a 
party also depends on a finding that the government represen- 
tative whose conduct is relied upon possessed actual authority 
to bind the government. See El Centro v. United States, 922 
F.2d 816 (Fed.Cir.1990), cert. denied,—U.S.—, 111 S.Ct. 2851, 
115 L.Ed.2d 1019 (1991). In the instant case, the government 
concedes that the relevant FHLBB and FSLIC officials 
possessed such authority. See transcript of oral argument, 
May 24, 1990, at 86, 94; see also 12 U.S.C. § 1729(f) (1989) 
(FSLIC “is authorized, in its sole discretion and upon such 
terms and conditions as lit] may prescribe” to extend assistance 
to failing thrifts). 

The sole authority issue raised by the government 
is whether the relevant FHLBB and FSLIC officials possessed 
authority to bind Congress from enacting subsequent legislation 
disrupting the terms of the contract entered into with plain- 
tiffs concerning the capital treatment of supervisory goodwill. 
See Defendant's Motion to Dismiss or, in the Alternative, for 
Summary Judgment at 31-33. The court does not understand 
this as the true issue raised by this and related cases. The 
court views this issue as encompassed in defendant’s contention 
that in light of POSSE no contract rights exist. The court has 
been presented with no evidence or argument that FHLBB or 
FSLIC did not have proper authority in their statutory man- 
dates to engage in the type of or specific transaction involved 
in this or similar cases. 


162a 


original Social Security Act and its amendments took 
place in the halls of Congress. The “rights” at issue 
in POSSE, then, were solely government-created. 
They were really policy decisions made by the 
democratic political process. There was no legal 
consideration for the creation of these “rights.” At 
any time, the government could revoke them without 
legal consequence because the plaintiffs had not 
bargained for their creation. See Estate of Samuel E. 
Bogley v. United States, 514 F.2d 1027, 206 Ct.Cl. 695, 
704-05 (1975) (“It is fundamental that in order to have 
a valid contract one party must make an offer that is a 
promise which is conditional upon receipt by the 
offeror of some act or promise from the offeree, and 
the offer must be accepted as to all its terms by the 
offeree.”); RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CON- 
TRACTS § 71(1) (1981) (“To constitute consideration, 
a performance or a return promise must be bargained 
for.”); 17 C.J.S. Contracts § 34 (Every contract “is the 
result of, and springs from, an offer and the accep- 
tance thereof. The offer and acceptance must have 
the characteristics of a bargain and must be 
conventional counterparts ... .). 


A similar legal issue was presented in Orrego v. United 
States Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD), 701 F.Supp. 1384 (N.D.111.1988), rev'd on other grounds 
sub nom., Orrego v. 833 West Buena Joint Venture, 943 F. 2d 
730 (7th Cir.1991). In that case, tenants of a federally assisted 
moderate and low income apartment building challenged an 
attempt by the building’s private owner to end federal regula- 
tion of the apartment. Specifically, the tenants challenged the 
prepayment by the owner to the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development (HUD) of the remaining amount due on 
its federally insured mortgage. The issue in dispute was the 
nature of the owner's “rights” under the regulatory agreement 
it entered into with the government. Under the regulatory 


163a 


In addition to the absence of the element of 
bargaining, there was also no agreement in POSSE 


scheme in effect at the time the owner entered into its agree- 
ment, private developers were eligible to “contract” with a 
government agency which would purchase existing mortgages 
and give the developers below-market forty-year mortgages on 
the condition, among others, that they would be limited in the 
rents they could charge tenants. See 12 U.S.C. § 17151(d)(3). 
In the standard regulatory agreement at the time the owner in 
Orrego “contracted” with the government, owners were per- 
mitted to prepay their mortgages after twenty years. See 24 
C. F. R. § 221.524(a)(ii). Many owners sought to do this in order 
to end federal regulation and thereby obtain higher mar- 
ket-fixed rents. Orrego, 701 F.Supp. at 1387. However, antici- 
pating a decrease in the availability of low income housing 
because of the prepayment provision, Congress enacted an 
amendment to 12 U.S.C. § 1715/(d)(3) which eliminated the 
owners’ then-existing “rights” to prepay their mortgages. In 
Orrego, the tenants challenged the owner's post-amendment 
prepayment, arguing that it was an “illegal” act. Id. at 1390. 
In considering the tenant’s claim, the court reviewed the 
POSSE decision and found that the amendment did not 
unconstitutionally deprive the owner of a vested contractual 
right as the provision allowing prepayment was “ ‘simply part 
of a regulatory program over which Congress retained author- 
ity to amend in the exercise of its power to provide for the 
general welfare.“ Id. at 1396-97. 

Thus in Orrego, as in POSSE, the owner did not have a 
protected property interest because the “rights” it asserted 
were solely government-created. The “contract” the owner 
entered into was a standard agreement which existed pursuant 
to an established regulatory scheme. The purported contract, 
unlike the one at issue here, was not the result of arms-length 
negotiation and an exchange of legally binding consideration. 
The correct analogy to the instant case would be if in Orrego 
the owner had been encouraged by the government to pay off 
its mortgage and the government had then prohibited it from 
renting half its apartments! 


- 


164a 


between the government and the plaintiffs, implied or 
otherwise, to exchange real obligations for real 
benefits. The provision at issue in POSSE permitted 
voluntary participation of states and state agencies in 
the social security system. Although the states and 
their employees paid social security taxes, these were 
paid in exchange for the right to receive benefits, not 
in exchange for the ability of the states to withdraw 
from the system. The California employees paid the 
same taxes for the same benefits as did all other 
participants in the social security system. Further 
it should be remembered that social security pay- 
ments are taxes, not insurance premiums voluntarily 
paid. Helvering v. Davis, 301 U.S. 619, 57 S.Ct. 904 

81 L.Ed. 1307 (1937). States thus received a benefit 
(an opportunity to provide retirement benefits for 
their citizens) without having to incur a 
corresponding binding obligation. Any purported 
contractual relationship existing between the 
government and the POSSE plaintiffs was therefore 
invalid for lack of consideration. See Brannan v 

United States, 7 Cl. Ct. 399, 405 (1985) (“{I]t is basic 
that consideration is an essential element of any valid 
contract, whether express or implied in fact.”); see 
also Lynch, 292 U.S. at 576, 54 S.Ct. at 842 (finding 
insurance policies issued by the government to the 

plaintiffs binding contracts on the basis that the 

plaintiffs paid consideration, i.e. prescribed monthly 

premiums, to the government); Estate of Samuel E. 

Bogley, 514 F.2d 1027, 206 Ct.Cl. at 704-05 (“ {Tyhe 

ingredients of a contract are parties, consent 

consideration, and obligation.’ ”) (quoting Farrington 


165a 


v. Tennessee, 95 U.S. (5 Otto) 679, 24 L.Ed. 558 
(1877)).” 

In contrast, a contractual relationship, with all its 
attendant obligations and duties, existed between the 
government and the Winstar plaintiffs. All the basic 
elements of contract formation were present: capacity 
and mutual intent to contract, arms length nego- 
tiation, and the exchange of real obligations for real 
benefits. See Winstar, 21 Cl.Ct. at 114-17." The 


% The Court would also not have found a contractual 
relationship existing between the government and the state and 
local employee plaintiffs as participation by employees of 
entities enrolled in the social security system was effectively 
mandatory. See POSSE, 477 U.S. at 41 n. 11, 106 S.Ct. at 2394 
n. 11. An essential element in the formation of a contract, free 
will of all the parties, was therefore absent as the employee 
plaintiffs did not willingly negotiate their participation in the 
system. A decision to invest in or purchase a failing savings 
and loan has never been made mandatory to this court’s 
knowledge, and was not so here. 

The court is not alone in reaching this conclusion. See, 
e.g., Far West Fed. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift 
Supervision, 787 F.Supp. 952 (D.Or.1992); Charter Fed. Sav. 
Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 773 F.Supp. 809, 
821 (W.D.Va.1991) ([The FHLBB had the discretion to allow 
or disallow the use of supervisory goodwill over the stipulated 
time for amortization. The inducement to allow it came, not 
from the mandate of a regulation, but the FHLBB’s need for 
assistance from plaintiffs institution. This was consideration, 
and it is one of the essential elements in the parties’ legal 
relationship which characterizes it as contractual in nature.“); 
Carteret Sav. Bank, FA v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 762 
F.Supp. 1159 (D.N.J.1991); Hansen Sav. Bank v. Office of 
Thrift Supervision, 758 F.Supp. 240 (D.N.J.1991); Security 
Sav. & Loan Ass in v. Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 761 
F. Supp. 1277 (S.D.Miss.1991); Far West Fed. Bank v. Director, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, 746 F.Supp. 1042 (D.Or.1990); 
Security Fed. Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Super- 


166a 


court’s conclusion is buttressed by the fact that the 
terms of the separate agreements negotiated between 
each acquiring savings and loan and the "HLBB and 
FSLIC substantially differ. This is in contrast with 
the standard agreements at issue in POSSE and 
Orrego, where the entities “contracting” with the 
government had no choice but to accept the terms of a 
pre-existing regulatory agreement. The fact that the 
government was a party to this contract, then, has no 


vision, 747 F.Supp. 656 (N.D.Fla.1990); Sterling Sav. Ass’n v. 
Ryan, 751 F.Supp. 871 (E.D.Wash.1990); see also Franklin Fed. 
Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift Supervision, 927 F.2d 
1332, 1345 (6th Cir.1991) (Contie, J. dissenting) (“The 
bargained-for (quid pro quo) forbearance clearly constitutes an 
integral component of the negotiated agreement between the 
FHLBB and [plaintiffs] and was not, as the government sug- 
gests, merely a gratuitous forbearance. [Plaintiffs’] sharehold- 
ers bargained for the instant forbearance and provided the 
government valuable consideration in reliance upon the 
government’s promise to allow [plaintiffs] the right to amortize 
supervisory goodwill over a 25-year period.”). Authority to 
the contrary is not definitive on the contract issue. See 
Franklin Fed. Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift 
Supervision, 927 F.2d 1332, 1341 (6th Cir.1991) (reversing a 
district court’s granting of a preliminary injunction enjoining 
the Office of Thrift Supervision from excluding supervisory 
goodwill, but not deciding whether a binding contract existed 
between the acquiring savings and loan and the government); 
Guaranty Fin. Servs., Inc. v. Ryan, 928 F.2d 994, 998 (11th 
Cir.1991) (same); Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of 
Thrift Supervision, No. 90-1678, 1991 WL 201178 at *7, 1991 
U.S.Dist.Col. LEXIS 11877 at *19-20 (denying the grant of a 
preliminary injunction, but not deciding whether the parties’ 
relationship constituted “a contract or some less binding form 
of agreement”); Flagship Fed. Sav. Bank v. Wall, 748 F.Supp. 
742 (S.D.Cal.1990) (denying injunctive relief, but not reaching 
the contract issue). 


167a 


bearing on its binding effect. See Sinking-Fund 
Cases, 99 U.S. (9 Otto) 700, 719, 25 L.Ed. 496, 504 
(1878) (“The United States are as much bound by 
their contracts as are individuals. If they repudiate 
their obligations, it is as much repudiation, with all 
the wrong and reproach that term implies, as it would 
be if the repudiator had been a State or municipality 
or a citizen.”). 

Approximately forty percent of this court’s cases 
are contract claims involving the federal government. 
While the government may engage in extremely large 
and important contractual relationships, it would 
make all dealings with the government a very elabor- 
ate and expensive form of gambling to hold that the 
government may repudiate a contract whenever sub- 
sequent policy considerations dictate that it was not a 


good or prudent bargain. As James Madison noted 


exactly two hundred years ago: “Government is insti- 
tuted to protect property of every sort; as well as that 
which lies in the various rights of individuals, as that 
which the term particularly expresses. This being 
the end of government, that alone is a just govern- 
ment which impartially secures to every man, what- 
ever is his own.” JAMES MADISON, Property 
(1792), reprinted in 6 THE WRITINGS OF JAMES 
MADISON 101, 102 (Gaillard Hunt ed., 1906) 
(emphasis in original). 

In finding the existence of a contract in this case 
the court agrees with the government’s assertion, 
and follows the Supreme Court’s holding in POSSE, 
that Congress is free, absent an express and unmis- 
takable intention to the contrary, to enact legislation 
contravening the terms of prior contractual agree- 


168a 


ments.” Rather, the point the court made in its July 
27, 1990 opinion was that when Congress elects to so 
legislate, the government must still honor the rights 
of its citizens. See Winstar, 21 Cl. Ct. at 116 (“{Whhile 
Congress’ power to regulate is not impaired, the 
government may be compelled to pay for the results of 
its actions, especially when in so doing the govern- 
ment actually is paying because it received a bene- 


fit.”). As discussed more fully below, Congress“ 


decision to regulate in this case had the consequence 
of exposing the government to potential liability for 
breach of contract damages or the possibility of hav- 
ing to make restitution to plaintiffs. The assertion 
that, in order to freely regulate, the government must 
have the power to disregard the rights and interests 
of its citizens is a novel proposition that finds no 
support in the legislative history of FIRREA, or for 
that matter, in our constitutional tradition. Sover- 
eign power is always restricted, in one sense, by the 
rights of individuals. However, in our Nation that has 
never been seen as an improper restriction on regula- 
tory power. Rather, it is the foundation upon which 
all law and regulation are built. See Hendler v. 
United States, 952 F.2d 1364, 1374 (Fed.Cir.1991) (“In 
the bundle of rights we call property, one of the most 
valued is the right to sole and exclusive possession— 
the right to exclude strangers, or for that matter 
friends, but especially the Government.”) (emphasis 
in original). 


“This principle was recently reaffirmed ia Peterson v. 
United States Department of Interior, 899 F.2d 799 (9th Cir.), 
cert. denied, — U.S. —, 111 S.Ct. 567, 112 L.Ed.2d 574 (1990), a 
case also relied upon by defendant in its Motion for Clari- 
fication. 


169a 


Although POSSE and well-developed case law 
makes it clear that the government is at all times free 
to legislate, that freedom is inherently constrained by 
the government’s obligation to honor its prior con- 
tractual commitments, especially when the govern- 
ment has received a benefit. See, e.g., Perry, 294 U.S. 
at 353-54, 55 S.Ct. at 436 (“The Constitution gives to 
the Congress the power to borrow money on the 
credit of the United States, an unqualified power, a 
power vital to the Government Having this 
power to authorize the issue of definite obligations for 
the payment of money borrowed, the Congress has not 
been vested with authority to alter or destroy those 
obligations.”). The limits imposed on the govern- 
ment’s sovereign power in this case are analogous to 
the limits imposed on that power by the fifth amend- 
ment. Under well-established fifth amendment 
jurisprudence, the government may legislate in a way 
that effects, intentionally or otherwise, a “taking” of 
an individual’s private property, whether it be by 
physically occupying it or rendering it valueless. 
The fifth amendment, however, circumscribes that 
governmental power by requiring that the govern- 
ment pay individuals “just compensation” for actions 
infringing on Ce ir protected property interests. See 
Hendler, 952 F.2d at 1378 (“We emphasize that the 
issue is not whether the Government had the right to 
impose itself and its activities on these plaintiffs. 
Whatever right the plaintiffs had to be let alone was 
overcome by the Government’s need in the interest of 
public health and safety .... The issue before the 
court lis] whether, on the facts before it, the 
Government took any property by permanent physical 
occupation, thus obligating it to pay plaintiffs just 
compensation.”) (emphasis in original). Thus, the 


170a 


fifth amendment limits the government’s power to 
take property without precluding its exercise. 

In this case, the government’s power to regulate 
must operate within the cc text of plaintiffs’ contract 
rights. While Congress clearly may alter the regu- 
latory treatment of supervisory goodwill, it must also 
honor the plaintiffs’ rights. The government may 
breach the contract, but it must pay for the 
the plaintiffs suffer. Any alteration of this principle 
would undercut our democratic system. It would allow 
— policies to be paid for with a minority’s 
rights. 


II. Exemption from future legislation by Congress 


In its Motion for Clarification, the government 
asserts that in order to find the existence of a binding 
contract right, for which damages can be given, the 
court must first find that the FHLBB or FSLIC had 
the authority to grant plaintiffs an unequivocal right 
to be exempt from future legislation governing the 
capital treatment of supervisory goodwill. Although 
the court finds that plaintiffs were not granted an 
exemption from future regulation concerning super- 
visory goodwill, the court holds that this exemption 
question is not relevant to the issues before the 
court. As the court noted in its July 27, 1990 opinion, 
“plaintiffs are not claiming that the government 
contractually bound Congress not to change its regu- 
lations.” Winstar, 21 Cl. Ct. at 116. Rather, plaintiffs 
seek recovery for alleged injuries resulting from 
Congress’ decision to abrogate the government’s 
agreement with plaintiffs. Thus, plaintiffs’ claim does 
not hinge on whether the government granted, or 
possessed the authority to grant, plaintiffs an 


17la 


exemption, implied or explicit, from subsequent 
regulation. 


III. Breach of contract 


Turning to the question of contract breach, the 
court finds that in enacting FIRREA the government 
did in fact breach its contract with plaintiffs. It is 
undisputed that the original agreement between the 
parties allowed plaintiffs to treat supervisory good- 
will as a capital asset and to amortize it over 
It is also undisputed that the 


plaintiffs was to exclude all but $2.7 million of 
approximately $9.1 million of supervisory goodwill 
includable before the enactment of the statute. The 
court holds that FIRREA’s alteration of the terms of 
the original agreement, absent a countervailing 
contractual right to do so, constituted a breach of 
contract entitling plaintiffs to damages or restitu- 
tion. The government has cited no contract- 
ually-based right to alter the terms of the original 
contract. 


®FIRREA mandates the phasing out of the use of 


declines each year, so as not to exceed 1.0% of total assets 
through December 31, 1992; not to exceed 0.75% of total assets 
through December 31, 1993; and not to exceed 0.375% of total 
assets through December 31, 1994. 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(3)(A). 


172a 


In finding that the government breached its 
contract with plaintiffs, the court seeks to make it 
clear that its decision does not reflect, as the 
government suggests it would, a judgment by the 
court upon the Congress’ savings and loan policy. 
Clearly, this court is not a policy-making body. The 
duty of this court, like any other court, is solely 
limited to determining the respective rights of the 
particular parties before it and granting relief to the 
parties where appropriate. It would be highly 
improper for this court to consider, as the govern- 
ment seems to suggest it do, the effect of this decision 
on the government’s savings and loan policy. Courts 
are not established to make policy. Our Constitution, 
and the people who established that great document, 
gave the policy-making powers to the executive and 
legislative branches. In a constitutional democracy 
such as this one, the court must accept as given 
policies duly enacted into law such as FIRREA was. 
Likewise, the courts, when adjudicating the rights of 
citizens, must not be influenced by the amount at 
stake, whether it be one cent or one billion dollars. It 
is as wrong to award one cent that is not merited as it 
is to fail to award a billion dollars that is justly due. 
To do otherwise would make a mockery of equal 
justice under law. In establishing this court, Con- 
gress gave it a simple mandate: to hear certain mone- 
tary claims brought against the government; to deter- 
mine the government’s liability pursuant to those 
claims, if any; and to fix the amount of damages owed 
to particular plaintiffs. See 28 U.S.C. § 1491 (1982); 
S.REP. No. 96-304, 96th Cong., Ist Sess. 11 (1979). 


173a 


IV. Sovereign acts doctrine 


In its Motion for Clarification, the government also 
argues that the sovereign acts doctrine precludes 
plaintiffs’ recovery for breach of contract." Under 
that doctrine, the government is not contractually 
liable, absent an express agreement to the contrary, 
for the consequences of acts performed in its 
sovereign capacity. See generally Peter S. Latham, 
The Sovereign Act Doctrine in the Law of 
Government Contracts: A Critique and Analysis, 7 
U.TOL.L.REV. 29 (1975). In Horowitz v. United 
States, 267 U.S. 458, 461, 45 S.Ct. 344, 344, 69 L.Ed. 736 
(1925), the Supreme Court articulated the doctrine as 
follows: 


It has long been held by the Court of Claims that 
the United States when sued as a contractor 
cannot be held liable for an obstruction to the 
performance of the particular contract resulting 
from its public and general acts as a sovereign. 
Deming v. United States, 1 Ct.Cls. 190, 191; 
Jones v. United States, 1 Ct.Cls. 383, 384; Wilson 
v. United States, 11 Ct.Cls. 513, 520. In the Jones 
Case, supra, the court said: “The two characters 
which the government possesses as a contractor 
and as a sovereign cannot be thus fused; nor can 
the United States while sued in the one character 
be made liable in damages for their acts done in 
the other. Whatever acts the government may do, 
be they legislative or executive, so long as they 
be public and general, cannot be deemed specially 
to alter, modify, obstruct or violate the particular 


„ The government also asserts this doctrine as a defense to 
plaintiffs’ taking claim. 


174a 


contracts into which it enters with private 
persons 


(quoting Jones v. United States, 1 Ct. Cl. 383, 384 
(1865)). 

Although the sovereign acts doctrine grants the 
government immunity from liability on a variety of 
contractual theories, the doctrine “is not a boundless 
justification for governmental non-liability.” Latham 
supra at 41; see also A erican Satellite Co. v. 
United States, 20 Cl. Cr. 710, 715 (1990) (“Mere 
invocation of the sovereign acts doctrine is not a 
talisman. The doctrine has limitations.”). The doc- 
trine grants the government immunity only where 
the government action alleged to constitute a breach 
is “public and general” in nature. Typically, govern- 
ment acts have been considered “public and general” 
when they impose a broad and general effect upon the 
society or the economy. See, e.g., Horowitz, 267 U.S. 
at 461, 45 S.Ct. at 344 (government found immune 
from liability where plaintiff's loss was caused by 
shipping embargo imposed by government on all 
shipments of silk); Tony Downs Foods Co. v. United 
States, 530 F. 2d 367, 209 Ct. Cl. 31, 34 (1976) (immunity 
found where Executive Order lifting price freeze “on 
all commodities and services” caused monetary loss 
to plaintiff); Amino Bros. Co. v. United States, 372 
F. 2d 485, 178 Ct. Cl. 515, 525, cert. denied, 389 U.S. 
846, 88 S.Ct. 98, 19 L.Ed.2d 112 (1967) (immunity found 
where government’s opening of dam flood gates to 
run-off water from heavy rains “affected the public 
generally and was not directed solely toward the 
plaintiff”); J.B. McCrary Co. v. United States, 84 
F.Supp. 368, 114 Ct. Cl. 12, 34 (1949) (immunity found 
where Executive Order freezing labor wages 


175a 


determined to be “an order of general application 
affecting all contractors and businesses and laborers 
everywhere”); Gothwaite v. United States, 102 Ct.Cl. 
400, 401 (1944) (immunity found where regulations of 
War Production Board impeding plaintiff's perfor- 
mance affected all entities requiring materials needed 
for the war effort).” 

Conversely, where the government abrogates 
through a limited and focused action specific govern- 
ment obligations to a particular class of individuals or 
entities it has contracted with, the government is not 
afforded immunity. In these instances, the 
government acts not in its capacity as sovereign, but 
in its capacity as contractor. See, eg., Everett 
Plywood Corp. v. United States, 651 F.2d 723, 227 
Ct. Cl. 415, 429 (1981) (Te act [prohibiting plaintiff 
from cutting timber it had purchased from the 
government] was neither public nor general—the 
government unilaterally terminated one contract 
after deciding continued performance would have been 
unwise. It would have been an entirely different case 
if Congress had passed a law immediately prohibiting 
all cutting in all public forests, but this unilateral 
termination does not constitute a sovereign act that 


5 In situations where courts have applied the sovereign acts 
doctrine to government actions only affecting a small class of 
individuals or entities, i.e. where the government action is not 
literally “general” in application, emphasis has been placed on 
the compelling “public” nature of the act. See, e. g., Wah 
Chang Corp. v. United States, 282 F.2d 728, 151 Ct.Cl. 41, 51 
(1960) (finding that “the temporary taking” of plaintiffs 
property “for the purpose of facilitating and guarding the 
secrecy of troop movements in time of war was a ‘public and 
general’ act of sovereignty ‘performed for the general good 
within the meaning of the Horowitz doctrine.”). 


176a 


excuses the government from breach damages.”); 
Sunswick Corp. v. United States, 75 F.Supp. 221, 109 
Ct.Cl. 772, cert. denied, 334 U.S. 827, 68 S.Ct. 1337, 92 
L.Ed. 1755 (1948) (“It does not follow that the action of 
the Wage Adjustment Board in directing the plaintiff 
to increase its carpenters’ wages can be so isolated 
under the guise of an act of sovereignty as to permit 
the Government, in its capacity as a party to the 
contract, to disavow having had any part in such 
action, and to disclaim any liability for whatever 
increased burden this action may have added to the 
performance of the contract. The increased wage 
costs for which plaintiff seeks to be reimbursed 
resulted not from the Government’s public and 
general act in setting up its wartime system for 
controlling and adjusting wages, nor from any 
widespread and general application of a device created 
for this public purpose as a matter of national policy 

Thus, the distinction may be seen to rest on 
which hat the government is wearing when the action 
abrogating the contract is taken. Is it the govern- 
ment as sovereign or the government as contracting 
party? In this sense, the application of the doctrine 
has hinged on the facts of each case. 

In order to invoke the sovereign acts doctrine, then, 
the government bears the burden of showing that its 
actions “were public, general, sovereign, performed 
for the public good, and not arbitrary and unreason- 
able.“ American Satellite, 20 Cl. Ct. at 715 (citing 
Air Terminal Servs., Inc. v. United States, 330 F.2d 
974, 165 Ct.Cl. 525, 536 (dissenting opinion of Jones, 
C.J.), cert. denied, 379 U.S. 829, 85 S.Ct. 57, 13 L.Ed.2d 
38 (1964)). In this case, the government has not made 
the requisite showings to invoke the doctrine. The 
pertinent sections of FIRREA at issue here, 12 


177a 


U.S.C. §§ 1464(t) (30A) and (9)(B), preclude the 
application of the sovereign acts doctrine.” Their 
very purpose was to take away plaintiffs’ rights to use 
supervisory goodwill because the Congress felt its 
use was no longer good policy. Courts assessing 
sovereign act claims have not granted immunity 
where the sole purpose of the government action is to 
reverse an earlier policy decision later deemed 
unwise. See, e.g., Everett Plywood, 651 F.2d 723, 227 
Ct.Cl. at 429 (government’s decision to cancel 
contract to sell standing timber due to its concern 
that continued logging and road construction would 
cause damage to soil, watershed and forest resources 
found not to be a sovereign act); Sun Oil Co., 572 F.2d 
786, 215 Ct. Cl. at 759-68 (government’s decision to 
deny a permit and thereby breach oil drilling lease 
agreement with plaintiffs because of environmental 
concerns did not constitute a sovereign act); 
Freedman v. United States, 320 F.2d 359, 162 Ct.Cl. 
390 (1963) (government’s cancellation of contract to 
sell surplus tanks because of subsequent discovery of 
presence in tanks of valuable diesel engines found not 
to be a sovereign act); Miller v. United States, 140 
F.Supp. 789, 135 Ct.Cl. 1 (1956) (government’s cancel- 
lation of contract to sell surplus aircraft because of 
government’s later decision that sales to plaintiff 


16 » see Far West Fed. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift 
Sup sion, 787 F.Supp. 952, 958-59 (D.Or.1992) (finding 
FIRE A to be a sovereign act, but ruling that plaintiffs’ claim 
for rescission and restitution based on frustration of purpose is 
“entirely consistent with the purposes of the sovereign acts 
doctrine”). Thus the court notes that even if the sovereign 
acts doctrine did apply to these provisions of FIRREA, plain- 
tiffs might still obtain relief on a theory of frustration of 


purpose. 


„ 
* 
* 

3 


178a 


would be contrary to national interests found not to 
be a sovereign act). 

In the instant case, taking away plaintiffs’ right in 
these sections of FIRREA was not the necessary 
means to a broad public end, rather it was the 
government’s end goal. On the government’s 
reasoning, any statute breaching a contract would be 
immune under the doctrine merely because its 
purpose was to breach the contract. This court has 
never granted government immunity on such a basis. 
See Freedman, 320 F.2d 359, 162 Ct.Cl. at 402 (the 
sovereign acts doctrine “does not relieve the govern- 
ment from liability where it has specially undertaken 
to perform the very act from which it later seeks to be 
excused .... The existence of this court is proof 
enough that the desire to save money is a poor reason 
to break an outstanding promise.”). Although the 
court accepts as a given that the government sought 
to promote the public welfare in enacting FIRREA as 
a whole, those specific provisions of the Act altering 
the capital treatment of supervisory goodwill were 
intended to, and did, impact only upon plaintiffs and 
those similarly situated entities who had acquired 
savings and loan institutions. This fact compels the 
conclusion that sovereign act immunity cannot 
adhere in this and related cases. 

In analyzing the sovereign acts doctrine’s applica- 
bility to the facts of this case, the court finds it sig- 
nificant that the public purpose the government 
sought to promote could have been achieved without 
disturbing plaintiffs’ contractual rights. See 
Freedman, 320 F.2d 359, 162 Ct.Cl. at 397-98, 402; 
Miller v. United States, 140 F.Supp. 789, 135 Ct.Cl. at 
10-11 (1956); Weaver Constr. Co., 91-2 B.C.A. J 23,800, 
1990 WL 39131, 1999 DOT BCA LEXIS 12 at *13 


179a 


(“(TJhe Government is not immune from contract 
damages for an act which implements national policy 
if the required implementation could have been 
achieved without disturbing contractual relation- 
ships.”). The government’s suggestion, therefore, 
that a finding by this court that the sovereign acts 
doctrine is not applicable would somehow defeat the 
objectives of Congress in passing FIRREA is without 
merit. Such a suggestion could only be true if it is 
assumed that the statute’s only cure for the savings 
and loan industry is taking plaintiffs’ newly con- 
tributed capital to pay for the alleged excesses of past 
generations. The statute’s comprehensive reform and 
regulatory system give no support to this view of the 
role of sections 1464(t)(3)(A) and (9)(B). The question 
in this case is not whether heightened capital 
standards for savings and loans is a good policy (the 
court must and does accept Congress’ and the 
President’s decision that it is), rather it is the 
question whether sections 1464(t)(3)(A) and (9)(B) 
may force plaintiffs rather than the government to 
pay for this policy. They may not. As James Madison 
observed: 


If the United States mean to obtain or deserve 
the full praise due to wise and just governments, 
they will equally respect the rights of property, 
and the property in rights: they will rival the 
government that most sacredly guards the 
former; and by repelling its example in violating 
the latter, will make themselves a pattern to that 
and all other governments. 

JAMES MADISON, Property (1792), reprinted in 6 

THE WRITINGS OF JAMES MADISON 101, 103 

(Gaillard Hunt ed., 1906). 


— 


180a 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, the court finds that 
a binding contract existed between the government 
and the plaintiffs and that the government breached 
that contract when Congress enacted FIRREA. 
Accordingly, this case will move forward to determine 
plaintiffs’ injury, if any, and the appropriate measure 
of damages or manner of restitution. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


18la 


APPENDIX E 


IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-8C 
WINSTAR CoRp., ET AL., PLAINTIFFS 
. 


THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT 


[FILED FEBRUARY 21, 1992] 


ORDER 


To the extent that the court has treated defendant’s 
Motion for Clarification of the Issues Remaining to 
be Briefed Respecting the Government’s Alleged Con- 
tract Breach as a motion for reconsideration, that mo- 
tion is denied. To the extent that this order clarifies 
defendant’s questions, posed in its Motion for Clari- 
fication, that motion is granted. 

In the next month the court intends to more fully 
elaborate upon this order with an opinion. However, in 
order for this litigation, and other related cases to 
proceed efficiently towards resolution the court 
provides the parties with the following answers to 
the questions posed in defendant’s Motion for Clari- 
fication. 


182a 


(1) After a further consideration of Bowen v. 
Public Agencies Opposed to Social Sec. 
Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 2390, 91 
L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE), and Peterson v. 
Department of Interior, 899 F.2d 799 (9th Cir.), 
cert. denied. U.S. __, 111 S.Ct. 567, 112 
L.Ed.2d 574 (1990), as well as other case law and 
briefing in this, and related cases, the court holds 
that abrogation of plaintiffs’ right to treat 
supervisory goodwill as a capital asset for a 
period of 35 years breached the government’s 
contract with plaintiffs. 


(2) The opinion makes it clear that plaintiffs 
were not granted an exemption from legislation 
governing the capital treatment of goodwill. 
However, the plaintiffs’ do have a contract right 
to certain treatment of their supervisory good- 
will as a capital asset. Abrogation of this right by 
the government absent a countervailing contrac- 
tual right of the government is a breach of 
contract entitling the plaintiffs to damages or 
restitution. 


(3) The sovereign acts doctrine does not bar 
plaintiffs’ claims in this or analogous cases. 


This order shall be sent to all parties in all 
Winstar-related cases. A status conference in this 
case and all related cases shall be scheduled for the 
week of March 23, 1992 to discuss the orderly 
scheduling of all pending issues to the end that the 
litigation may proceed to a resolution of remaining 
issues. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


183a 


APPENDIX F 


IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-8C 


WINSTAR CORPORATION & UNITED FEDERAL 
SAVINGS BANK, PLAINTIFFS 


v. 


THE UNITED STATES, DEFENDANT 


[FILED JULY 27, 1990 


OPINION 


Saitu, Chief Judge. 


This dispute stems from the acquisition of a failing 
savings and loan prior to the enactment of the 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and En- 
forcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) and the subsequent 
effect of the new regulatory scheme on plaintiffs. It 
presently is before the court on plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment as to liability and defendant's 
motion to dismiss or in the alternative cross-motion 
for summary judgment. Although plaintiffs’ com- 
plaint advances several legal theories, the pre- 
requisite for recovery under any proposed rationale 
requires the court to find that plaintiffs had a 
property right stemming from contract or some other 


184a 


source to include supervisory goodwill as a capital 
asset for regulatory purposes and to amortize it over 
35 years. : 

After careful consideration of the arguments 
advanced in the parties’ briefs and during extensive 
oral arguments, the court denies the parties’ motions, 
with leave to renew or move for judgment on the 
pleadings under RUSCC 12(c), if and when approp- 
riate. The court is of the opinion that summary 
judgment on liability is precluded because a genuine 
issue of material fact remains, and requests further 
briefing in order to resolve this issue. 

The court further finds that although there were 
express agreements among the parties, the trans- 
action as a whole is represented by an implied-in-fact 
contract. For reasons set forth below, the court 
reserves its consideration of the taking claim. 


FACTS 


The facts presented here are intended to provide 
the reader with a basic understanding of the context 
in which this dispute arises, and are not intended as a 
complete factual statement of the case. 

Plaintiffs are Winstar Corporation and United 
Federal Savings Bank, a federal stock savings bank, 
all of the common stock of which is owned by Winstar. 
Winstar was formed in 1984 for the sole purpose of 
acquiring Windom Federal Savings & Loan Associ- 
ation. Windom had shown substantial operating 
losses in its 1983 year-end report. Faced with the 
probable need to liquidate Windom, at an alleged cost 
to the government of over $12 million, the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) actively solicited 
bids for its acquisition from a list of potential 
acquirers, among which were the organizers of 


185a 


Winstar. In late 1983, FHLBB and the Federal 
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) 
began negotiating with the organizers of Windom. 
FSLIC eventually recommended to FHLBB that it 
approve Winstar’s merger proposal, based on its 
analysis of several factors, including the cost to the 
government of the available alternatives. Winstar’s 
proposal was estimated to be the least costly to the 
government of all the acquisition proposals, and less 
than half as expensive as the liquidation of Windom. 
Included in Winstar’s proposal was the provision 
that the acquisition employ the purchase method of 
accounting. Under this method, as described by 
plaintiffs and not disputed by defendant, the book 
value of the acquired thrift’s assets and liabilities was 
adjusted to fair market value at the time of the 
acquisition. Any excess in the cost of the acquisition 
(which included liabilities assumed by the acquirer) 
over the fair market value of the acquired assets was 
separately recorded on the acquirer’s books as 
“goodwill.” In other words, the government agreed to 
allow the plaintiffs and others in similar circum- 
stances to treat what was a deficit in capital as an 
asset. Goodwill was considered an intangible asset 
that could be amortized on a straight-line basis over a 
number of years. The difference between the aggre- 
gate fair market value of liabilities assumed by the 
acquirer and the aggregate fair market value of the 
failing thrift’s assets was known as “supervisory 
goodwill,” in the context of a supervisory merger, and 
was recorded on the resulting institution’s balance 
sheet as an asset includable in capital for purposes of 
satisfying FHLBB’s minimum capital requirements. 
Winstar’s initial proposal subsequently was modi- 
fied, but at all times indicated that the purchase 


186a 


method of accounting would be used. The proposal 
ultimately accepted by the government called for a 
35-year period for the amortization of this asset. It 
was anticipated that after such time, at the very 
latest, the institution really would be in the black. It 
was hoped that by doing this, with some real infusions 
of new money and a certain number of years to 
eliminate this unusual asset, the savings bank could 
work its way out of the deficit. 

In 1989, President Bush signed into law the Finan- 
cial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement 
Act of 1989 (FIRREA), Pub.L. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183 
(Aug. 9, 1989) (now codified at various sections of 
Title 12 of the United States Code). Among the many 
changes effected by the act are extensive amendments 
to the Home Owner’s Loan Act, codified at 12 U.S.C. 
§§ 1461-1468, significantly affecting the regulation of 
the savings and loan industry. The most important 
provisions for purposes of this case relate to the 
permissible regulatory treatment of supervisory 
goodwill. 

Under the new law, a certain amount of supervisory 
goodwill is permitted to be amortized for no more than 
20 years. The law restricts on a declining basis the 
percentage of that goodwill that may be included as 
capital. The statutory mechanism for this is found in 
the transition rule that applies to capital standards, 
at 12 U.S.C. § 1464(t)(3)(A). That section reads as 


follows: 


Notwithstanding paragraph (9)(A) [defining 
core capital generally to exclude intangible 
assets], an eligible savings association may in- 
clude qualifying supervisory goodwill in calcu- 
lating core capital. The amount of qualifying 


187a 


supervisory goodwill that may be included may 
not exceed the applicable percentage of total 
assets set forth in the following table 


The table indicates that from the date of enactment 
through December 31, 1994, the percentages decline 
from 1.500% to 0.375%, after which time no amount 
will be includable. 

“Qualifying supervisory goodwili” is a defined 
term, the definition of which is found at 12 U.S.C. § 
1464(t)(9)(B). 

The term “qualifying supervisory goodwill” 
means supervisory goodwill existing on April 12, 
1989, amortized on a straight-line basis over the 
shorter of— 


(i) 20 years, or 


(ii) the remaining period for amortization in 
effect on April 12, 1989. 


Plaintiffs allege that the exclusion under FIRREA 
of at least some of plaintiffs’ supervisory goodwill is 
in violation of the parties’ agreement, and constitutes 
a breach of contract and, in the alternative, a taking of 
plaintiffs’ contract rights. It also is alleged that as a 
result of this section, plaintiffs have suffered severe 
losses. 


DISCUSSION 


The immediate issue before the court is a garden 
variety question of whether a contract, express or 
implied, existed. Although there certainly were 
express representations made, they combined to 
create a transaction, which, as a whole, is represented 
by a contract implied-in-fact. 


188a 


There is a significant amount of precedent 
involving the elements required to show an implied- 
in-fact contract in this court. It has been stated that: 


A contract implied in fact requires a showing of 
the same intent to contract as that required for 
an express contract .... It is essential ... that 
the acceptance of the offer be manifested by 
conduct that indicates assent to the proposed 
bargain. The requirements of mutuality of intent 
and the lack of ambiguity in offer and acceptance 
are the same for an implied-in-fact contract as for 
an express contract; only the nature of the 
evidence differs. 


Russell Corp. v. United States, 587 F.2d 474, 210 
Ct.Cl. 596, 609 (1976), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 1073, 97 
S.Ct. 811, 50 L.Ed.2d 791 (1977) (footnotes omitted). 
See also Somali Dev. Bank v. United States, 508 F.2d 
817, 205 Ct.Cl. 741, 751 (1974) (“Before a contract may 
be implied in fact, there must be a meeting of the 
minds which is inferred from the conduct of the 
parties, and in the light of the surrounding circum- 
stances, shows their tacit understanding.”). Of 
course, mutual assent is not sufficient to imply a 
contract. “(Tjhere must be some consideration 
moving to the United States, or the Government must 
have received money under a duty to pay it over, or 
the claimant must have had a lawful right to the 
money when it was received, such as money paid 
under a mistake.” Id. 508 F.2d 817, 205 Ct.Cl. at 751 
(citing Knote v. United States, 95 U.S. 149, 156, 24 
L.Ed. 442 (1877)). 

Defendant vigorously claims that neither FSLIC 
nor FHLBB agreed that there would be no changes in 


189a 


regulatory policy with respect to goodwill, nor could 
they so bind Congress. Plaintiffs assert, with equal 
vigor, that the government expressed an unequivocal 
agreement that plaintiffs would be permitted to 
continue to treat supervisory goodwill as a capital 
asset and to amortize it for 35 years, regardless of 
changes in generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP) or in regulatory policy. 
The undisputed evidence confirms plaintiffs’ posi- 
tion. Among the relevant documents evidencing the 
ies’ intent is the correspondence from the 
FHLBB to the Board of Directors of United dated 
July 13, 1984, and referred to in this litigation as the 
forbearance letter. The first paragraph of the letter 
indicates that its purpose is “to confirm the under- 
standing that:,” and continues to enumerate several 
terms of the acquisition. Paragraph 2 reads as 
follows: 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, the value 
of any intangible assets resulting from account- 
ing for the merger in accordance with the pur- 
chase method may be amortized by Savings Bank 
over a period not to exceed 35 years by the 
straight-line method 


The letter also indicated that the FHLBB recognized 
that the accounting practices mentioned may have 
deviated from GAAP: “The accounting forbearances . 
. . are not acceptable in any financial statements 
which are required to be prepared in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles.” 

Further evidence of defendant’s intent is found in 
two inter-office memoranda from financial analysts at 
FHLBB, both of whom were reporting on viability 
analyses regarding the proposed acquisition. The 


190a 


first memo, dated March 14, 1984, listed among its 
“Relevant Assumptions” the following: 


2. Purchase accounting is applied to the assets 
of Windom . . . . Goodwill is amortized over 40 
years. 


The second memo, dated May 30, 1984, similarly listed 
among its “Relevant Assumptions” that “[g]oodwill is 
amortized over 35 years.” Based on these assump- 
tions, the FHLBB estimated the amount of financial 
assistance to be provided by FSLIC and the 
acquirers, respectively. An additional inter-office 
memorandum from the Deputy Director of 
Program/Administration of the FHLBB to the 
Assistant Director of the agency, dated June 1, 1984, 
indicated the appropriateness of the purchase method 
of accounting for the proposed transaction, as well as 
the office’s “lack of objection to the accounting 
forbearance outlined for purposes of reports to the 
FHLBB.” 

The documents discussed above are representative 
of the evidence that leads this court to the firm 
conclusion that the government expressly intended to 
contract for the particular treatment of goodwill at 
issue in this case, notwithstanding changes in GAAP 
or in the statutory scheme. There is no support for 
the defendant’s argument that these statements 
merely were representations of the then-existing 
regulatory policy. Rather, they illustrate the reality 
that the promise of continued treatment of goodwill as 
a capital asset that could be amortized over 35 years 
was a negotiated and critical term of this particular 
transaction. It was critical because it was clear that 
without it no purchaser would have engaged in this 
transaction. 


19la 


Defendant attempts to mischaracterize plaintiffs’ 
claim as one which improperly seeks to bind the 
government’s power to regulate. To support its 
motion to dismiss on this ground, defendant cites 
Bowen v. Agencies Opposed to Social Security 
Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41, 52, 106 S.Ct. 2390, 2396-97, 
91 L.Ed.2d 35 (1986) (POSSE) (“contractual 
arrangements, including those to which a sovereign 
itself is a party, ‘remain subject to subsequent 
legislation’ by the sovereign” (quoting Merrion v. 
Jicarilla Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130, 147, 102 S.Ct. 
894, 907, 71 L.Ed.2d 21 (1982))); St. Louis v. United 
Railways Co., 210 U.S. 266, 273-75, 280, 28 S.Ct. 630, 
634, 52 L.Ed. 1054 (1908) (sovereign power to tax 
retained unless “specifically surrendered in terms 
which admit of no other reasonable interpretation”); 
VicksLurg, Shreveport & Pacific Rail Road Co. v. 
Dennis, 116 U.S. 665, 668, 6 S.Ct. 625, 626-27, 29 L.Ed. 
770 (1886) (“ ‘neither the right of taxation, nor any 
other power of sovereignty, will be held by this court 
to have been surrendered, unless such surrender has 
been expressed in terms too plain to be mistaken’ ”); 
and Peterson v. United States Department of 
Interior, 899 F.2d 799 (9th Cir.1990) (rejecting claim 
by water management districts that they had 
contractual right to continue delivering subsidized 
water to leaseholds of any size notwithstanding 
change in statute limiting size of leaseholds to which 
the water could be delivered). All of these cases, 
however, recognize that there are contracts to which 
the government must be bound, particularly when the 
government has received a benefit. E. g., POSSE, 477 
U.S. at 52, 106 S.Ct. at 2396-97 (citing Perry v. 
United States, 294 U.S. 330, 350-54, 55 S.Ct. 432, 
434-37, 79 L.Ed. 912 (1935)); Lynch v. United States, 


192a 


292 U.S. 571, 586, 54 S.Ct. 840, 846-47, 78 L.Ed. 1434 
(1934). 

It is critical to this case, and apparently 
misconstrued by defendant, that plaintiffs are not 
claiming that the government contractually bound 
Congress not to change its regulations. Rather, 
plaintiffs claim that in their particular transaction 
with the government, it was agreed that they would 
be permitted to treat supervisory goodwill in a 
particular way for a fixed number of years. Thus, 
while Congress’ power to regulate is not impaired, 
the government may be compelled to pay for the 
results of its actions, especially when in so doing the 
government actually is paying because it received a 
benefit. An analogy may be drawn to the corporate 
world, in which under state law and a corporation’s 
by-laws its board of directors’ ability to act for the 
good of the shareholders may not be limited. Not- 
withstanding this prohibition, the corporation may be 
required to pay for its actions, such as firing an 
officer, although the legitimacy of its action is not 
questioned. With respect to government actions, an 
analogous situation may be found in the area of 
regulatory takings. Although Congress may exer- 
cise its police power and regulate extensively, in 
some cases when it does so it must provide just 
compensation if the result of the regulation 
effectively is to condemn a property right. See, e.g., 
First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los 
Angeles, 482 U.S. 304, 107 S.Ct. 2378, 96 L.Ed.2d 250 
(1987); Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 
393, 415, 43 S.Ct. 158, 160, 67 L.Ed. 322 (1922). See also 
Penn Central Transp. Co. v. New York City, 438 
U.S. 104, 145, 98 S.Ct. 2646, 2669-70, 57 L.Ed.2d 631 
(1978) (Rehnquist, C., dissenting). The fact that the 


193a 


government was free to change its regulatory scheme 
is not inconsistent with the possibility that there 
exists a contract here under which the government 
may have obligations to the plaintiffs in this case 

Finally, defendant argues that in determining 
whether there exists a contract the court is required 
to interpret the transaction in light of the policies 
underlying the controlling legislation. See Peterson, 
899 F. 2d at 807 (relying on F. H. A. v. The Darlington, 
Inc., 358 U.S. 84, 87-88, 79 S.Ct. 141, 144, 3 L. Ed. 2d 132 
(1958). Accepting this proposition, the court is 
convinced that at least part of the policy reflected in 
the prior and current regulatory schemes is a strong 
desire, if not need, on the part of the government to 
involve the private sector in rescuing failing savings 
and loans. This view, coupled with the fact that no 
other private entity would have entered into an 
agreement to purchase Windom without an agreement 
to allow it to continue to treat supervisory goodwill 
as a capital asset and to amortize it over 35 years (or a 
comparable alternative to achieve the see result), 
buttresses plaintiffs’ assertions. 

In the instant case, there is ample evidence to 
support the court’s finding that a contract implied-in- 
fact was formed between the organizers of Winstar 
and the United States. This contract embraced the 
entire transaction by which Windom was acquired by 
Winstar and merged into United. This contract 
includes the various written agreements among all 
interested parties. Among the critical terms of this 
contract were the obligations on the part of the 
government to put approximately $1.95 million 
directly into United and to contribute an additional 
several million dollars based on Windom’s aggregate 
negative net worth, a sum that ultimately amounted 


we 


194a 


to $3,694,499, for a total cash contribution of 
$5,644,499. Winstar, in turn, was obligated to 
immediately put $2 million into United. As an 
additional and critical term of the contract, the 
government agreed to permit Winstar to treat 
supervisory goodwill as a capital asset to be 
amortized over 35 years. It must be stressed that the 
contract provided that this particular institution 
would be permitted to continue the treatment of 
supervisory goodwill as a capital asset that could be 
amortized over 35 years, and not that the regulations 
would not change. In consideration, the government 
received the benefit of relief from its obligations to 
liquidate Windom or otherwise provide for the 
depositors of Windom, the value of which, while 
certainly substantial, remains to be determined. 


The court also finds, contrary to defendant’s 
contention, that this contract is not governed by 
the Contract Disputes Act because it is not a 
contract for “the procurement of property,; 
services; . . . construction, alterations, repair or 
maintenance of real property; or, .. the disposal 
of personal property.” 41 U.S.C. § 602(a) (1988). 


Because it is preferable to resolve disputes in such 
a way as to avoid constitutional considerations, see, 
e.g., New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer, 440 
U.S. 568, 582, 99 S.Ct. 1355, 1364, 59 L.Ed.2d 587 
(1978); Spector Motor Service v. McLaughlin, 323 
U.S. 101, 105, 65 S.Ct. 152, 154, 89 L.Ed. 101 (1944), and 
because the resolution of plaintiffs’ contract claim 
may obviate the need to proceed on the taking claim, 
further consideration of plaintiffs’ taking claim is 
suspended. 


195a 


CONCLUSION 


Defendant’s argument that the government could 
not have been a party to the acquisition because the 
government never owned Windom belies the actual 
nature of the relationships among the parties, and the 
character of the transaction. Far from solely provid- 
ing the necessary regulatory approval for the acqui- 
sition, the government was a necessary party to the 
occurrence of this transaction. It was a party to the 
implied-in-fact contract, obligating itself and accept- 
ing consideration from plaintiffs. 

The court requires further briefing on several 
elements of plaintiffs’ contract claim which are neces- 
sary to determine liability, and requests further 
briefing on: whether a breach occurred; if so, whether 
it resulted in injury; if so, the type and measure of 
relief appropriate. A status conference to establish a 
briefing schedule will be scheduled by subsequent 


order. 


196a 


APPENDIX G 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS 


1. Section 1464(t) of Title 12, U.S.C., ii in in 
relevant part: 


(t) Capital standards 
(1) In general 


(A) Requirement for standards to be 


prescribed 


The Director shall, by regulation, pre- 
scribe and maintain uniformly applicable 
capital standards for savings associations. 
Those standards shall include — 


(i) a leverage limit; 

(ii) a tangible capital requirement; and 

(iii) a risk-based capital requirement. 
(B) Compliance 


A savings association is not in com- 
pliance with capital standards for purposes 
of this subsection unless it complies with all 
capital standards prescribed under this 


paragraph. 
(C) Stringency 


The standards prescribed under this 
paragraph shall be no less stringent than the 


197a 


capital standards applicable to national 
banks. 


(D) Deadline for regulations 


The Director shall promulgate final re- 
gulations under this paragraph not later 
than 90 days after August 9, 1989, and those 
regulations shall become effective not later 
than 120 days after August 9, 1989. 


(2) Content of standards 


(A) Leverage limit 


The leverage limit prescribed under 
paragraph (1) shall require a savings 
association to maintain core capital in an 
amount not less than 3 percent of the 
savings association’s total assets. 


(B) Tangible capital requirement 


The tangible capital requirement pre- 
scribed under paragraph (1) shall require a 
savings association to maintain tangible 
capital in an amount not less than 1.5 per- 
cent of the savings association’s total assets. 


(C) Risk-based capital requirement 


Notwithstanding paragraph (IC), the 
risk-based capital requirement prescribed 
under paragraph (1) may deviate from the 
risk-based capital standards applicable to 
national banks to reflect interest-rate risk or 
other risks, but such deviations shall not, in 
the aggregate, result in materially lower 


198a 


levels of capital being required of savings 
associations under the risk-based capital 
requirement than would be required under 
the risk-based capital standards applicable to 
national banks. 


(3) Transition rule 


(A) Certain qualifying supervisory 
goodwill included in calculating 
core capital 


Notwithstanding paragraph (9A), an 
eligible savings association may include 
qualifying supervisory goodwill in cal- 
culating core capital. The amount of quali- 
fying supervisory goodwill that may be in- 
cluded may not exceed the applicable per- 
centage of total assets set forth in the 
following table: 


For the following period: The applicable percentage is: 


Prior to January 1, 199. 1.500 percent 
January 1, 1992-December 31, 1992.............. 1.000 percent 
January 1, 1993-December 31, 1993.............. 0.750 percent 
January 1, 1994-December 31, 1994 0.375 percent 
. ——. ——. ——— —— ee 0 percent 


(B) Eligible savings associations 


For purposes of subparagraph (A), a 
savings association is an eligible savings 


199a 


association so long as the Director deter- 
mines that — 


(i) the savings association’s manage- 
ment is competent; 


(ii) the savings association is in 
substantial compliance with all applicable 
statutes, regulations, orders, and super- 
visory agreements and directives; and 


(iii) the savings association’s man- 
agement has not engaged in insider 
dealing, speculative practices, or any 
other activities that have jeopardized the 
association’s safety and soundness or 
contributed to impairing the association’s 
capital. 


(6) Consequences of failing to comply with 
capital standards 


(A) Prior to January 1, 1991 
Prior to January 1, 1991, the Director— 


(i) may restrict the asset growth of 
any savings association not in compliance 
with capital standards; and 


(ii) shall, beginning 60 days following 
the promulgation of final regulations 
under this subsection, require any 
savings association not in compliance with 


200a 


capital standards to submit a plan under 
subsection (s)(4)(A) of this section that— 


(I) addresses the savings association’s 
need for increased capital; 


(II) describes the manner in which the 
savings association will increase its 
capital so as to achieve compliance with 
capital standards; 


(III) specifies the types and levels of 
activities in which the savings association 
will engage; 


(IV) requires any increase in assets to 
be accompanied by an increase in tangible 
capital not less in percentage amount than 
the leverage limit then applicable; 


(V) requires any increase in assets to 
be accompanied by an increase in capital 
not less in percentage amount than 
required under the risk-based capital 
standard then applicable; and 


(VI) is acceptable to the Director. 


(B) On or after January 1, 1991 
On or after January 1, 1991, the Director— 


(i) shall prohibit any asset growth by 
any savings association not in compliance 
with capital standards, except as provided 
in subparagraph (C); and 


201la 


(ii) shall require any savings associa- 
tion not in compliance with capital stand- 
ards to comply with a capital directive 
issued by the Director (which may include 
such restrictions, including restrictions 
on the payment of dividends and on 
compensation, as the Director determines 


to be appropriate). 
(C) Limited growth exception 


The Director may permit any savings 
association that is subject to subparagraph 
(B) to increase its assets in an amount not 
exceeding the amount of net interest credited 
to the savings association’s deposit liabilities 
if— 


(i) the savings association obtains the 
Director’s prior approval; 


(ii) any increase in assets is ac- 
companied by an increase in tangible 
capital in an amount not less than 6 
percent of the increase in assets (or, in 
the Director’s discretion if the leverage 
limit then applicable is less than 6 
percent, in an amount equal to the 
increase in assets multiplied by the 
percentage amount of the leverage limit); 


(iii) any increase in assets is accom- 
panied by an increase in capital not less in 
percentage amount than required under 
the risk-based capital standard then 
applicable; 


202a 


(iv) any increase in assets is invested 
in low-risk assets, such as first mortgage 
loans secured by 1- to 4-family residences 
and fully secured consumer loans; and 


(v) the savings association’s ratio of 
core capital to tetal assets is not less than 
the ratio existing on January 1, 1991. 


(D) Additional restrictions in case of 
excessive risks or rates 


The Director may restrict the asset 
growth of any savings association that the 
Director determines is taking excessive 
risks or paying excessive rates for deposits. 


(E) Failure to comply with plan, 
regulation, or order 


The Director shall treat as an unsafe 
and unsound practice any material failure by 
a savings association to comply with any plan, 
regulation, or order under this paragraph. 


(F) Effect on other regulatory authority 


This paragraph does not limit any 
authority of the Director under other 
provisions of law. 


(9) 


Definitions 
For purposes of this subsection— 


(A) Core capital 


Unless the Director prescribes a more 
stringent definition, the term “core capital” 
means core capital as defined by the 
Comptroller of the Currency for national 
banks, less any unidentifiable intangible 
assets, plus any purchased mortgage servicing 
rights excluded from the Comptroller's 
definition of capital but included in calculating 
the core capital of savings associations 


pursuant to paragraph (4). 
(B) Qualifying supervisory goodwill 


The term “qualifying supervisory goodwill” 
means supervisory goodwill existing on April 
12, 1989, amortized on a straightline basis over 
the shorter of— 


(i) 20 years, or 


(ii) the remaining period for amorti- 
zation in effect on April 12, 1989. 


(C) Tangible capital 


The term “tangible capital” means core 
capital minus any intangible assets (as 
intangible assets are defined by the 
Comptroller of the Curreney for national 
banks). 


204a 


(D) Total assets 


The term “total assets” means total assets 
(as total assets are defined by the Comptroller 
of the Currency for national banks) adjusted in 
the same manner as total assets would be 
adjusted in determining compliance with the 
leverage limit applicable to national banks if 
the savings association were a national bank. 


(10) Use of comptroller’s definitions 
(A) In general 


The standards prescribed under paragraph 
(1) shall include all relevant substantive 
definitions established by the Comptroller of 
the Currency for national banks. 


(B) Special rule 


If the Comptroller of the Currency has not 
made effective regulations defining core capital 
or establishing a risk-based capital standard, 
the Director shall use the definition and stand- 
ard contained in the Comptroller’s most re- 
cently published final regulations. 


2. Section 567.2 of Title 12 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations provides: 


§ 567.2 Minimum regulatory capital require- 
ment. 


(a) To meet its regulatory capital requirement a 
savings association must satisfy each of the following 
capital standards: 


205a 


(1) Risk-based capital requirements. (i) A sav- 
ings association’s minimum risk-based capital re- 
quirement shall be an amount equal to 8% of its risk- 
weighted assets as measured pursuant to § 567.6(a) of 


this part. 


(ii) A savings association may not use supple- 
mentary capital to satisfy this requirement in an 
amount greater than 100% of its core capital as 
defined in § 567.5 of this part. 


(2) Leverage ratio requirement. (i) A savings 
association’s minimum leverage ratio requirement 
shall be the amount set forth in § 567.8 of this part. 


(ii) A savings association must satisfy this 
requirement with core capital as defined in § 567.5 of 
this part in an amount not less than 3% of its adjusted 
total assets. 


(3) Tangible capital requirement. (i) A savings 
association’s minimum tangible capital requirement 
shall be the amount set forth in § 567.9 of this part. 


(ii) A savings association must satisfy this 
requirement with tangible capital as defined in § 567.9 
of this part in an amount not less than 1.5% of its 
adjusted total assets. 


(b) Transition period for risk-based capital 
requirement. (1) From December 7, 1989 to 
December 30, 1990, a savings association’s minimum 
risk-based capital requirement for any calendar 
quarter shall be an amount equal to 80% of the 


206a 


amount required under paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section; and 


(2) From December 31, 1990 until December 30, 
1992, a savings association’s minimum risk-based 
capital requirement for any calendar quarter shall be 
an amount equal to 90% of the amount required under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section. 


(e) Savings associations are expected to maintain 
compliance with all of these standards at all times. 


3. Section 567.5 of Tile 12 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations provides in pertinent part: 


§ 567.5 Components of capital. 


(a) Core Capital. (1) The following elements, 
less the amount of any deductions pursuant to 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, comprise a savings 
association’s core capital: 


(i) Common stockholders’ equity (including 
retained earnings); 


Stock issues where the dividend is reset periodically based 
on current market conditions and the savings association’s 
current credit rating, including but not limited to, auction 
rate, money market or remarketable preferred stock, are 


assigned to supplementary capital, regardless of cumulative or 
noncumulative characteristics. 


207a 


(ii) |Noncumulative perpetual preferred stock 
and related surplus; 


(iii) Minority interests in the equity accounts 
of subsidiaries that are fully consolidated; 


(iv) Nonwithdrawable accounts and pledged 
deposits of mutual savings associations (excluding 
any treasury shares held by the savings association) 
meeting the criteria of regulations and memoranda of 
the Office to the extent that such accounts or 
deposits have no fixed maturity date, cannot be 
withdrawn at the option of the accountholder, and do 
not earn interest that carries over to subsequent 
periods; 


(v) The remaining goodwill (FSLIC Capital 
Contributions) resulting from prior regulatory 
accounting practices as provided in § 567.1(w)(1) of 
this part. 


(2) Deductions from core capital: (i) Intangible 
assets are deducted from assets for purposes of 
determining core capital except as provided in 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section and § 567.12 of this 


part 


2 Stock issued by subsidiaries that may not be counted by 
the parent savings association on the Thrift Financial Report, 
likewise shall not be considered in calculating capital. For 
example, preferred stock issued by a savings association or a 
subsidiary that is, in effect, collateralized by assets of the 
savings association or one of its subsidiaries shall not be 
included in capital. Similarly, common stock with mandatorily 
redeemable provisions is not includable in core capital. 


208a 


(ii) Paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section does not 
apply to qualifying supervisory goodwill held by 
an eligible savings association (as defined in s 
567.1(h) of this part) to the extent permitted by 
this paragraph. The amount of qualifying 
supervisory goodwill may not exceed the 
applicable percentage of adjusted total assets as 
calculated for the tangible capital requirement 
set forth in the following table: 


Percent 
Fan. 1, 19BB—Dec. 81, 166 „q „ „„ 0.750 
Jan. 1, 1904—Dee. 81, 1906 ......ccccccecccscccsccseccsssereseeees 0.375 
—K . 0 


(iii) [Reserved] 


(iv) Investments, both equity and debt, in 
subsidiaries that are not includable subsidiaries 
(including those subsidiaries where the savings 
association has a minority ownership interest) 
are deducted from assets and, thus core capital 
except as provided in paragraphs (a)(v) and (a)(vi) 
of this section. 


N % If a savings association has any 
investments (both debt and equity) in one or 
more subsidiaries engaged as of April 12, 1989 
and continuing to be engaged in any activity that 
would not fall within the scope of activities in 
which includable subsidiaries may engage, it 
must deduct such investments from assets and, 
thus, core capital in accordance with paragraph 


209a 


(a) (Zw) of this section. The savings association 
must first deduct from assets and, thus, core 
capital the amount by which any investments in 
such subsidiary(ies) exceed the amount of such 
investments held by the savings association as of 
April 12, 1989. Next, the savings association 
must deduct from assets and, thus, core capital 
the applicable percentage set forth in paragraph 
(a)(2)(v)(B) of this section of the lesser of: 


(1) The savings association’s investments 
in and extensions of credit to the subsidiary as of 
April 12, 1989; or 


(2) The savings association’s investments 
in and extensions of credit to the subsidiary on 
the date as of which the savings association’s 
capital is being determined. 


(B) For purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(v)(A) of 
this section, the applicable percentage is as 
follows: 


For the period: The applicable percentage is: 


Prior to July 1, 1990 1 — 


July 1, 1990-June 30, 1991 ..—'V9.—g..—.—.—.—. 10 
July 1, 1991 June 30, 1992 ...... 25 
July 1, 1992-June 30, 1993 . ..........—.—27ũ 40 
July 1, 1993-June 30, 1994 ...... 60 
Thereaſterr . . 100 


—- 


210a 


(C) A savings association that has deducted a 
portion of its investment in a subsidiary pursuant 
to paragraph (a)(2)(v)(A) of this section must 
consolidate the prorated assets of the subsidiary 
in calculating adjusted total assets for the core 
capital requirement by multiplying those prorated 
assets by the following applicable percentage and 
adding that amount in calculating its adjusted 
total assets: 


For the period: The applicable percentage is: 
Ue BO Gy Ti: BED / xx 100 
e 90 
II 75 
rr x 60 
ee ...... 40 
2 0 


(vi) If a savings association holds a subsidiary 
(either direetly or through a subsidiary) that is 
itself a domestie depository institution, the Office 
may, in its sole discretion upon determining that 
the amount of core capital that would be required 
would be higher if the assets and liabilities of such 
subsidiary were consolidated with those of the 
parent savings association than the amount that 
would be required if the parent savings 
association’s investment were deducted pursuant 
to paragraphs (a)(2)(iv) and (a)(2)(v) of this section, 


211a 


consolidate the assets and liabilities of that 
subsidiary with those of the parent savings 
association in calculating the capital adequacy of 
the parent savings association, regardless of 
whether the subsidiary would otherwise be an 
includable subsidiary as defined in s 567. 100 of this 


part. 


