a? 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the federal government can deliberately repudi- 
ate, without liability, specifically negotiated, unambiguous, 
and express contractual commitments for which it has 
received valuable consideration simply by changing the law. 


PARTIES BELOW 


The parties to the proceeding in the court whose judg- 
ment is under review were Winstar Corporation, United Fed- 
eral Savings Bank, Statesman Savings Holding Corp., The 
Statesman Group, Inc., and American Life and Casualty 
Insurance Company. 


Respondents have already provided the Court, in their 
brief in opposition to the government's petition for writ of 
certiorari, with the information required under Rule 29.6 of 
the Rules of this Court. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ......................... iv 
EEL LES l 
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .._ 13 
ESS a a 18 


I. THE GOVERNMENT UNMISTAKABLY 
AGREED TO ACCORD REGULATORY CAPI- 
TAL TREATMENT TO RESPONDENTS’ 
SUPERVISORY GOODWILL AND CAPITAL 
CREDIT FOR SPECIFIED TIME PERIODS... 18 


Il. THE THRIFT REGULATORS HAD EXPRESS 
STATUTORY AUTHORITY TO ENTER 
INTO STATESMAN’'S AND WINSTAR’S 
SELB aki c div ae dubeecececccess: 41 


Ill. THE SOVEREIGN ACTS DOCTRINE DOES 
NOT EXCUSE THE GOVERNMENT'S LIA- 
BILITY IN DAMAGES FOR ITS BREACH OF 
ITS CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS......... 42 


Tete ee eee ee bes ceerccecceseecesces cs: 50 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Page 
Amino Bros. Co. v. United States, 372 F.2d 485 (Ct. 

Cl.), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846 (1967).............. 46 
Appleby v. Delaney, 271 U.S. 403 (1926).............. 18 
Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40 (1960)........ 37 
Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to Social Sec. 

Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41 (1986)............. 11, 33, 34 
Bradley v. Washington, Alexandria, and Georgetown 

Steam Packet Co., 38 U.S. (13 Pet.) 89 (1839) ...... 18 


Carteret Sav. Bank v. OTS, 762 F. Supp. 1159 (D.N.J. 
1991), vacated on other grounds, 963 F.2d 567 (3d 


Gh, We wanceedcnehe ban uademenmmette ee cc 21 
Charter Fed. Sav. Bank v. OTS, 976 F.2d 203 (4th Cir. 

1992), cert. denied, 113 S.Ct. 1643 (1993).......... 35 
Choate v. Trapp, 224 U.S. 665 (1912)................. 40 
Craft Machine Works, Inc. v. United States, 926 F.2d 

fl RI Br Sea 22 
Energy Reserves Group v. Kansas Power & Light Co., 

sb OY SRNR RS Serie es 38 
Far West Fed. Bank v. Director, OTS, 787 F. Supp. 

See Ge Ss Se esidvincvckkeubcesie ee 20 
Freedman v. United States, 320 F.2d 359 (Ct. Cl. 

G+ cn. nveenh dnbanuiadbunsnica tended ee 44 
Globe Refining Co. v. Landa Cotton Oil Co., 190 US. 

Se Nas bend cbéubiaweued bene eee 16 
Guaranty Fin. Serv., Inc. v. Ryan, 928 F.2d 994 (11th 

ee WEED ho dbueéscsssnaddaseleuseeee 35 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Cases Page 
Hansen Sav. Bank v. OTS, 758 F. Supp. 240 (D.N.J. 
aie ol Shi Pi sch a eli aha aight 21 


Heil v. United States, 273 F. 729 (S.D.N.Y. 1921). ..13, 42 


Hills Materials Co. v. Rice, 982 F.2d $14 (Fed. Cir. 
PD ditetiduhesnadua chocster eo cs 18, 22, 44, 46 


Hodel v. Irving, 481 U.S. 704 (1987)..............._.. 40 
Horowitz v. United States, 267 U.S. 458 (1925) .... 43, 44, 45 


Hughes Communications Galaxy Inc. v. United States, 


Dee TS SS Gee. Cie, OO0B).. occ ccc nccee 22 
Jefferson Branch Bank v. Skelly, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 

RS let i EE ae 32, 33 
Jones v. United States, | Ct. Cl. 383 (1865)........... 45 
Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. 571 (1934)... . 32, 40, 45, 46 
Manigault v. Springs, 199 U.S. 473 (1905) ............ 15 
Merrion v. Jicarilla Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130 

Ae ciida cd Labdeilc deo kbncsicceccine 33, 34 


New York Mail & Newspaper Transp. Co. v. United 
States, 154 F. Supp. 271 (Ct. Cl), cert. denied, 355 


ERE EST SE ae a 49 
Ocean Technology, Inc. v. United States, 19 Cl. Ct. 

SE eae 49 
Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330 (1935) ....... passim 


Piqua Branch v. Knoop, 57 U.S. (16 How) 369 (1854)... . 33 


Prestex Inc. v. United States, 320 F.2d 367 (Ct. Cl. 
Sips Ain dehbta tad naes tomececewccuns 49 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Cases Page 
Providence Bank v. Billings, 29 U.S. (4 Pet.) 514 

GUpGc ccccccecconcenspscunsedadennsunenhauloul 32, 33 
RTC v. FSLIC, 25 F.3d 1493 (10th Cir. 1994)....... 20, 28 
Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986 (1984)..... 40 
Russell v. Sebastian, 233 U.S. 195 (1914) ............. 18 
Security Fed. Sav. Bank v. Director, OTS, 747 F. Supp. 

ee Ry epee |) ee ee 21 


Security Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Director, OTS, 761 F. 
Supp. 1277 (S.D. Miss. 1991), aff'd in part, rev'd 
in part on other grounds, 960 F.2d 1318 (Sth Cir. 
TOUR cdiddbe des cked Dbcubenley Grdalckiecsle duds 21 


Sinking Fund Cases, 99 U.S. (9 Otto) 700 (1879)...... 32 


Sterling Sav. Ass'n v. Ryan, 751 F. Supp. 871 (E.D. 
Wash. 1990), rev'd on other grounds, 959 F.2d 241 


ee ee SEeh bent unercuauaenie es 3... 21 
Sunswick Corp. v. United States, 75 F. Supp. 221 (Ct. 

Cl.), cert. denied, 334 U.S. 827 47 
Transcapital Fin. Corp. v. Director, OTS, 44 F.3d 

— , <_ & re aa aan 35 
Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, OTS, 967 F.2d 598 

Gees Gs Cee ndcnccccessctcsdésacceaaee.t. 35 
The Binghamton Bridge Co., 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 5! 

Geedddecwcadcsecntanuceoues eeseecececeneces 18, 35 
United States v. Amdahl Corp., 786 F.2d 387 (Fed. 

Ge SED dee nterduetiatbbscdtuckdpasended!... 49 
United States v. Cherokee Nation, 480 U.S. 700 

GI i bdccche cébedinteVascuiidaddcbeiies. abccal 33, 34 


United States v. Klein, 80 U.S. (1 Wall.) 128 (1871) .... 32 


vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Cases Page 
United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 US. 1 

RE See YAEL Tan ow SI ag 15, 38, 43 
Van Hoffman v. Quincy, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) 535 (1867).... 22 
Wood v. Lovett, 313 U.S. 362 ES 22 
Yosemite Park & Curry Co. v. United States, 582 F.2d 

. AD... SS ees ee 49 
STATUTES 
secthise costs thet ae Sh ST OT VOPR OT a ! 
12 USC. § 172S¢4) (1988) .......................... 42 
12 U.S.C. § 1729(f)(2)A)(3) (1988)............... 42 


Orner AuTHorrnes 


135 Cong. Rec. 11,795 (1989)................... 39 
135 Cong. Rec. H2706 (daily ed. June 15, 1989)....__. 41 
Comptroller General Op. B-240860 (Aug. 27, 1990)... 41 
E. Allan Farnsorth, Contracts 840 (2d ed. ss PPE 16 


H.R. Rep. No. 54, 101st Cong. Ist Sess., pt. |, at 
PE Suites AUIS c Ncteewksihc ddd dns ck se... 41 


Housing and Urban Recovery Act of 1982: Hearing 
Before the Subcommittee on Housing and Commu- 
nity Development of the House Committee on Bank- 
ing Finance and Urban Affairs, 97th Cong., 2d 
Sey SOS Ok WEL. occ occcccsecec......: 3 


vill 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Orner AUTHORITIES Page 


Michael L. Zigler, Note, Takings Law and the Con- 
tract Clause: A Takings Law Approach to Legisla- 
tive Modifications of Public Contracts, 36 Stan. L. 
Oe, Geer Mee nnnadcaasenden dhbbheneksabihdasdens +e 15 


Oversight on the Condition of the Financial Services 
Industry: Hearings Before The Senate Comm. on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 100th Cong., 


iF > OF EP es RR ee ee 6 
Recent Cases, 109 Haw. L. Rev. 1162 (1996).......... 48 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts (1981) .......... 16, 18 
S. Rep. No. 19, 101st Cong., Ist Sess. 9 (1989) ........ 5 


Savings and Loan Policies in the Late 1970s and 
1980s: Hearings Before The House Comm. on 
Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, 101st Cong., 


Bas Bae ee ne « cha cc bdekeeiicel Ls a. 5 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENTS 
WINSTAR CORPORATION AND 
THE STATESMAN GROUP, INC., ET AL. 


This case is actually three separate cases, consolidated by 
the Court of Federal Claims for purposes of an interlocutory 
appeal of the court's order granting plaintiffs’ (respondents 
here) motions for partial summary judgment as to liability on 
their claims of breach of contract. Pet. App. 150a-152a. This 
brief is filed on behalf of the respondents in two of the 
consolidated cases — Winstar Corporation (“Winstar”) and 
The Statesman Group, Inc., and its affiliated entities (collec- 
tively “Statesman”). Respondent in the third consolidated 
case, Glendale Federal Bank, FSB, is represented by separate 
counsel and is filing its own brief. 


STATEMENT 


In upholding the trial court's finding of contract liability 
against the government, a nine-judge majority of the en banc 
Federal Circuit concluded that “[t}here is nothing extraordin- 
ary about the contracts in these cases save for their subject 
matter and the potential liability to the government.” Pet. 
App. 45a. Applying straightforward and venerable principles 
of contract law, the Federal Circuit concluded, as had the trial 
court, that in acquiring insolvent savings and loan institutions 
(“thrifts”), respondents had “negotiated contracts with the 
bank regulatory agencies that allowed them to include super- 
visory goodwill (and capital credits) as assets for regulatory 
capital purposes and to arnortize that supervisory goodwill 
over extended periods of time.” Pet. App. 30a. Winstar and 
Statesman fulfilled their obligations under their contracts 
with the government, but the government did not. Because the 
thrift regulators, acting pursuant to regulations implementing 
the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement 
Act of 1989 (“FIRREA”), Pub. L. No. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183 
(codified in relevant part at 12 U.S.C. § 1464), repudiated 
their agreements and largely eliminated the bargained-for 
supervisory goodwill and capital credits from the thrifts’ 
regulatory capital, “Winstar and Statesman were immediately 


2 


thrown into noncompliance with the new regulatory capital 
requirements and were seized by federal regulators within 
approximately six months.” /d. The government's repudiation 
of its agreements with respondents was nothing more, nor 
less, than an old-fashioned breach of contract, and the only 
thing remarkable about this case are the arguments advanced 
by the government to avoid its liability for the damages it has 
caused to respondents. 

Throughout its opening brief, the government casts 
respondents Winstar and Statesman, and the transactions giv- 
ing rise to their claims, in a false light. Noting that during the 
thrift crisis of the 1980s many troubled thrifts sought “to 
grow rapidly” as “the easiest way to regain profitability,” Pet. 
Br. 2, quoting H.R. Rep. No. 54, 101st Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 1, 
at 298-99 (1989) (“House Report”), the government portrays 
respondents Winstar and Statesman as “thrifts [that] engaged 
in . . . acquisitions of, failing thrifts” and that sought “[i}n 
connection with their transactions,” the Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board’s (“Bank Board”) “formal approval” and “valu- 
able government cash and non-cash financial assistance.” Pet. 
Br. 14. The government also attempts to portray the thrift 
regulators — the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corpora- 
tion (“FSLIC”) and the Bank Board — as financially disin- 
terested in the acquisitions, passively providing the necessary 
“regulatory approval of the Bank Board for the... 
acquisition,” Pet. Br. 6, and “permit[ting respondents] to use 
‘goodwill’ to satisfy federal regulatory capital requirements” 
until FIRREA finally curtailed such “shadowy” accounting 
“gimmicks.” Pet. Br. 4-5. 

One would scarcely conclude from a reading of the 
government’s brief that the thrift regulators’ commercial 
interests as the insurer of the deposits of the acquired thrifts 
were vitally at stake in these transactions; that the regulators 
aggressively urged Winstar and Statesman — neither of which 
were previously involved in the savings and loan industry — to 
acquire the insolvent thrifts; that the key inducement, the 
essential guid pro quo, for Statesman’s and Winstar’s acquisi- 
tions was the regulators’ express contractual promise to 
accord regulatory capital treatment to supervisory goodwill 


3 


(and Statesman’s capital credit) for the specified periods; that 
the government’s use of regulatory capital \“forbearances” 
such as supervisory goodwill to facilitate acquisitions of 
failed thrifts was designed to (and did) save the regulators, 
not the acquirers, huge sums of money; that the regulators 
aggressively promoted the use of supervisory goodwill and 
capital credits because they lacked the cash that would other- 
wise have been necessary either to liquidate or to facilitate 
acquisitions of failed thrifts; and that the regulators’ transac- 
tions with Winstar and Statesman saved the government tens 
of millions of dollars. The government’s account of the trans- 
actions giving rise to this case is misleading, and a somewhat 


extended counter-statement of the case is required to correct 
it. 


1. The causes and extent of the financial crisis in the 
thrift industry in the 1980s are amply described by the court 
of appeals in both the panel majority opinion (Pet. App. 
57a-61a) and the en banc majority opinion (Pet. App. 4a-7a). 
it suffices here to say that by 1984, when Winstar acquired an 
insolvent thrift from the FSLIC, hundreds of savings and loan 
institutions had failed and the FSLIC was in extremis. Histori- 
cally, the FSLIC and the Bank Board had “resolved” failed 
thrifts either by liquidation or by offering enough cash or 
other tangible financial assistance to induce a healthy institu- 
tion or investor to acquire the failed thrift. The cost to the 
FSLIC insurance fund of facilitating the acquisition of a 
failed thrift usually ran about 70 percent of the cost of 
liquidating the thrift.' Because of the unprecedented number 
of thrift failures in the early 1980s, “the FSLIC faced deposit 
insurance liabilities that threatened to exhaust its insurance 
fund,” Pet. App. Sa, and it was forced to offer favorable 
regulatory capital forbearances instead of cash and other 
tangible financial assistance to induce healthy institutions and 


' Housing and Urban Recovery Act of 1982: Hearings Before the 
Subcommittee on Housing and Community Development of the House Committee 
on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 1490, 1501 (Mar. 24, 
1982) (statement of Richard T. Pratt, Chairman, Bank Board) (“Pratt testimony”). 


4 


private investors to acquire insolvent thrifts.2 The primary 
regulatory capital forbearance offered by the regulators was 
“supervisory goodwill,” which was created under the “pur- 
chase method” of accounting for a thrift acquisition, and was 
measured as the amount by which the cost of the acquired 
thrift (which included any liabilities assumed by the acquirer) 
exceeded the fair market value of the acquired assets. As the 
court of appeals explained: 


The Bank Board and the FSLIC allowed the merged 
thrifts to count this supervisory goodwill toward the 
minimum regulatory capital requirements and to 
amortize this goodwill over periods of up to forty 
years. This permitted the healthy thrift to assume 
the deposit liabilities of the failing thrift and to 
maintain capital compliance without having to put 
up large amounts of its own money and without 
requiring large amounts of monetary assistance 
from the government. 


Pet. App. 6a (emphasis added). The FSLIC and the Bank 
Board also permitted some acquirers to count all or a portion 
of the cash contributed by the FSLIC to the deal as a direct 
and commonly permanent credit to the acquired thrift’s regu- 
latory capital. This regulatory forbearance was called, not 
surprisingly, a “capital credit.” 


The FSLIC and the Bank Board thus used supervisory 
goodwill and capital credits, as Bank Board Chairman Pratt 


2 The Bank Board developed an entire menu of cash substitutes used to 
induce acquisitions of insolvent thrifts. The substitutes were even standardized to 
expedite the processing of these transactions, and to diminish staff time in 
negotiating these deals. The Bank Board issued a memorandum, denominated 
SP-37(a), to its Principal Supervisory Agents, providing a standard list of non-cash 
accounting forbearances. J.A. 180-207. Memorandum SP-37(a) made clear that 
“[t}he basic purpose in granting forbearances is to give realistic incentives to 
potential acquirers of previem institutions.” J.A. 182. The suggested forbearances 
included separate language effectuating the use of supervisory goodwill and 
regulatory capital credits. See J.A. 194, 195. 


5 


testified in 1982, “as a means of conserving FSLIC’s insur- 
ance fund.” Pratt testimony at 1502.3 And it worked. By 
offering regulatory capital forbearances, FSLIC and the Bank 
Board “stimulated many acquisitions that would otherwise not 
have taken place” absent much greater cash contributions by 
FSLIC. Pet. App. 7a. As a result, the average cost to FSLIC of 
facilitating the acquisition of an insolvent thrift was reduced 
to less than 20 percent of the estimated liquidation cost. Pratt 
testimony at 1501. 


Congress was fully informed of the Bank Board’s use of 
supervisory goodwill and capital credits in lieu of cash to 
facilitate acquisitions of insolvent thrifts. Indeed, the Bank 
Board’s “consistent policy of forbearance toward capital defi- 
cient thrifts” and its “development and use of regulatory 
accounting principles . . . that served to artificially inflate the 
value of thrift capital,” were undertaken “with Congressional 
consent.” S. Rep. No. 19, 101st Cong., Ist Sess. 9 (1989). 


2. a. After “year-long negotiations between Statesman 
and FHLBB and FSLIC,” Pet. App. 109a, Statesman acquired 
four deeply insolvent thrifts in March 1988. In 1987 FSLIC 
had solicited 96 financial institutions and 41 private investors 
to bid on the four thrifts, but Statesman was the only party to 
submit a proposal. C.A. App. 69 (under seal). Thus, had a 
deal with Statesman not been consummated, the government's 
only alternative would have been liquidation. 


Statesman agreed to invest $21 million in the merged 
institutions, and the government agreed to make a $60 million 
capital infusion. Even after these capital infusions had been 
made, however, the merged institution acquired by Statesman 


3 In congressional testimony in 1990, former Chairman Pratt recalled that 
supervisory goodwill had been “an indispensable tool” in the Bank Board's efforts 
to consolidate “weaker institutions into stronger hands . . . while at the same time 
husbanding the financial resources which were then available to it.” Pet. App. 7a, 
quoting Savings and Loan Policies in the Late 1970s and 1980s: Hearings Before 
The House Comm. on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 
176, 227 (1990). 


* “C.A. App.” refers to the appendix filed jointly by the parties in the Court 
of Appeals. 


6 


was still insolvent, with a negative tangible net worth of 
almost $9 million. In other words, Statesman invested $21 
million in a thrift that not only failed to satisfy, on a tangible 
capital basis, the government's minimum regulatory capital 
standards, but was deeply insolvent and thus subject to sei- 
zure by the thrift regulators on the very day that they deliv- 
ered it to its new owners. Pet. App. 64a. 

Statesman agreed to this seemingly foolish acquisition 
because it bargained for and received from the government 
express contractual promises (1) that the supervisory goodwill 
created by the transaction — a figure ultimately calculated to 
be $25.8 million — could be reported by the thrift as regula- 
tory capital and amortized over a period of 25 years, and (2) 
that $26 million of FSLIC’s cash contribution could be 
recorded as a direct and permanent capital credit to the thrift’s 
regulatory capital. Pet. App. 10a. In return for these regula- 
tory capital forbearances, the FSLIC and the Bank Board 
received what they believed to be a “permanent” disposition 
of four of their serious problem thrifts at a cost to the 
insurance fund far lower than the cost of liquidation. 

The value to the government of these regulatory capital 
forbearances was enormous and readily quantifiable. Indeed, 
shortly after the Statesman deal was closed, Bank Board 
Chairman Wail touted it to Congress as costing the govern- 
ment “$50 million less than the cost to the FSLIC of liquidat- 
ing the four institutions.” Oversight on the Condition of the 
Financial Services Industry: Hearings Before The Senate 
Comm. on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 100th 
Cong., 2d Sess. 356 (1988). J.A. 487. In other words, States- 
man agreed to shoulder $50 million of the government’s cost 
of resolving four of its failed thrifts. The value of the super- 
visory goodwill and capital credit to Statesman, on the other 
hand, derived not from any inherent worth, but solely from 
the government’s promise to count them as regulatory capital, 
a promise that only the government could make. 

Statesman took the government at its word, and fully 
performed its end of the bargain. Indeed, Statesman’s new 
thrift far exceeded the thrift regulators’ most optimistic pro- 
jections. Under Statesman’s management the thrift’s tangible 


7 


net worth increased more than $6 million - from negative $9 
million to just under negative $3 million. Yet, on July 5, 
1990, the thrift regulators declared Statesman’s thrift to be 
“in an unsafe and unsound condition to transact business,” 
C.A. Supp. App. 1071, despite the plain fact that the thrift 
was by then far safer and sounder than it was a scant 20 
months earlier, when the government turned it over to States- 
man. The government seized the much-improved thrift, along 
with Statesman’s $21 million. 


The government changed its mind about the soundness of 
the thrift’s financial condition because it changed its mind 
about allowing the thrift to report its bargained-for super- 
visory goodwill and capital credit as regulatory capital. Pur- 
suant to FIRREA, the Bank Board's successor agency, the 
Office of Thrift Supervision (“OTS”), promulgated new mini- 
mum capital standards that largely eliminated the thrift's 
ability to report its goodwill and capital credit as regulatory 
capital — the central quid pro quo for Statesman’s agreement 
to acquire the insolvent thrifts on the financial terms negoti- 
ated by the parties. If the government had honored its contrac- 
tual obligations to Statesman, the thrift would have satisfied — 
with millions to spare — all three of the new minimum regula- 
tory capital standards established by FIRREA. Pet. App. 
113a-114a. Thus, as the Court of Federal Claims concluded, 
“but for the enactment of FIRREA, Statesman would be 
operating today.” Pet. App. 1 14a. 


b. In late 1983 FSLIC and the Bank Board began solic- 
iting bids for the acquisition of Windom Federal Savings & 
Loan Association, an insolvent thrift institution whose failure 
was imminent and whose liquidation would cost FSLIC an 
estimated $12 million. Pet. App. 184a. Winstar, which was 
organized by private investors for the sole purpose of acquir- 
ing the thrift, submitted the winning bid, which saved FSLIC 
more than half the estimated cost of liquidating the thrift. Pet. 
App. 185a. Pursuant to the parties’ acquisition agreement, 
Winstar invested approximately $2.8 million in the thrift, 
while the FSLIC contributed approximately $5.6 million. Pet. 
App. 194a. Even with these capital contributions, the acquired 
thrifts tangible net worth was approximately negative $6.7 


million. Accordingly, the “linchpin of the parties’ agree- 
ment,” as the trial court noted, was the government's express 
promise that the goodwill resulting from the transaction — 
slightly over $10.6 million — could be reported as regulatory 
capital: “[T}he promise of continued treatment of goodwill as 
a capital asset that could be amortized over 35 years was a 
negotiated and critical term of this particular transaction. It 
was critical because it was clear that without it no purchaser 
would have engaged in this transaction.” Pet. App. 154a. 

Winstar’s thrift failed to satisfy FIRREA’s new minimum 
capital standards. In May of 1990, OTS placed the thrift in 
receivership. Pet. App. 14a. 

c. The record of these cases thus makes clear that using 
favorable regulatory capital forbearances to induce Winstar 
and Statesman to acquire failed thrifts was the government's 
idea. Far from the disinterested regulators portrayed in the 
government’s brief, FSLIC’s commercial and financial inter- 
ests as a deposit insurer were vitally at stake in these transac- 
tions, and it needed to sell the failed thrifts to Statesman and 
Winstar far more than Statesman and Winstar needed to buy 
them. The FSLIC and the Bank Board offered supervisory 
goodwill and capital credits as substitutes for the cash that 
they did not have, and they aggressively encouraged States- 
man and Winstar to accept these regulatory capital for- 
bearances as consideration, the quid pro quo for assuming 
liabilities that far exceeded the assets acquired. And the 
Statesman and Winstar transactions saved the insurance fund, 
by FSLIC’s own reckoning, almost $60 million over the cost 
of liquidating the insolvent institutions. Pet. App. 1 1la-12a. In 
light of these facts, it is hardly surprising that Circuit Judge 
Newman, in dissenting from the panel majority's decision 
below, was moved to remark that the government's disavowal 
of its contractual obligations in this case “comes with poor 
grace, not only in view of the government’s encouragement of 
these arrangements wher they were made, but also because 
performance was accepted by the government for several 
years.” Pet. App. 95a. 

3. Statesman and Winstar filed suit against the United 
States in the Court of Federal Claims, seeking monetary relief 


9 


on contractual and constitutional theories. The trial court 
granted, in separate opinions, both Statesman’s and Winstar’s 
motions for summary judgment as to liability. Pet. App. 
106a-152a (Statesman); Pet. App. 153a-182a (Winstar). The 
Court held that the government had entered into an express 
contract with Statesman, and an implied-in-fact contract with 
Winstar, regarding the regulatory capital treatment of super- 
visory goodwill (and in Statesman, the capital credit), an‘ 
that the government had breached its contractual obligations. 
In light of its finding of liability on respondents’ contract 
claims, the court did not reach respondents’ claims under the 
Takings Clause and the Due Process Clause of the Fifth 
Amendment. The court rejected the government's arguments 
that the “sovereign acts” doctrine and the “unmistakability” 
doctrine shielded the government from monetary liability. The 
court consolidated the Statesman and Winstar cases with the 
similar Glendale case and certified its decisions for interlocu- 
tory appeal to the Federal Circuit. 


4. A divided panel of the Federal Circuit, over Judge 
Newman's dissent, reversed the trial court's liability rulings 
in favor of Statesman and Winstar. Pet. App. 53a-88a; 
89a-103a (Newman, J., dissenting). The panel decision was 
vacated, however, when the full court granted respondents’ 
petitions for rehearing en banc. Pet. App. 105a. The en banc 
Federal Circuit affirmed the trial court’s contract liability 
rulings by a 9 to 2 vote. Pet. App. la-52a. The court of 
appeals painstakingly reviewed de novo the contract docu- 
ments governing the transactions and concluded, as the trial 
court had, that the regulatory capital treatment of supervisory 
goodwill (and of Statesman’s capital credit) was a specifically 
bargained for and agreed upon term of the contracts between 
the parties. 

With respect to the Statesman transaction, the court of 
appeals first noted that the government had conceded that the 
“Assistance Agreement” executed by the parties contained an 
express term allowing Statesman to report its $26 million 
capital credit as regulatory capital. The court of appeals found 
the government's promise concerning supervisory goodwill 
specifically described in the resolution issued by the Bank 


10 


Board in connection with the transaction. The Bank Board's 
resolution, which also reiterated the government's promise 
concerning Statesman's $26 million capital credit, expressly 
provided that in “report{ing) to the Bank Boar and the 
FSLIC, . . . [t}he value of any unidentifiable intangible assets 
li.e., goodwill] resulting from accounting for the Acquisi- 
tion .. . in accordance with the purchase method of account- 
ing may be amortized by [Statesman] over a period not in 
excess of twenty-five (25) years by the straight line method.” 
Pet. App. 25a-26a. The Federal Circuit rejected the govern- 
ment’s argument that the Bank Board's resolution did not 
constitute a contract document, noting that the Assistance 
Agreement contained an integration clause that expressly 
incorporated contemporaneous resolutions of the Bank Board. 
Pet. App. 25a. Accordingly, the Federal Circuit concluded 
that the government was contractually bound to permit States- 
man to report its supervisory goodwill and capital credit as 
regulatory capital on the specified terms. 

With respect to the Winstar transaction, the court of 
appeals found that the government had expressly promised to 
treat Winstar’s supervisory goodwill as regulatory capital, and 
thus it did not need to reach the question whether such a 
promise could be implied-in-fact. Although the Assistance 
Agreement did not contain a specific provision relating to 
supervisory goodwill, it did contain an integration clause 
specifically incorporating into the parties’ contract any “reso- 
lutions or letters issued contemporaneously” by the Bank 
Board. A “forbearance” letter issued by the Bank Board in 
connection with the transaction specifically “confirmed the 
understanding” of the parties that “[f]or purposes of reporting 
to the Board,” Winstar would be entitled to amortize its 
goodwill “over a period not to exceed 35 years by the 
straight-line method.” Pet. App. 28a. 

Having found express contractual commitments by the 
government concerning the regulatory capital treatment of 
respondents’ supervisory goodwill and capital credit, the Fed- 
eral Circuit readily and correctly concluded that the govern- 
ment’s repudiation of those commitments constituted a breach 
of its coniractual obligations. The court of appeals also 


rejected the government's claim that its contractual commit- 
ments concerning regulatory capital were negated under the 
so-called “unlawful action” clause of the parties’ agreement 
when FIRREA was enacted. 


The Federal Circuit turned next to the government's 
sweeping claim that respondents’ contracts failed to satisfy 
the requirements of the “unmistakability doctrine.” Relying 
primarily on this Court's decision in Bowen v. Public Agen- 
cies Opposed to Social Security Entrapment, 477 U.S. 41 
(1986) (“POSSE”), the government argued that because 
respondents’ contracts did not contain an express provision 
guaranteeing that the government would continue to honor the 
regulatory capital forbearances notwithstanding a legislative 
change such as FIRREA, the contracts should not be con- 
strued as unmistakably waiving Congress’ sovereign power to 
legislate. Quoting liberally from the trial court’s analysis of 
the unmistakability doctrine, the Federal Circuit reasoned that 
the government's argument was based upon the false premise 
that respondents sought to bind “Congress not to change its 
regulations.” Pet. App. 37a. Respondents, however, were not 
seeking to “enjoin{ } the thrift regulators from applying the 
FIRREA requirements to the thrifts.” Pet. App. 37a. Rather, 
they sought only monetary relief for the harm that they 
suffered when FIRREA’s requirements were applied to them. 
Thus, the court of appeals concluded that upholding the gov- 
ernment’s contract liability to respondents would not threaten 
Congress’ sovereign power to legislate. Pet. App. 38a.° 


* With respect to the distinct government promise regarding the treatment of 
Statesmar.'s $26 million capital credit, the Federal Circuit also noted that “FIRREA 


capital credits, as well as the fact that FIRREA did not abrogate those 
commitments, is discussed at length in the brief filed in this case by amici Coast 
Federal Bank, Union Federal Savings Bank of Indianapolis, Union Holding 


i i 


12 


With specific reference to this Court's decision in 
POSSE, the Federal Circuit agreed with the trial court that 
“the unmistakability doctrine . . . controls how contractual 
rights with the government are created, i.e., whether the 
government has agreed in unmistakable terms to be contrac- 
tually bound.” Pet. App. 35a-36a (emphasis in original). 
Because Winstar’s and Statesman’s contracts granted them, 
“in the clearest possible terms, the right to certain types of 
regulatory capital treatment,” the requirements of the unmis- 
takability doctrine were satisfied. Pet. App. 36a. 

Finally, the Federal Circuit rejected the government's 
defense under the “sovereign acts doctrine,” which excuses 
the government from contract liability when its performance 
is precluded by “a public and general sovereign act.” Pet. 
App. 39a. FIRREA’s provisions concerning supervisory good- 
will did not qualify as “public and general” sovereign acts 
because they specifically targeted respondents’ agreements 
and similar contracts. FIRREA’s provisions restricting the 
regulatory capital treatment of supervisory goodwill, while no 
doubt enacted for the public good, “specifically abrogate[d] 
agreements the government had made at an earlier time when 
it had suggested and approved the use of such ‘gimmicks’ to 
avoid bailing out failing thrifts.” Pet. App. 43a. Because the 
government had “plainly sought to render its own perfor- 
mance impossible,” the sovereign acts doctrine did not insu- 
late it from damages liability. Pet. App. 45a. 


Judge Nies and Judge Lourie filed separate dissents. 
Judge Nies continued to adhere to the views expressed in her 
majority opinion for the panel. (The other member of the 
panel majority, Judge Rich, changed his mind on reconsidera- 
tion and joined the en banc majority.) Judge Nies believed 
that the majority had erred in failing to distinguish between 
the “government” and Congress in concluding that the enact- 
ment of FIRREA had breached respondents’ contracts. Pet. 
App. 47a. Judge Lourie concluded that the sovereign acts 
doctrine precluded respondents’ recovery for breach of con- 
tract because FIRREA was “broadly directed to the good of 
the general public, to the country’s financial system, rather 
than to a specific contract that it disapproved.” Pet. App. Sia. 


13 
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

Respondents’ claim is simple and straightforward, a point 
that tends to be obscured by the heft of this brief and Lf the 
briefs filed by our many amici. Winstar and Statesman were 
induced by the government's thrift regulators to acquire at 
great expense deeply insolvent thrifts on the basis of the 
government's contractual commitment to accord the acquired 
institutions certain specifically negotiated and clearly 
expressed regulatory capital forbearances. Respondents fully 
performed their contractual obligations, but the government 
did not, causing respondents substantial damage. If it is still 
true, as it always has been, that “in the performance of its 
voluntary engagements with its citizens [the government] 
should conform to the same standard of honorable conduct as 
it exacts of them,” Heil v. United States, 273 F. 729, 731 
(S.D.N.Y. 1921) (Hand, J.), then the courts below did not err 
in holding the government liable in damages for its breach. 


The government's defense, in contrast, is sophisticated 
and complex, and its many facets take many pages to rebut. It 
boils down, however, to a claim that our law attaches no 
consequence whatever to the government's deliberate repu- 
diation of specific contractual commitments that formed the 
principal quid pro quo for Statesman’s and Winstar’s costly 
acquisitions. Indeed, the government says that it is even 
entitled under the law to keep the multi-million dollar invest- 
ments that it solicited from Statesman and Winstar and then 
seized along with the thrifts. No federal case supports the 
government’s claim. 


The government's argument opens with the contention 
that the specifically negotiated, unambiguous, and express 
contractual promises concerning respondents’ regulatory cap- 
ital forbearances were not sufficiently “unmistakable” to cre- 
ate binding obligations on the government. They were not 
unmistakable, the government says, because the parties’ con- 
tracts did not contain language expressly “contracting away 
[Congress's] right to exercise future sovereign regulatory 
authority”; that is, the contracts did not include language 
“either commit[ing] Congress not to enact new legislation 


14 


requiring a different treatment of respondents’ capital or 
grant(ing) respondents a prospective immunity from any such 
legislative change.” Pet. Br. 19, 36.° The government quickly 
adds, however, that even if respondents’ contracts did contain 
express provisions satisfying the government's version of the 
“unmistakability doctrine,” respondents still lose. Any such 
express contractual promise would be ultra vires, and thus 
“invalid and unenforceable,” id. 37, because the Bank Board 
did not have “an express delegation of authority from Con- 
gress” to enter into “an agreement that binds future Con- 
gresses not to change regulatory schemes or that immunizes 
private parties from the effects of such changes.” /d. 36. In 
the next breath, however, the government notes that respon- 
dents’ case would not really be improved even if we could 
produce such an extraordinary statutory delegation of author- 
ity to the thrift regulators. Any such delegation would itself 
be ultra vires, for under the “reserved powers doctrine” the 
government's “sovereign regulatory authority” cannot be 
“ ‘bargained away, and is inalienable even by express grant’ ” 
of the legislature itself. Jd. 38, quoting Atlantic Coast Line 
R.R. v. City of Goldsboro, 232 U.S. 548, 558 (1914). 


Thus, the government's arguments add up to this: under 
the unmistakability doctrine a government agency's contrac- 
tual commitment concerning its regulatory authority must be 
expressed in unmistakable terms, although such a promise, no 
matter how unmistakable, will nonetheless be invalid and 
unenforceable under the reserved powers doctrine. Obviously, 
the government is confused about the legal principles govern- 
ing its contractual undertakings. 


The government's confusion stems from its insistence 
that respondents’ claims for contract damages are to be 


© In its briefing to the Federal Circuit, the government offered even more 
specific insight into its version of the unmistakability doctrine, asserting that it 
could not be held liable to respondents in the absence of “an unambiguous contract 
provision stating that (the thrift agency] was guaranteeing a specified form of 
regulatory treatment for a single thrift, and that the contract would override any 
attempt by Congress to legislate differently for the thrift industry.” Replacement 
Reply Brief of Defendant-Appellant United States at 9. 


15 


analyzed as if respondents were seeking an order invalidating 
FIRREA’s restrictions on supervisory goodwill and enjoining 
the government to specifically perform its contractual obliga- 
tions according to their terms. Every case cited by the govern- 
ment in support of its unmistakability and reserved powers 
contentions involved either a Contract Clause or a Due Pro- 
cess Clause challenge to the constitutional validity of a statute 
that impaired the government's performance of its pre-exis- 
ting contractual obligations. A decision upholding the consti- 
tutional challenge in these cases would have voided the 
legislation impairing the government's contractual obligation, 
thus requiring the government to abide by its agreement 
according to its terms. In other words, successful assertion of 
a Contract Clause or Due Process Clause challenge to a law 
impairing a prior government contractual obligation is tanta- 
mount to an award of specific performance;’ the contract 
obligation effectively overrides subsequent contrary legisla- 
tion, thus “binding [the government] to a future course of 
conduct” at least with respect to the contracting parties. 
United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 U.S. 1, 23 (1977). 


It was in this context, as the government acknowledges 
(Pet. Br. 38), that the “reserved powers doctrine” was devel- 
oped to ensure that “the obligation of contracts does not 
prevent the State from exercising such powers as are vested in 
it for the promotion of the common weal, or are necessary for 
the general good of the public. . . . ” Manigault v. Springs, 
199 U.S. 473, 480 (1905) (emphasis added). This Court 
described the reserved powers doctrine succinctly in United 
States Trust: “(T]he Contract Clause does not require a State 
to adhere to a contract that surrenders a central attribute of its 
sovereignty.” 431 U.S. at 23 (emphasis added). In other 


? Michael L.. Zigler, Note, Takings Law and the Contract Clause; A Takings 
Law Approach to Legislative Modifications of Public Contracts, 36 Stan. L. Rev. 
1447, 1462 (1984) (“[T}he contract clause effectively grants public contract holders 
a constitutional right to specific performance. .. . [A}nalysis under the contract 
clause is limited to declaring the statute unconstitutional. The provision does not 
authorize the courts to award damages in lieu of requiring the state to adhere to the 
Original terms of the contract.”) 


16 


words, a contractual obligation does not constitutionally “pre- 
vent” a State from enacting contrary legislation under its 
police powers, nor does it constitutionally require a State “to 
adhere to” its contractual obligation in the face of such 
legislation. In this context, the Contract Clause leaves a 
contracting State in the same shoes as any other contracting 
party — it may elect to breach its contractual obligation and 
pay damages.® 

The courts below well understood this point. As the en 
banc Federal Circuit put it: “[C)ongress was always free to 
deem supervisory goodwill a bad idea and legislate it out of 
existence. Where that legislation breached the government's 
prior contractual obligations regarding the treatment of super- 
visory goodwill, however, the government remains liable in 
money damages for the breach.” Pet. App. 38a. 


The alleged rationale for the government’s novel version 
of the “unmistakability doctrine” is derived directly from the 
reserved powers doctrine. Because government promises of 
specific regulatory treatment in the future may frustrate the 
ability of government to take contrary regulatory action 
deemed in the public interest, the requirement that such prom- 
ises be expressed in unmistakable terms “helps to ensure that 
public officials who enter into contracts — and others who 


8 “When a man makes a contract, he incurs, by force of the law, a liability to 
damages, unless a certain promised event comes to pass. . . . The [common] law 
seems to have regarded it as technically in the electiosi of the promisor to perform « : 
to pay damages.” Globe Refining Co. v. Landa Cotton Oil Co., 190 U.S. 540, 543 
(1903). Restatement (Second) of Contracts ch. 16, intro. note (1981) (“The 
traditional goal of the law of contract remedies has not been compulsion of the 
promisor to perform his promise but compensation of the promisee for the loss 
resulting from breach. . . . In general, therefore, a party may find it advantageous to 
refuse to perform a contract if he will still have a net gain after he has fully 
compensated the injured party for the resulting loss.”); E. Allan Farnsworth, 
Contracts 840 (2d ed. 1990) (“{A]}long with the celebrated freedom to make 
contracts goes a considerable freedom to break them as well.”). 


17 


review them — are fully aware of the serious step they are 
taking.” Pet. Br. 11. 

In this case, the public policy considerations underlying 
the reserved powers doctrine and the government's unmis- 
takability doctrine are wholly inapplicable. Respondents are 
not challenging the constitutional validity of FIRREA’s good- 
will provisions, nor are they seeking to require the govern- 
ment “to adhere to [its] contract” regarding supervisory 
goodwill and capital credits. It is too late for that; the govern- 
ment has applied FIRREA’s goodwill provisions to respon- 
dents’ thrifts and, consequently, has regulated them out of 
existence. In other words, the government elected to breach, 
and respondents seek only to be compensated for their injury. 
The issue in this case, therefore, is not whether the govern- 
ment’s regulatory capital promises were “unmistakable” 
enough to constitutionally immunize respondents from appli- 
cation of FIRREA’s goodwill provisions, but rather whether 
the government is constitutionally immune from damages 
liability for its breach of express regulatory capital promises 
for which it sought and received valuable consideration. The 
government can cite no constitutional provision, and no case, 
supporting its claim of immunity from contract damages for 
its repudiation of its agreements with Statesman and Winstar. 

In the pages that follow, we demonstrate that the federal 
thrift regulators, knowingly and with full authority, entered 
into contracts with Statesman and Winstar that anticipated the 
possibility of future regulatory changes and expressly agreed, 
in as unmistakable a fashion as possible, that the regulatory 
accounting treatment promised in these agreements would 
govern over any future regulatory change. 

We further demonstrate that no attribute of the govern- 
ment as sovereign immunizes the government from liability in 
damages for its abrogation of its contractual obligations to 
Statesman and Winstar. The “sovereign acts” doctrine ensures 
that the federal government, as a contracting party, is 
accorded the same treatment under the law as is accorded to 
piivate contracting parties; if a private party would have been 
liable under the contract, then so also is the government. 
Accordingly, the Federal Circuit was correct in concluding 


that the doctrine “does not relieve the government from lia- 
bility where it has specifically undertaken to perform the very 
act from which it later seeks to be excused.” Hills Materials 
Co. v. Rice, 92 F.2d 514, 516 n.2 (Fed. Cir. 1992). 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE GOVERNMENT UNMISTAKABLY AGREED 
TO ACCORD REGULATORY CAPITAL TREAT- 
MENT TO RESPONDENTS’ SUPERVISORY GOOD- 
WILL AND CAPITAL CREDIT FOR SPECIFIED 
TIME PERIODS. 


1. “All contracts are to be construed to accomplish the 
intention of the parties.” The Binghamton Bridge, 70 U.S. (3 
Wali.) 51, 74 (1865).9 The intent of contracting parties is 
often no less obvious from the economic realities surrounding 
a transaction than it is from the contract documents them- 
selves. Courts are thus naturally reluctant to interpret a con- 
tract in a manner that renders the bargain illusory or 
economically irrational for one of the parties.'° 


The contract interpretation advanced by the governm-ent 
in this case is no less at war with common sense than it is 


9 See id. at 76 (“{T}he main canon of interpretation of a contract, is to 
ascertain what the parties themselves meant and understood.”) Bradley v. 
Washington, Alexandria, and Georgetown Steam Packet Co., 38 U.S. (13 Pet.) 89, 
96-97 (1839) (“It is a principle recognized and acted upon by all courts of justice, as 
a cardinal rule in the construction of all contracts, that the intention of the parties is 
to be inquired into; and if not forbidden by law, is to be effectuated.”). See also 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 201 cmt. c (1981) (“{T]he primary search is 
for a common meaning of the parties... . The objective of interpretation in the 
general law of contracts is to carry out the understanding of the parties... . "). 


10 See, e.g., Russell v. Sebastian, 233 U.S. 195, 208 (1914) (rejecting State's 
argumeni that plaintiff gas company had made extensive investment in plants and 
reservoirs “without any assurance that the laying of the distributing system could be 
completed, or that it could even be extended far enough to afford any chance of 
profit”); Appleby v. Delaney, 271 U.S. 403, 413 (1926) (city’s contract 
interpretation rejected because “[i}t is not reasonable to suppose that the [plaintiffs} 
would pay $12,000 . . . and leave to the city authorities the absolute right completely 
to nullify the chief consideration”). 


19 


with the written agreements executed by the parties. Accord- 
ing to the government, the parties’ written agreements in this 
case “contain no undertaking by FSLIC that its parent body - 
the Bank Board - or Congress would not change [thrift 
capital] requirements or the treatment of goodwill under 
them,” and that the courts below therefore simply “hypothe- 
siz[ed] an intent by the thrift regulators” to agree “that good- 
will would continue to be treated as capital in the future.” Pet. 
Br. 15. The government thus represents to this Court that 
when it shook hands with Statesman and Winstar on these 
transactions in 1988 and 1984, all parties fully understood 
and intended that the Bank Board was entitled under their 
contracts to exclude supervisory goodwill from regulatory 
Ca%ital at that very moment. The parties intended, in other 
words, that the government was “agreeing to abide by its 
promises only so long as it unilaterally decided to keep those 
promises.” Pet. App. 128a. Given that supervisory goodwill 
was the only thing standing between respondents’ thrifts and 
“immediate liquidation,” Pet. App. 64a, the common sense of 
the matter, as the trial court below put it, is that “no purchaser 
would have engaged in [these] transaction[s]” without “the 
promise of continued treatment of goodwill as a capital asset 
that could be amortized over [the specified number of] years.” 
Pet. App. 190a.!! 


'! The government resists this conclusion on two grounds. First, the 
government notes that Statesman and Winstar “obtained the benefits of the Bank 
Board policy permitting them to count goodwill as capital” for 20 months and five 
years, respectively. Pet. Br. 42-43. But the fact that the government honored its 
contractual commitments for a brief period of time does not ameliorate, let alone 
eliminate, the harm that its repudiation caused to respondents. More fundamentally, 
the government's brief periods of performance under its contracts does not alter the 
fact that its alleged contract obligation — to perform at its “unrestricted pleasure” — 
was simply no obligation at all. Pet. App. 128a. 

The government also points out that Statesman and Winstar “received 
substantial infusions of federal cash” as consideration in the transactions. Pet. Br. 
43. The government forgets that it, not Statesman and Winstar, was the insurer of 
the deposits of the insolvent thrifts. The government's cash contributions were 
necessary to cover, though only partially, the losses already suffered by the 
federally insured insolvent thrifts. Statesman's and Winstar's combined capital 


20 


The truth is that precisely because of the historically 
volatile nature of the government's regulation of thrift capital 
standards (they “changed three times in 1982 alone,” Pet. 
App. 57a), Statesman and Winstar painstakingly negotiated 
over many months regulatory capital forbearances that would 
make their acquisitions viable. And they insisted that the 
parties’ regulatory capital agreements be incorporated, repeat- 
edly, in the contract documents governing the transactions — a 
process that would have been meaningless if, as the govern- 
ment now absurdly contends, these provisions were merely 
superfluous acknowledgments of the government’s regulatory 
policy at the time. 


The government’s assertion that it made no promises and 
assumed no risks in connection with its transactions is 
expressly belied by the “Assistance Agreement” that it exe- 
cuted. This document provides: “It is the purpose of this 
Agreement to provide a means by which . . = the [FSLIC] may 
receive the benefits and assume the risks contracted for, and 
expense to the [FSLIC] may be reduced.” J.A. 409 (States- 
man) (emphasis added). As we demonstrate below, the gov- 
ernment clearly and expressly assumed in these transactions 
the risk that future regulatory changes would prevent fulfill- 
ment of its regulatory capital promises. '? 


investment of almost $24 million was a direct contribution to the government's 
losses as deposit insurer. And if these transactions had not been consummated, the 
government estimates that its losses on the insolvent thrifts would have run another 
$60 million. Thus, the reality of these transactions is that Winstar and Statesman 
contributed almost $24 million to the government for the privilege of assuming 
almost $60 million of additional government liabilities. 

'2 The government, citing three decisions, argues that courts have held that 
documents similar to those at issue here were not sufficient to establish the 
existence of enforceable contracts regarding the regulatory accounting treatment of 
supervisory goodwill and regulatory capital credits. Pet. Br. 22 n.12. Leaving aside 
the fact (as explained infra n.21) that the decisions cited by the government are 
readily distinguishable, the government ignores numerous other cases in which 
courts, examining documents either very similar to, or even less explicit than, the 
documents evidencing the transactions at issue here, have concluded that the 
government did enter into such contracts for particular accounting treatment. See, 
e.g., RTC v. FSLIC, 25 F.3d 1493 (10th Cir. 1994); Far West Fed. Bank v. Director, 


21 
2. a. Statesman. 


In 1988 Statesman and the government executed a 
lengthy “Assistance Agreement,” as well as a separate “Regu- 
latory Capital Maintenance Agreement.” The Assistance 
Agreement contains an integration clause providing that 
“[t}his Agreement, together with any resolutions adopted by 
the Bank Board and documents delivered at closing which 
contain written interpretations or understandings of the par- 
ties, constitutes the entire agreement between the parties .. . , 
excepting only . . . any resolutions or letters . . . issued by the 
Bank Board . . . in connection with the approval of the 
Acquisition. ...” J.A. 407-08. In light of this language, the 
courts below uniformly found (Pet. App. 25a, 62a, 121a), that 
two other documents — a “Resolution” and a “Forbearance 
Letter” executed by the Bank Board in connection with the 
approval of the acquisition — set out contract terms governing 
the transaction equal in legal force to those in the Assistance 
Agreement.! 

The government concedes that the Assistance Agreement 
expressly committed the government to count $26 million of 
FSLIC’s cash contribution as regulatory capital. Pet. Br. 34. 
Specifically, the Assistance Agreement provides: 

For the purposes of reports to the Bank 

Board . . . , $26 million of the contribution [made 

by FSLIC] shall be credited to [Statesman’s] regula- 

tory capital account and shall constitute regulatory 

capital (as defined in § 561.13 of the Insurance 

Regulations). 


OTS, 787 F. Supp. 952 (D.Or. 1992); Carteret Sav. Bank v. OTS, 762 F. Supp. 1159 
(D.N.J. 1991), vacated on other grounds, 963 F.2d 567 (3d Cir. 1992); Hansen Sav. 
Bank v. OTS, 758 F. Supp. 240 (D.N.J. 1991); Security Fed. Sav. Bank v. Director, 
OTS, 747 F. Supp. 656 (N.D. Fla. 1990); Security Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Director, 
OTS, 761 F. Supp. 1277 (S.D. Miss. 1991), aff'd in part, rev'd in part on other 
grounds, 960 F.2d 1318 (Sth Cir. 1992), Sterling Sav. Ass'n v. Ryan, 751 F. Supp. 
871 (E.D. Wash. 1990), rev'd on other grounds, 959 F.2d 241 (9th Cir. 1992). 


'3 The Assistance Agreement also contained an “Accounting Principles” 
section, which expressly provided that the accounting treatment of the transaction 
would be governed by the “resolution or action in the Bank Board approving or 
relating to the Acquisition. . . ." J.A. 402. 


22 


J.A. 362a. The government argues, however, that this provi- 
sion obligated it to accord regulatory capital treatment to 
Statesman’s $26 million capital credit only until it decided 
not to. Seizing upon the parenthetical statement providing 
that the capital credit shall constitute regulatory capital “(as 
defined in § 561.13 of the Insurance Regulations),” the gov- 
ernment argues that its regulatory capital promise “depended 
entirely upon existing regulations and that the same treatment 
would not necessarily be accorded if changes were made in 
the governing regulations or statute.” Pet. Br. 34, 35. 


The government’s interpretation of this provision, which 
renders Statesman’s bargain entirely illusory, does not repre- 
sent the intentions of the contracting parties. First, by incor- 
porating by reference the definition of regulatory capital 
contained in the FSLIC’s regulation, the parties’ agreement 
incorporated the content of the regulation as it existed at the 
time of the contract. See Craft Machine Works, Inc. v. United 
States, 926 F.2d 1110, 1115 (Fed. Cir. 1991); Hughes Commu- 
nications Galaxy, Inc. v. United States, 998 F.2d 953, 957-58 
(Fed. Cir. 1993); Hills Material Co. v. Rice, 982 F.2d 514 
(Fed. Cir. 1992). See also Wood v. Lovett, 313 U.S. 362, 
369-70 (1941); Van Hoffman v. Quincy, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) 535, 
550 (1867). Moreover, the government’s suggested interpreta- 
tion is directly contradicted by other express provisions in the 
contract. 


As previously noted, Statesman fully understood that 
regulatory capital standards could be changed by the govern- 
ment. Accordingly, it insisted that the “Accounting Princi- 
ples” provision of the Assistance Agreement specifically 
provide that the government’s contractual commitment con- 
cerning the regulatory accounting treatment of the transaction 
would govern over any conflicting present or future “regula- 
tions of the [FHLBB] or [FSLIC].” Because the Accounting 
Principles clause directly refutes the government's construc- 
tion of the parties’ agreement, and because the government's 
discussion of this key provision omits a critical sentence, we 
set the clause out at length, emphasizing the two key sen- 
tences: 


-* 


23 


Section 17. Accounting Principles. Except as other- 
wise provided, any computations made for purposes 
of this Agreement shall be governed by GAAP, 
except that where such principles conflict with the 
terms of the Agreement, applicable regulations of 
the Bank Board or the CORPORATION, or any 
resolution or action of the Bank Board approving or 
relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or to this 
Agreement, then this Agreement, such regulations, 
or such resolution or action shall govern. In the case 
of any ambiguity in the interpretation or construc- 
tion of any provision of this Agreement, such ambi- 
guity shall be resolved in a manner consistent with 
such regulations and the Bank Board's resolution or 
action relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or of 
this Agreement. /f there is a conflict between such 
regulations and the Bank Board's resolution or 
action relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or to 
this Agreement, the Bank Board's resolution or 
action shall govern. For purposes of this section, 
the accounting principles and governing regula- 
tions shall be those in effect on the Effective Date, 
as subsequently changed, amended, clarified or 
interpreted by the Bank Board... . 


J.A. 402-03. (emphasis added). Thus, the emphasized sen- 
tences of the Accounting Principles clause clearly provide 
that the Bank Board's Resolution and Forbearance Letter 
govern over any conflicting capital regulations, including 
“subsequently changed” or “amended” regulations. 


The government's answer to the obvious import of the 
two emphasized sentences of the Accounting Principles 
clause is to hide the first one from this Court. The govern- 
ment's discussion of this clause (in connection with Winstar's 
virtually identical Accounting Principles clause), omits any 
reference to the first emphasized sentence, and quotes the 
second emphasized sentence standing alone. See Pet. Br. 31. 


24 


The government then invites this Court to interpret the second 
emphasized sentence as though the sentence preceding it did 
not exist, arguing that it shows “that the parties recognized 
that Bank Board policies could change, and that whatever new 
policies were adopted would, from then on, govern future 
accounting by” Statesman. /d. When the two sentences, how- 
ever, are read together, as intended by the parties, it is clear 
that the clause means precisely the opposite of the govern- 
ment’s suggested interpretation. Indeed, a candid reading of 
the Accounting Principles clause can yield no conclusion 
other than that reached by Circuit Judge Newman in dissent- 
ing from the panel majority's opinion below: “[T]he 
‘Accounting Principles’ clauses in the Winstar and the States- 
man agreements reflect the parties’ recognition that the 
accounting principles might in the future be ‘subject to clari- 
fication, interpretation or amendment’, and provide that ‘[i}f 
there is a conflict between such regulations and the Bank 
Board's resolution or action . . . , the resolution or action shall 
govern.” Pet. App. 10la. 


The Bank Board Resolution referred to in the Accounting 
Principles clause set forth the parties’ agreement concerning 
the regulatory capital treatment of both the $26 million capi- 
tal credit and supervisory goodwill. The key provision of the 
Resolution warrants quotation in full: 


[T}]he Acquisition and the Mergers shall be 
accounted for, and [Statesman] shall report to the 
Bank Board and the FSLIC, in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles prevailing 
in the savings and loan industry, as excepted, mod- 
ified, clarified, or interpreted by applicable regula- 
tions of the Bank Board and the FSLIC, except to 
the extent of the following departures from gener- 
ally accepted accounting principles: 


(a) Twenty-one million dollars of the initial con- 
tribution by the [FSLIC] to [Statesman], and five 
million dollars of the principal amount of the Sub- 
ordinated Debenture issued to the FSLIC, pursuant 


25 


to § 6 of the Assistance Agreement, shall be cred- 
ited to the regulatory capital account of [States- 
man]; and 


(b) The value of any unidentifiable intangible 
assets [i.e., goodwill] resulting from accounting for 
the Acquisition and the Mergers in accordance with 
the purchase method of accounting may be amor- 
tized by [Statesman] over a period not in excess of 
twenty-five (25) years by the straight line method. 


J.A. 458-59 (emphasis added). 


Similarly, the Forbearance Letter issued by the Bank 
Board in connection with the transaction reiterated the gov- 
ernment’s agreement to allow Statesman to count $26 million 
of FSLIC’s cash contribution as “a credit to [Statesman’s] 
regulatory capital.” The letter specified that “for regulatory 
accounting purposes, [Statesman] may book such contribution 
as a direct addition to its regulatory capital.” J.A. 476. 


The government dismisses the Bank Board's Resolution 
and Forbearance Letter as obligating only Statesman; they 
contain “no promises” by the government concerning regula- 
tory capital, but rather “merely state[s] the requirements for 
Statesman to capitalize goodwill under then-current regula- 
tory capital policy.” Pet. Br. 33. One need look no farther than 
the Forbearance Letter’s name to refute the government's 
remarkable argument. It was the government, after all, that 
was forbearing from enforcing certain otherwise applicable 
requirements of its then-current regulatory capital policies in 
order “to give realistic incentives to potential acquire[r]s of 
problem institutions.” J.A. 182; see note 2, supra. The letter 
opens with the statement that “the following forbearances are 
hereby granted,” and closes with an express reservation of all 
of the Bank Board's statutory authority “[o]ther than actions 
to enforce the regulatory requirements waived in accordance 


with paragraphs 1-5 ....” J.A. 475-80 (emphases added). 
Likewise, the Bank Board Resolution contains a number of 


26 


provisions expressly waiving specified regulatory require- 
ments.'* Indeed, in the very provision of the Resolution 
governing the regulatory capital treatment of Statesman’s 
capital credit and supervisory goodwill, the Bank Board 
expressly agrees to the specified “departures” from its other- 
wise applicable regulatory accounting requirements. 


Finally, the parties’ Regulatory Capital Maintenance 
Agreement (“RCMA”) expressly confirms that the govern- 
ment’s Resolution and Forbearance Letter obligated it to 
accord the specified regulatory accounting forbearances. Exe- 
cuted by Statesman and FSLIC “{iJn consideration of the 
mutual promises contained [t}herein,” J.A. 418, the RCMA 
expressly required Statesman to maintain the regulatory capi- 
tal of the acquired thrifts “at the level . . . required by 
§ 563.13(b) of the Insurance Regulations . . . or any successor 
regulation, as now or thereafter in effect.” But the RCMA 
also specifically provided that Statesman’s “Required Regula- 
tory Capital shall be calculated . . . [to] include . . . Reg- 
ulatory Capital amounts permitted by the FSLIC in the 
Assistance Agreement and in the forbearances issued in con- 
nection with the transactions. . . .” J.A. 418-19 (emphasis 
added). 


In light of the foregoing express contractual provisions, 
the Federal Circuit, quoting the trial court, concluded that 
“the government granted [Statesman], in the clearest possible 
terms, the right to certain types of regulatory capital treat- 
ment.” Pet. App. 36a. Indeed, far from placing itself at the 
regulatory mercy of the government, as the government would 
have it, Statesman can justly be accused of overkill in its 
insistence that the government's regulatory capital promises - 
a key term of the transaction for both sides — be expressed in 


'* See JA. 449 (“the Bank Board .. . hereby waives and deems inapplicable” 
certain regulations), id. 452 (“good cause exists for a waiver of the requirements of” 
certain regulations), id. (“the terms of this Resolution, and not the requirements set 
forth in (specified regulations} shall govern” the transaction), id. 455 (“the Bank 
Board. . hereby deems inapplicable and waives” certain regulations), id. 473 (“the 
Bank Board hereby waives the laws of any state” that interfere in certain ways with 
the insurance activities of Statesman’s affiliates). 


27 


the parties’ written contracts.'* The conclusion is thus inesca- 
pable that the parties’ agreement placed “the risk of a change 
in the governing law” (Pet. Br. 35) squarely on the govern- 
ment, rather than Statesman. '° 


'S The importance and content of the government's regulatory accounting 
forbearances is also reflected in the negotiating record of the transaction, as well as 
in the government's own internal analysis of the deal. For example, Statesman’s 
acquisition proposal explicitly required that “[t}wenty one million dollars of the 
cash contribution to be made to [Statesman] pursuant to an assistance agreement to 
be entered into between the FSLIC and Statesman is to be a credit to [Statesman's| 
regulatory capital; therefore, for regulatory accounting purposes, (Statesman) wil! 
book such contribution as a direct addition to its net worth.” J.A. 215-16. Similarly, 
the Business Plan submitted as part of Statesman's proposal expressly “assume(d] 
the acquisition will be accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. 
applied by the ‘push down’ method... . " J.A. 232. See also J.A. 240. Similar 
explicit statements regarding Statesman’s intentions were made in the holding 
company application submitted to FPSLIC. See J.A. 245-46. Similarly, the 
government's internal documents analyzing the transaction make clear that the 
promised regulatory accounting forbearances were critical to its consummation and 
success. See, ¢.g., FHLBB Memorandum (J.A. 280) (“It is the PSLIC’s intention 
that $21 million of the cash contribution to be made to [Statesman] pursuant to an 
assistance agreement to be entered into between the FSLIC and [Statesman] is to be 
a credit to (Statesman’s] regulatory capital, therefore, for regulatory accounting 
purposes, [Statesman] may book such contribution as a direct addition to its 
regulatory capital.”), FHLBB Memorandum: Viability and Revised Bid Costing 
(C.A. App. 58) (under seal ) (“Statesman will mark-to-market all assets and 
liabilities . . . under use of purchase accounting.”); id (C.A. App. 61) (under seal) 
("$21 million of the FSLIC cash assistance . . iS a direct contribution to net 
worth”); FHLBB Issues Memorandum (C. A. App. 70) (under seal) (“$21 million of 
FSLIC’s assistance will count towards regulatory net worth.”). 


‘© The government claims, Pet. Br. 35, that its contractual commitments 
concerning regulatory capital were negated under the so-called “unlawful action” 
clause of the parties’ agreement. The clause provides: “Nothing in this Agreement 
shall require any unlawful action or inaction by either of the parties hereto.” Pet. 
App. 23a. The Federal Circuit, like the trial court (Pet. App. 125Sa-129a), correctly 
interpreted this clause as protecting against any inadvertent violation of law existing 
when the contract was entered, rather than supplying “an escape hatch that allows 
the federal government to avoid performance of its contractual obligations without 
penalty by passing a law prohibiting its own performance.” Pet. App. 23a-24a. The 
same answer applies to the standard provision in the Assistance Agreement 
requiring Statesman to comply “with all applicable statutes, regulations, orders of 
and restrictions imposed by the United States or any state, municipality, or other 


28 


b. Winstar. 


Many of W*nstar’s contract documents are remarkably 
similar to those at issue in Statesman, and so many of the 
points previously made in answer to the government's argu- 
ments with respect to Statesman are equally applicable here. 
The Winstar Assistance Agreement contains an Accounting 
Principles provision that is virtually identical to the corre- 
sponding provision in the Statesman agreement (quoted at 
length above). See J.A. 108-09. The Assistance Agreement 
also contains a similar integration clause, incorporating into 
the parties’ agreement the Bank Board's contemporaneous 
Resolution and Forbearance Letter.'? J.A. 112. The Bank 
Board’s Forbearance Letter, in turn, “confirm[ed] the under- 
standing” of the parties that “[flor purposes of reporting to 
the Board, the value of any intangible assets [i.e., goodwill] 
resulting from accounting for the merger in accordance with 
the purchase method may be amortized by [Winstar] cver a 
period not to exceed 35 years by the straight-line method.” 
J.A. 123. As in Statesman, the Bank Board's Forbearance 
Letter in the Winstar transaction plainly expresses commit- 
ments on behalf of the government — to “forbear” and “waive” 
enforcement of otherwise applicable regulatory capital 
requirements. See J.A. 124. And the Accounting Principles 
clause in Winstar’s Assistance Agreement, as in Statesman, 
makes clear that “in the event of regulatory change, the 
negotiated forbearances and accounting procedures would 
govern.” Pet. App. 102a (Newman, J., dissenting). 


The government seizes upon the language stating that the 
Accounting Principles clause applies only to “computations 
made for the purposes of this Agreement,” arguing that 
because the Assistance Agreement contained no provision 
relating to supervisory goodwill, “no computations regarding 


political subdivision,” which specifically referenced such things as “equal 
employment opportunities” and “environmental standards.” J.A. 407. 


'7 Every court that has considered similar integration language has 
confirmed that it expressly incorporates Bank Board forbearance letters and 
resolutions into the parties’ contractual arrangement. See Pet. App. |2!a-!22a 
(listing cases). See also RTC v. FSLIC, 25 F.3d at 1499. 


29 


goodwill or capital requirements had to be or were ‘made for 
the purposes of this Agreement.’ ” Pet. Br. 30-31. Here again, 
however, the government ignores the agreement's integration 
clause, which expressly incorporated into the Assistance 
Agreement the Bank Board’s Forbearance Letter, which 
expressly permits Winstar to count its supervisory goodwill as 
amortizing regulatory capital for 35 years. Nor does the 
government explain what “computations made for the pur- 
poses of this Agreement” the clause could possibly be refer- 
ring to if not regulatory capital computations. 


Finally, the government notes (Pet. Br. 31-32) that the 
Bank Board Resolution required Winstar to file a “Net Worth 
Maintenance Stipulation” requiring Winstar to maintain its 
“net worth .. . at a level consistent with that required 
by .. . the Insurance Regulations, as now or hereafter in 
effect.” J}.A. 78 (emphasis added). The Resolution thus con- 
templated, according to the government, “that regulatory cap- 
italization requirements might be changed, and Winstar 
pledged to comply with those changes.” Pet. Br. 32. 


To be sure, the Resolution required Winstar to pledge to 
maintain the thrift’s net worth at the “level” — that is, the 
amount as a percentage of assets — required under then- 
existing or later regulations. The Resolution did not contem- 
plate, however, that the calculation of regulatory capital, or 
more accurately, the status of supervisory goodwill as an asset 
included in that calculation, would change. Indeed, Winstar 
fulfilled its obligation to provide the required Net Worth 
Maintenance Stipulation, and it was included in the parties’ 
Assistance Agreement. Specifically, Winstar pledged to main- 
tain its “Net Worth at an amount not less than the minimum 
amount prescribed in § 563.13 of the Insurance Regulations.” 
J.A. 96. The Assistance Agreement then defines the term “net 
worth” as follows: “Regulatory Net Worth as defined in 
§ 561.13 of the Insurance Regulations and as computed in 
accordance with the accounting principles required by this 
Agreement.” J.A. 94 (emphasis added). 


Winstar’s contract documents thus plainly reflect the 
parties’ agreement that Winstar could count supervisory 


30 


goodwill as regulatory capital for 35. years and that the gov- 
ernment assumed the risk of future regulatory change.'® 


c. In sum, both the Federal Circuit and the Court of 
Federal Claims, which are especially entrusted with issues of 
government contract interpretation and enforcement, con- 
cluded from all the evidence that Statesman and Winstar 
specifically bargained for and received an express govern- 
ment promise to accord regulatory capital treatment to super- 
visory goodwill and capital credit for specified periods. This 
interpretation plainly accords with the intentions of the con- 
tracting parties, and the government's disingenuous attempt to 
suggest otherwise does it no credit.'? 


'8 The regulatory capital terms set out in the contract documents are 
consistently reflected in other documents related to this transaction. For example, 
the acquisition proposal documents prepared by Winstar clearly indicated that the 
resulting institution would “record the assets (other than FSLIC assistance) and 
liabilities acquired at the date of consummation of the combination at their fair 
value and the difference will be allocated to goodwill and amortized on the straight- 
line basis over a period not to exceed 35 years.” C.A. App. 205. See also J.A. 40-42. 
Similarly, the government's internal documents analyzing the transaction 
recognized the regulatory capital forbearance as a key feature of the deal. See, e.g. 
FHLBB Memorandum: Viability Analysis (J.A. 37) (listing as assumption that 
“[pjurchase accounting is applied to the assets of Windom. . . . Goodwill is 
amortized over 40 years.”), FHLBB Memorandum (J.A. 46) (listing as assumption 
that “[gjoodwill is amortized over 35 years”); FHLBB S-Memorandum (J.A. 62) 
(noting “that the proposed acquisition requires the use of the purchase method of 
accounting, and that loan discounts and intangible assets will be amortized under 
regulatory accounting principles.”); FHLBB Memorandum (J.A. 49) (“We 
concur . . . that the purchase method of accounting is appropriate for the acquisition 
of Windom. . . . Further, we have no objection to the accounting forbearance 
outlined for purposes of reports to the FHLBB.”). 


'9 Relying on the termination provisions in the Winstar and Statesman 
Assistance Agreements, the government also argues that whatever contractual 
commitments it made to respondents have by now terminated. Pet. Br. 32, 35 n. 25. 
The Court of Appeals quite correctly rejected this argument. Pet. App. 23a, 29a. 
The government's argument ignores the actual language of the Assistance 
Agreements, which provide that the Assistance Agreements would, “/e/xcept as 
otherwise specifically provided . . . in th[e] Agreements,” terminate, in the case of 
Statesman, five years after the effective date of the agreement or, in the case of 
Winstar, two years after the effective date of the agreement. See J.A. 405 (emphasis 
added). See also J.A. 110. As the Court of Appeals held, such termination 


31 


3. a. The government relies upon the “unmistakability 
doctrine” for its claim that its contracts with Statesman and 
Winstar should be construed to create no obligation whatever 
on its part. According to the government, the unmistakability 
doctrine is a kind of “clear statement” rule of contract inter- 
pretation, designed to ensure that a government promise “con- 
tracting away the government's right to exercise future 
sovereign regulatory authority” is expressed in the “clearest 
possible terms.” Pet. Br. 18-19. The rationale of the rule is 
that courts should be reluctant to interpret government con- 
tracts to prohibit the government from taking regulatory 
actions that may be deemed “necessary or advisable at a later 
time.” Pet. Br. 18. To satisfy the unmistakability doctrine in- 
this case, respondents would have to produce, according to 
the government, an express promise “either committ[ing] 
Congress not to enact new legislation requiring a different 
treatment of respondents’ capital or grant[ing] respondents a 
prospective immunity from any such legislative change.” Pet. 
Br. 36. 


Throughout the course of this case, the government has 
stood silent in response to our repeated requests that it point 
to a single government contract — from any time in our 
Nation’s history, involving any federal agency — that contains 
an express provision stating that the government's contract 
obligations will override any future statutory obligations 
imposed by Congress. We cannot find one either. One need 
know no more than this to know that the government's under- 
standing of the unmistakability doctrine is wrong. 


Indeed, if the government's version of the unmis- 
takability doctrine is correct, then the many cases in which 
this Court has enforced contracts against the United States 
despite subsequent changes in the law must be wrong. For 
example, in Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330 (1935), this 


provisions did not “negate other obligations under the merger plan, including the 
specific time periods for amortization of goodwill.” Pet. App. 23a. Finally, even if 
the government's strained reading of the termination provision is correct, the 
Statesman Assistance Agreement did not expire until 1993, four years after the 
passage of FIRREA. 


32 


Court held that a government bond promising the payment of 
principal and interest in gold was a binding contractual oblig- 
ation that could not be abrogated by subsequent legislation. 
Similarly, in Lynch v. United States, 292 U.S. $71 (1934), the 
Court held that war risk insurance policies issued pursuant to 
statute were contracts that could not be abrogated by subse- 
quent statutes without compensating the beneficiary. In nei- 
ther Perry nor Lynch did the government contract at issue 
contain even a reference, unmistakable or otherwise, to Con- 
gress or its sovereign powers, let alone a provision “com- 
mit(ting] Congress not to enact new legislation.” Pet. Br. 36. 
And, in both Perry and Lynch the Court made clear that the 
government is bound by its express contractual undertakings 
no less than an individual would be. See Perry, 294 U.S. at 
352 (“When the United States, with constitutional authority, 
makes contracts, it . . . incurs responsibilities similar to those 
of individuals who are parties to such instruments.”); Lynch, 
292 U.S. at 579 (“When the United States enters into contract 
relations, its rights and duties therein are governed generally 
by the law applicable to contracts between private individ- 
uals.”). See also Sinking Fund Cases, 99 U.S. (9 Otto) 700, 
719 (1879) (“The United States are as much bound by their 
contracts as are individuals.”); United States v. Klein, 80 U.S. 
(13 Wall.) 128, 144 (1872) (“It is as much the duty of the 
government as individuals to fulfill its obligations.”). 


In truth, the government's notion of contract unmis- 
takability misappropriates the nomenclature of a venerable 
and sensible rule of construction — that contract rights against 
the government cannot be presumed, but must be “expressed 
in terms too plain to be mistaken,” Jefferson Branch Bank v. 
Skelly, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 436, 446 (1862) — and attaches it to 
an extraordinary claim of governmental immunity from lia- 
bility for any contract breach occasioned by an act of Con- 
gress. The origins of the doctrine can be traced back to the 
early 1800s. In the leading case, Providence Bank v. Billings, 
29 U.S. (4 Pet.) 514 (1830), a bank claimed that its charter 
from the State created a contract right precluding the State 
from taxing it. Chief Justice Marshall rejected the bank's 
claim that the charter impliedly prohibited taxation because 


33 


the taxing power could be exercised so as to destroy the 
charter. /d. at 561-62. Because the charter did not contain “a 
promise, either express or implied, not to tax the bank,” id. at 
560, the Court held that such a contractual promise “ought not 
to be presumed in a case in which the deliberate purpose of 
the State to abandon it does not appear.” /d. at 561. Nowhere 
did the Court suggest that anything more “unmistakable” than 
an express promise not to tax would be required to bind the 
government. 

Indeed, in Jefferson Branch Bank vy. Skelly, supra, this 
Court held that a bank's charter created a contract right 
exempting the bank from taxation imposed by subsequent 
statute. The charter provision at issue provided that a certain 
percentage of the bank’s profits were to go to the State “in 
lieu of all taxes.”2° Certainly this language — though unmis- 
takable in the common sense of the term — does not satisfy the 
unmistakability rule advanced by the government. Yet this 
Court construed the charter provision to have contractually 
bound the state “in terms too plain to be mistaken.” Jefferson 
Branch Bank, 66 U.S. (1 Black) at 446. 

These cases are the direct ancestors of the three cases 
cited by the government in support of its version of the 
unmistakability doctrine - POSSE, Merrion v. Jicarilla 
Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130 (1982), and United States v. 
Cherokee Nation, 480 U.S. 700 (1987). Merrion involved 
leases granted by the Apache Tribe for the extraction of oil 
and gas deposits on reservation land. The Tribe later imposed 
a severance tax on oil and gas production covered by the 
leases, and the lessees sought to enjoin imposition of the tax 
on the ground that their leases exempted them from such 
taxes. The leases, however, were silent on the question of 
severance taxes. As the Court concluded: 

We could find a waiver of the Tribe's taxing power 

only if we inferred it from silence in the leases. To 

presume that a sovereign forever waives the right to 


20 Piqua Branch v. Knoop, 57 U.S. (16 How.) 369, 378 (1854). The Court's 
opinion in Jefferson Branch Bank does not set out the specific charter provision at 
issue,- but it cites to the Piqua Branch decision, which does. 


34 


exercise one of its sovereign powers unless it 
expressly reserves the right to exercise that power 
in a commercial agreement turns the concept of 
sovereignty on its head... . 


455 U.S. at 148 (emphasis added). 


Quoting the above passage from Merrion, the Court in 
POSSE reiterated that a contractual waiver of the govern- 
ment’'s right to exercise sovereign powers cannot be inferred 
from contractual silence on the issue. POSSE involved a 
purported contract between the Department of Health and 
Human Services (“HHS”) and the State of California govern- 
ing the State’s participation in the social security system. The 
agreement was expressly made subject to the provisions of the 
Social Security Act, which at the time the agreement was 
entered permitted states to withdraw from participation in the 
program. A subsequent amendment to the Act prohibited 
states from withdrawing from the system. This Court held that 
neither the Act nor the State’s contract obliged the govern- 
ment to permit the State’s withdrawal because Congress had 
expressly reserved in the statute the “right to alter, amend, or 
repeal” any of its provisions. 477 U.S. at 52. Thus, the Act 
itself obviously “created no contractual rights,” and because 
the contract conformed to the Act, it too created no contrac- 
tual right to withdraw. Jd. POSSE thus stands for the common 
sense rule of construction that neither the government nor 
anyone else is contractually bound in the face of statements 
that expressly negate any intention to be bound. POSSE 
expressly reaffirmed, however, that “the Federal Government, 
as sovereign, has the power to enter contracts that confer 
vested rights, and the concomitant duty to honor those rights.” 
Id. 


Finally, in Cherokee Nation, the Tribe claimed that a 
treaty granting it title to a river bed also conveyed the federal 
government's navigational servitude, although the treaty was 
silent on the point. Citing POSSE, this Court rejected the 
claim, stating that such a waiver of “sovereign authority will 
not be implied but instead must be ‘surrendered in unmistak- 
able terms.’ ” /d. at 707, quoting POSSE, 477 U.S. at 52. 


35 


The consistent teaching of these cases is that an “unmis- 
takable” promise is simply a clearly expressed promise. None 
of the cases even distantly suggests that in order to bind the 
government to a clearly expressed promise, it must be cou- 
pled with a further promise that Congress will not enact 
contrary legislation. Thus, while it is certainly true that the 
courts below expressly declined in this case to apply the 
government's version of the unmistakability doctrine, they 
faithfully applied this Court’s version of the doctrine. See 
also The Binghamton Bridge, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) at 75-77.?! 


2! The government cites (Pet. Br. 22 n.12) three cases that, it says, properly 
applied the unmistakability doctrine to contracts similar to those at issue here. See 
Charter Fed. Sav. Bank v. OTS, 976 F.2d 203 (4th Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 113 S. 
Ct. 1643 (1993); Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, OTS, 967 F.2d 598 (D.C. Cir. 
1992); Guaranty Fin. Serv., Inc. v. Ryan, 928 F.2d 994 (1 1th Cir. 1991). In contrast 
to the Government's portrayal of those cases, however, both Guaranty and Charter 
represent straightforward applications of the principles discussed in POSSE. 

In Guaranty the government expressly reserved its right to change applicable 
regulations and apply them to the thrift. 928 F.2d at 999. And the Fourth Circuit in 
Charter expressly distinguished that case from Winstar and Statesman, noting that 
Charter did not involve a written contract of any kind between the plaintiffs and the 
government. 976 F.2d at 211 n.12. That the POSSE doctrine precluded relief in 
cases in which there was no contract to begin with or in which the contract included 
an express reservation of authority to alter the terms of performance does not mean 
that it precludes relief here, where the parties’ contracts clearly express the 
government's promise with respect to the regulatory capital forbearances at issue 
and which contain no similar language of reservation. Finally, the D.C. Circuit's 
application of the unmistakability doctrine in Transohio was limited to claims 
seeking injunctive relief, not compensation. Although the first Transohio decision 
had adopted the United States’ erroneous view of contract interpretation in a case 
seeking injunctive relief, the second Transohio decision determined that rule may 
be inapplicable in a Tucker Act action for damages: “The Transohio opinion, 
including the statement that “Transohio cannot prevail on its takings claim on the 
merits,” 967 F.2d at 614, was solely concerned with Appellants’ ability to obtain 
injunctive relief, as is evident from the opinion’s repeated explanations that 
Transohio ‘did not receive from the banking regulators a right that defeats 
Congress’ power to change the law on goodwill accounting.’ Id. at 613; see id. at 
601, 624. That analysis has no bearing one way or the other on the merits of 
Appellants’ claim for compensation in the Federal Court of Claims.” Transcapital 
Fin. Corp. v. Director, OTS, 44 F.3d 1023, 1025 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (emphases added). 


36 


b. In the introduction to our argument (supra at 13-17), 
we demonstrated that the rationale of the government's 
vamistakability doctrine, and of the reserved powers doctrine 
developed by this Court in the context of Contract Clause 
challenges, is wholly inapplicable to this case. Respondents 
do not seek an order invalidating FIRREA’s goodwill provi- 
sions or otherwise requiring the government to abide by its 
contractual obligations. Nor do respondents seek the return of 
their thrifts; that egg cannot now be unscrambled. Respon- 
dents seek only monetary relief for their injuries, which 
“presents little threat to the government's sovereign powers.” 
Pet. App. 37a. 


The government argues, however, that "(t]he unmis- 
takability doctrine protects against requiring the public to pay 
in damages for the privilege of changing government policy, 
just as it protects against injunctions precluding such alter- 
ations altogether.“ Pet. Br. 11. While requiring the govern- 
ment to respond in damages for a contract breach occasioned 
by a statutory or regulatory change would not prevent the 
exercise of sovereign authority, the government argues that 
the threat of a damages award would nonetheless “carr[y] the 
danger that needed future regulatory action will be deterred.” 
Pet. Br. 21. 


The law, however, attaches an obligation to pay damages 
not to “the privilege of changing government policy,” but 
rather to the privilege of breaching a solemn contractual 
obligation. The purpose of the law of contracts is to “deter” 
breaches of contractual obligations secured by consideration. 
The government claims, however, that it is entitled, as sover- 
eign, to make a contractual promise that in no way deters it 
from later breaching that promise. Mr. Hamilton answered 
this claim succinctly two centuries ago: “It is in theory 
impossible to reconcile the idea of a promise which obliges, 
with the power to make a law which can vary the effect of it.” 
Perry, 294 U.S. at 351 n.2 (quoting Alexander Hamilton, 
“Report On Public Credit” (1795). in 3 The Works of Alex- 
ander Hamilton 518-19 (John C. Hamilton ed. 1850)). 


37 


Moreover, the assumption that allowing contract damages 
recovery in this case would financially harm the government 
ignores the extraordinary financial benefit that the govern- 
ment received from respondents in exchange for the contrac- 
tual promises that the government has now broken. Thus, far 
from harming the government, damages relief is necessary to 
prevent a government windfall.2? Similarly, upholding the 
government's claimed constitutional right to breach its con- 
tract obligations without liability would effectively expand 
the government's sovereign power beyond constitutional 
bounds. The thrift regulators could not have forced Statesman 
and Winstar to acquire the insolvent thrifts. Nor could they 
have forced respondents to donate almost $24 million to help 
the government defray the cost of recapitalizing its insolvent 
thrifts. Allowing the government now to repudiate, without 
liability, its contractual commitments to respondents would 
enable the government to accomplish through broken prom- 
ises that which it could not have required through the compul- 
sion of straightforward legislation.?* 


“The right to make binding obligations is a competence 
attaching to sovereignty.” Perry, 294 U.S. at 353. The federal 
government, like any other contracting party, may elect to 
breach its contract obligations, but it must pay damages, like 
any other contracting party. See note 8, supra. The govern- 
ment’s contrary claim misapprehends the nature of its own 


22 Allowing the government to breach its regulatory capital promises without 
com uence would effectively shift to respondents and others like them the 
dominant financial burden for the government's change in regulatory policy, solely 
because they took the government at its word. Far from being a necessary or 
legitimate element of sovereign power, the government's alleged entitlement to 
breach without damages liability runs counter to the basic purpose of the Takings 
Clause, namely, “to bar Government from forcing some people alone to bear public 
burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole.” 
Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49 (1960). 


23 The government acknowledges (Pet. Br. 4] n.34) that it can claim no 
legitimate, let alone overnding, interest in “repudiat{ing) its own debts simply in 
order to save money.” POSSE, 477 U.S. at 55. The only governmental interest at 
stake, however, in this action for damages relief is money. It is thus clear that there 
is no senous “public policy” basis for denying respondents’ claims. 


38 


accountability under our constitutional system. As the trial 
court below put it: 


The assertion that, in order to freely regulate, the 
government must have the power to disregard the 
rights and interests of its citizens is a novel proposi- 
tion that finds no support . . . in our constitutional 
tradition. Sovereign power is always restricted, in 
one sense, by the rights of individuals. However, in 
our Nation that has never been seen as an improper 
restriction on regulatory power. Rather, it is the 
foundation upon which all law and regulation are 
built. 
Pet. App. 168a.24 


4. The reserved powers doctrine, as we have previously 
discussed (supra at 15-17), was developed by this Court to 
ensure that a State’s contractual obligations did not limit, 
under the Contract Clause, a future exercise of the State's 
police powers in the area of health, safety, and public morals. 
See, e.g., United States Trust, 431 U.S. at 21-24. The Court 
has consistently recognized, however, that a State’s “power to 
enter into effective financial contracts cannot be questioned,” 
even though enforcing such contracts according to their terms 
necessarily entails restrictions on the State's taxing and 
spending powers. /d. at 24. See also Energy Reserves Group v. 
Kansas Power & Light Co., 459 U.S. 400, 412-13 n.16 (1983) 
(“In almost every case, the Court has held a governmenta! 
unit to its contractual obligations when it enters financial! or 


24 See also Pet. App. 103a (“That the government may be empowered to 
legislate in this way, and that a desired public policy 1s served, does not mean that 11 
can be done without liability to those with whom the government had made a 
different commitment. The government is not exonerated of responsibility with 
respect to specific commercial contracts to which it 1s a party, whether the breach is 
by executive or legislative action.”) (Newman, J., dissenting); id 192a-193a 
(“[WJhile Congress’ power to regulate is not impaired, the government may be 
compelled to pay for the result of its actions, especially when in doing so the 
government actually is paying because it received a benefit... . The fact that the 
government was free to change its regulatory scheme 1s not inconsistent with the 
possibility that there exists a contract here under which the government may have 
obligations to the plaintiffs in this case”). 


39 


other markets.”). The government concedes this point, recog- 
nizing that the government cannot “renege on purely financial 
contractual obligations.” Pet. Br. 41; see id. at n.9 (noting that 
the price term and other financial elements of a government 
contract “do no! implicate sovereign regulatory authority”). 

The contracts at issue here involved commercial transac- 
tions in which both parties were motivated by their own 
economic interests. The government's regulatory capital 
promises were made for financial reasons and they were 
breached for financial reasons. As the government itself 
emphasizes, goodwill was eliminated as regulatory capital 
under FIRREA because it “is not cash. .. . When the Federal 
Government liquidates a failed thrift, goodwill is simply no 
good. It is valueless. That means, quite simply, that the 
taxpayer picks up the tab for the shortfall.” Pet. Br. 5, quoting 
135 Cong. Rec. 11,795 (1989). 


Thus, in 1989 the government rejected goodwill! as regu- 
latory capital for precisely the same reason that it embraced 
goodwill as regulatory capital in its transaction with States- 
man — because it is not cash. As a substitute for cash, 
goodwill was used by the government as “an indispensable 
tool” in the government's effort to induce respondents’ acqui- 
sitions on terms that “husband[ed FSLIC’s] financial 
resources” from the enormous expense of liquidating or 
recapitalizing the insolvent thrifts. See note 3, supra. Later, 
that very same goodwill became quite dispensable to the 
government solely because it would be “valueless” if the 
government ever had to liquidate the thrifts that it had sold to 
respondent. So the government repudiated the very regulatory 
capital promises that had induced respondents’ acquisition 
and ordered respondents either to replace the supervisory 
goodwill and capital credit with hard cash or to return the 
thrifts, along with their multi-million investments, to the 
government. In short, by repudiating its regulatory capital 
promises, the government retroactively transferred to respon- 
dents the government's obligation, as deposit insurer, to make 
good on the losses suffered by the acquired thrifts. 


40 


The government's regulatory capital promises in this case 
are thus no less financial, and its breach no less consequen- 
tial, than if the government had induced respondents’ super- 
visory acquisitions with a promissory note rather than 
intangible capital, and then canceled the note and seized the 
thrifts as undercapitalized. Accordingly, the reserved powers 
doctrine would not in any event shield the government from 
enforcement of its regulatory capital promises according to 
their terms. See, e.g., Lynch, 292 U.S. at 579; Perry, 294 U.S. 
at 352. See also Hodel v. Irving, 481 U.S. 704 (1987); 
Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986 (1984); Choate v. 
Trapp, 224 U.S. 665 (1912). 


5. In sum, Statesman and Winstar specifically bargained 
for and received express regulatory capital promises from the 
thrift regulators in return for their agreements to infuse sub- 
stantial sums of money into the acquired thrifts and to assume 
liabilities that far exceeded the thrifts’ assets. Statesman and 
Winstar took care to ensure that the government's regulatory 
capital promises were expressly contained in “documents 
[that] were integrated and cross-referenced, in textbook com- 
pliance with the rules of contract.” Pet. App. 95a (Newman, 
J., dissenting). The intent of the contracting parties regarding 
regulatory capital is clear from the contract documents, the 
negotiating records, the government's internal analyses of the 
transactions, the parties’ course of dealing until enactment of 
FIRREA, and common sense. No doctrine of contract con- 
struction, including the unmistakability doctrine, requires a 
court to interpret an agreement in a manner that negates the 
clear intent of the contracting parties, as the government 
invites this Court to do here. Indeed, Congress found these 
and similar contracts unmistakable enough; during consider- 
ation of FIRREA, both supporters and opponents of the legis- 
lation in Congress understood and acknowledged that 
FIRREA’s goodwill provisions would violate existing 


41 


government contracts like respondents.2° And the Comptroller 
General warned Congress that enactment of those provisions 
would expose the government “to potentially enormous finan- 
cial liability” for both breach of contract and uncompensated 
takings. Comptroller General Op. B-240860 (Aug. 27, 1990) 
(J.A. 515). The government assumed the risk of future regula- 
tory change, and now it must pay damages for its breach. 


Il. THE THRIFT REGULATORS HAD EXPRESS STAT- 
UTORY AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO STATES- 
MAN’S AND WINSTAR’S CONTRACTS. 


It is true, as the government states, that nothing in the 
laws relating to thrift institutions “grant{ed] FSLIC or the 
Bank Board the authority to commit Congress not to modify 
the governing statutes.” Pet. Br. 41. Indeed, we are certain 


25 See, eg. H.R. Rep. No. 54, 101st Cong., Ist Sess., pt. |, 432 (1989) 
(defining supervisory goodwill, and then noting that “[a}ny other goodwill resulting 
from the acquisition, merger, consolidation, purchase of assets or other business 
combination that is not covered by a specific contractual understanding or 
agreement with the Bank Board is not included as a component of capital”) 
(emphasis added), id. at 497-98 (additional views of Mr. Annunzio, Mr. Kanjarski, 
and Mr. Flake) (“The Committee's [treatment of supervisory goodwill] is the same 
as the government asking a man to enlist in the Army for hazardous duty overseas 
and then suing him for deserting his wife and children. . . . Simply put, the 
Committee has reneged on the agreements that the government entered into 
concerning supervisory goodwill.”), id. at 507-08 (additional views of Mr. LaFalce) 
(“Those institutions which carry intangible assets on their books do so generally 
under written agreements they have entered into with the U.S. government, 
agreements which generally state that they cannot b< superseded by subsequent 
regulations.”), id. at 534 (additional views of Representatives H.ler, Ridge, Bartlett, 
Dreier, McCandless, Saiki, Baker, and Paxon). See aiso i355 Cong. Rec. H2706 
(daily ed. June 15, 1989) (statement of Rep. Crane) (FIRREA “would require these 
S&Ls to write off this goodwill in a scant five years. This legislation violates the 
present agreements that these institutions made with the Federal Government.”), id 
at H2783 (daily ed. June 15, 1989) (statement of Rep. Ackerman) (FIRREA “would 
abrogate written agreements made by the U.S. Government to thrifts that acquired 
failing institutions. . . . In effect, the Government is saying, “Thanks for your help, 
but we don't need you anymore, so we're breaking our promise.’ "), id. at H2717 
(daily ed. June 15, 1989) (Statement of Rep. Rostenkowski) (“The contracts 
between the savings and loan owners when they acquired failing institutions in the 
early 1980's are not contracts written in stone.”). 


42 


that there is no provision in the United States Code granting 
such a power to any federal agency. And we cannot imagine 
that such a law would be upheld if one did exist. As we have 
demonstrated above, however, the unmistakability doctrine, 
properly understood, requires nothing more to bind the gov- 
ernment than a clearly expressed contractual promise, not a 
further commitment that the promise will either be honored 
by Congress or specifically enforced despite enactment of 
contrary legislation. Thus, the fact that the thrift laws do not 
contain a provision delegating to the thrift regulators’ author- 
ity to make such a commitment is quite beside the point. 


There is no doubt tha’ he thrift regulators had ample 
statutory authority to enter sto the contracts at issue here. As 
the court of appeals noted, the FSLIC has always had express 
Statutory power “[t)o make contracts.” Pet. App. 39a (quoting 
12 U.S.C. § 1725(c)(3) (1988) (repealed by FIRREA)).26 That 
nothing more is required is a central premise of the Tucker 
Act, whose purpose, according to Judge Learned Hand, was 
“to assume liability for the acts of such of [the government's] 
agents as had the power in the discharge of their duties to 
assume or refuse engagements on the faith of which other 
citizens should rely.” Heil, 273 F. at 731. 


Ill. THE SOVEREIGN ACTS DOCTRINE DOES NOT 
EXCUSE THE GOVERNMENT’S LIABILITY IN 
DAMAGES FOR ITS BREACH OF ITS CONTRAC- 
TUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


1. As a final safe harbor from liability for its contract 
breach, the government offers the sovereign acts doctrine, 
which excuses the government from contract liability when its 


26 See also 12 U.S.C. § 1729(f (2A), (3) (1988) (repealed by FIRREA) 
(granting authority to FPSLIC, “in its sole discretion and upon such terms and 
conditions as [it] may prescribe,” to agree to specified forms of assistance in order 
to facilitate the merger or acquisition of a failing institution), 12 U.S.C. § 1725(d) 
(1988) (repealed by FIRREA) (authorizing FSLIC “to borrow money, and to issue 
notes, bonds, debentures, or other such obligations upon such terms and conditions 
as the [Bank Board] may determine.”). 


43 


performance is “incidentally” impaired by its unrelated “pub- 
lic and general acts as a sovereign.” Horowitz v. United 
States, 267 U.S. 458, 461 (1925). The Federal Circuit con- 
cluded that the sovereign acts doctrine did not apply in these 
cases primarily because it was “convinced . . . that the 
FIRREA provisions at issue here targeted thrifts that had 
undergone supervisory mergers, financed in part with super- 
visory goodwill, with the approval and assistance of the 
federal government.” Pet. App. 45a. As a result, no “public 
and general” sovereign act was involved that could trigger the 
immunity of the doctrine. 

The government quarrels with this conclusion of the 
Federal Circuit on several, equally unmeritorious, grounds. 
The government first contends that FIRREA qualifies as a 
“public and general” sovereign act because it “instituted a 
comprehensive overhaul of the regulation of the entire thrift 
industry,” Pet. Br. 44, and so was enacted “to govern regula- 
tory policy and to advance the general welfare.” Pet. Br. 45. 
The Federal Circuit provided the complete answer to this 
argument, observing that the relevant provisions of FIRREA 
were not any less targeted at the parties to supervisory 
mergers because they were packaged in a much larger, “com- 
prehensive” piece of legislation. Pet. App. 44a. Moreover, the 
court of appeals pointed out that the good motives of Con- 
gress in enacting FIRREA did not somehow distinguish the 
relevant parts of FIRREA and make them “general” for pur- 
poses of the sovereign acts doctrine; presumably every act of 
Congress is intended to advance the public welfare. Pet. App. 
45a. See United States Trust, 431 U.S. at 29 (“a State cannot 
refuse to meet its legitimate financial obligations simply 
because it would prefer to spend the money to promote the 
public good rather than the private welfare of its creditors”). 


The government further argues that the Federal Circuit's 
rejection of the sovereign acts doctrine — based on the conclu- 
sion that FIRREA’s “principal effect is to abrogate specific 
contractual rights,” Pet. App. 40a — is wrong because FIR- 
REA provided a “transition” that phased out supervisory 
goodwill over several years rather than eliminating it all at 
once. Pet. Br. 45-46. As a result, the government claims, 


44 


FIRREA actually placed thrifts like Statesman and Winstar in 
a better position than other institutions. /d. at 45. 


Taken at face value, such an argument turns a blind eye 
to the actual impact of FIRREA, as well as to the text and 
legislative history of the statute itself. For Winstar and States- 
man, there was no “transition” period; their thrifts were 
seized within a few months of the date on which FIRREA’s 
restrictions on supervisory goodwill became effective. The 
government certainly will have a hard time convincing States- 
man and Winstar that FIRREA placed them in a better posi- 
tion than anyone else. 


At bottom, the government strains to avoid the clear 
focus of FIRREA and its legislative history on the goodwill 
contracts — as the in banc Federal Circuit, and Judge Newman 
dissenting from the panel decision, explained, Pet. App. 
41a-44a, 95a-98a — by employing a non sequitur. The fact that 
the restrictions on the use of supervisory goodwill were 
phased in hardly negates the undeniable fact that those 
restrictions were targeted at this particular intangible asset 
created only by contracts with the government. 


2. To apply the sovereign acts doctrine as the govern- 
ment urges here would transform the doctrine into a radical 
instrument of government lawlessness, at war both with this 
Court’s precedents and with the attributes of sovereignty 
itself. As previously discussed, this Court has long recognized 
that “the right to make binding obligations is a competence 
attaching to sovereignty.” Perry, 294 U.S. at 353. Conse- 
quently, the Federal Circuit was correct in describing the 
bounds of the sovereign acts doctrine: “[W]Je know of no 
authority for . . . [the proposition] that the government has a 
sovereign right to disavow its contractual obligations through 
comprehensive national legislation.” Pet. App. 45a. See also 
Freedman v. United States 320 F.2d 359, 366 (Ct. Cl. 1963) 
(“The doctrine of ‘public and general’ ‘sovereign acts,’ laid 
down in Horowitz . . . does not relieve the Government from 
liability where it has specially undertaken to perform the very 
act from which it later seeks to be excused.”); Hills Materials 
Co. v. Rice, 982 F.2d 514, 516 n.2 (Fed. Cir. 1992). To the 


45 


contrary, “Congress was without power to reduce expendi- 
tures by abrogating contractual obligations of the United 
States.” Lynch, 292 U.S. at 580. 


The issue addressed by the sovereign acts doctrine, it 
must be remembered, arises only in circumstances where the 
“dual capacities” of the government as sovereign and as a 
participant in commerce are manifestly distinct. In Horowitz, 
for example, a government agency that had entered a contract 
to sell surplus silk could not comply with Horowitz’ request 
to ship the silk by freight due to a subsequent rail embargo. In 
denying Horowitz’ claim against the government for loss 
caused by the resulting delay in shipment, this Court 
explained: 

The two characters which the government possesses 

as a contractor and as a sovereign cannot be thus 

fused ... . In this court the United States appear 

simply as contractors; and they are to be held liable 
only within the same limits that any other defendant 
would be in any other court. Though their sovereign 

acts performed for the general good may work 

injury to some private contractors, such parties gain 

nothing by having the United States as their defen- 
dants. 


Horowitz, 267 U.S. at 461, quoting Jones v. United States, | 
Ct. Cl. 383, 384 (1865). 


The operating premise of the sovereign acts doctrine is 
that, where the federal government is acting in distinct capac- 
ities as sovereign and as a contractor, in its role as a contrac- 
tor it is entitled to be treated as if it were a private contracting 
party — no better, no worse. It follows that to determine 
whether the government’s breach of a contract is excused 
under the sovereign acts doctrine, “a citizen or corporate body 
must by supposition be substituted in its place, and then the 
question be determined whether the action will lie against the 
supposed defendant.” Jones v. United States, 1 Ct. Cl. at 385. 
In Horowitz, the silk contract contained no provision concern- 

, shipment by freight or otherwise allocating the risk of a 
iuture event like the embargo, and so Horowitz would not 


46 


have been entitled to recover his loss against a private con- 
tractor. As a result, he was not entitled to recovery against the 
government. 


Under this analysis, when a contracting party - whether a 
private party or a government agency — in effect assumes the 
risk that a change in the law will not occur, and that change 
does occur so as to impair contract performance, the party 
that assumed that risk will be liable in damages. Nothing in 
the sovereign acts doctrine either bars the government as a 
contractor from assuming such a risk or subsequently operates 
to immunize it from the consequences of such an obligation, 
whether or not the legislation involved is “public and gen- 
eral.” In Perry, for example, Congress acted pursuant to its 
power “to regulate the value of money,” 294 U.S. at 350, to 
declare provisions in not only government contracts, but in 
any contract, requiring payment in gold to be “against public 
policy.” Jd. at 349. It is difficult to imagine a statute with 
broader application. Yet the Court rejected the notion that this 
power allowed Congress to “disregard the obligations of the 
Government at its discretion,” id. at 350, or to otherwise 
“alter or repudiate the substance of its own engagements.” /d. 
at 351. So, too, in Lynch, the law breaching the government's 
contract was a repeal of “[a]ll laws granting or pertaining to” 
certain insurance policies. 292 U.S. at 575. Though Congress 
clearly had the power to issue such insurance, id. at 579, at 
the same time “Congress was without power to reduce expen- 
ditures by abrogating contractual obligations of the United 
States.” Id. at 580.27 


27 See also Hills Materials, 982 F.2d at 516 n.2 (“{T}he [sovereign acts] 
doctrine certainly does not prevent the government as contractor from affirmatively 
assuming responsibility for specific sovereign acts.”), Amino Bros. Co. v. United 
States, 372 F.2d 485, 491 (Ct. Cl.), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 846 (1967) (“The 
government cannot make a binding promise that it will not exercise a sovereign 
power, but it can agree in a contract that if it does so, it will pay the other 
contracting party the amount by which its costs are increased by the Government's 
sovereign act.”). 


47 


In its contracts with Statesman and Winstar, the govern- 
ment agreed to assume precisely this risk that future regula- 
tory changes would not interfere with the promised regulatory 
treatment of supervisory goodwill and capital credits. Accord- 
ingly, the sovereign acts doctrine can erect no bar to the 
government's liability in damages to Statesman and Winstar 
for its breaches of the contracts with them. 


The inapplicability of the sovereign acts doctrine is even 
more apparent when, as is the case here, a clear distinction 
cannot be drawn as to whether the government is acting in its 
sovereign or regulatory capacity on the one hand, or its 
capacity as a participant in commerce on the other. Indeed, 
the blurring of this distinction with the rise of the modern 
regulatory state has long been recognized.2* The contracts 
with Statesman and Winstar provide a clear example. A gov- 
ernment agency, acting as an insurer, and animated by finan- 
cial concerns similar to those of any other insurer, needed to 
relieve itself of the vast liability created by insolvent thrifts 
that was driving the agency itself into insolvency. As a result, 
the agency entered the marketplace to find buyers for those 
thrifts who would assume that liability — clearly a commercial 
endeavor.?? Yet certain of the contractual promises made to 
effect these transactions, part of the price paid by the agency, 
were promises to accord specified regulatory treatment to 
respondents’ supervisory goodwill and capital credit, prom- 
ises that obviously could not have been made by a private 
party. Only the government could have made such a contrac- 
tual promise, and only the government could have breached it. 


28 See, e.g., Sunswick Corp. v. United States, 75 F. Supp. 221, 228 (Ct. C1.), 
cert. denied, 334 U.S. 827 (1948) (“We know of no reason why the Government 
may not by the terms of its contract bind itself for the consequences of some act on 
its behalf which, but for the contract, would be nonactionable as an act of the 
sovereign.”). 

29 This point is discussed more fully in the brief filed in this case by amici 
Keystone Holdings, Inc. and American Savings Bank, F.A. 


48 


Surely the sovereign acts doctrine does not permit the 
government to escape damages liability for rendering impos- 
sible (by changing the law) its own performance of a contrac- 
tual promise that only it could have made. Excusing a 
deliberate breach of such a governmental promise would 
contradict rather than serve the purpose of the sovereign acts 
doctrine. As one commentator recently put it: 

In such cases, the party that entered into the con- 

tract — the government as lawgiver or regulator - 

and the party that impaired the contract by enacting 

a sovereign act — the government as lawgiver or 

regulator — are the same. Instead of providing the 

government with as much protection under contract 

law as private parties enjoy, shielding the regulatory 

state from contract liability would allow the govern- 

ment as lawgiver or regulator to breach its contracts 
freely. 
Recent Cases, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 1162, 1167 (1996). 


3. Finally, the government does not even try to justify 
the unconscionably unfair consequences of applying the sov- 
ereign acts doctrine in this case. The government, as a direct 
result of its repudiation of its contractual obligations, seized 
Statesman's and Winstar's thrifts, along with the substantial 
cash capital infusions ($21 million and $2.8 million, respec- 
tively) that they had made in the thrifts in direct reliance on 
the government's promises. The government would invoke the 
sovereign acts doctrine not only to excuse its breach, but also 
to retain Statesman’s and Winstar’s money as well. No sover- 
eign acts case, of course, supports such a result. 


To the contrary, American law is far more solicitous of 
elementary notions of fairness than the government is willing 
to admit. Even when an agency's contractual promise cannot 
be enforced - for example, because it was unlawful or 
unauthorized at the time it was made - the benefits conferred 
on the government and costs incurred by the private party in 
reliance on the promise must be reimbursed, on application of 
a quantum meruit or quantum valebant analysis, to put the 
contracting parties “substantially in the position they would 


49 


have occupied without the attempted contract... ." New 
York Mail & Newspaper Transp. Co. v. United States, 154 F. 
Supp. 271, 276 (Ct. Cl.), cert. denied, 355 U.S. 904 (1957). 


For example, in United States v. Amdahl Corp., 786 F.2d 
387, 393 (Fed. Cir. 1986), the Federal Circuit held that the 
government must return the value of benefits received even 
under a contract that was properly terminated by the govern- 
ment for illegality: 

Where a benefit has been conferred by the contrac- 

tor on the government in the form of goods or 

services, which it accepted, a contractor may 

recover at least on a quantum valebant or quantum 
meruit basis for the value of the conforming goods 

or services received by the government prior to the 

rescission of the contract for invalidity.*° 


Clearly Statesman and Winstar are entitled, at a mini- 
mum, to return of the money and other benefits they provided 
to the government in reliance on promises that were validly 
made, but whose performance was later rendered impossible 
by contrary legislation. 


30 See also Prestex Inc. v. United States, 320 F.2d 367, 373 (Ct. Cl. 1963) 
(“Even though a contract be unenforceable .. . , it is only fair . . . that the 
Government pay for goods delivered or services rendered and accepted under it.”’); 
Yosemite Park & Curry Co. v. United States, 582 F.2d 552, 560 (Ct. Cl. 1978) 
(“[Whhile . . . the Government could [not] be bound by . . . Agreement, . . . the 
Government bargained for, agreed to pay for, and received the benefit of [the 
contractor's] services ... . "); Ocean Technology, Inc. v. United States, 19 Cl. Ct. 
288, 293 (1990) (“It would be manifestly unfair, at this late date, for [the 
government] to retain the benefits of the [contractor's product] . . . while 
renouncing its contractual obligations.”). 


50 
CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment below should be 
affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Cuarces J. Cooper 
Counsel of Record 
Micuaet A. Carvin 
Rosert J. Cynkar 
Vincent J. CoLatriano 
SuHaw, Pitman, Ports 

& TrowsridGe 
2300 N Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
(202) 663-8000 


March 29, 1996 


