No. 95-865 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
v. 
WINSTAR CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 
VOLUME I OF II 


Drew S. Days, III CHARLES J. CooPER 
Solicitor General Shaw, Pittman, Potts, & 
Department of Justice Trowbridge 
Washington, D.C. 20530 2300 N Street, N.W. 
(202) 514-2217 Washington, D.C. 20037 
Counsel of Record for (202) 663-8000 

Petitioner Counsel of Record for 
Respondents Winstar 
Corporation and the 
Statesman Group, Inc., et al. 

Jerry Srouck 

Spriggs & Hollingsworth 

1350 I Street, N.W. 

Ninth Floor 

Washington, D.C. 20005 

(202) 898-5800 

Counsel of Record for 
Respondent Glendale 
Federal Bank, FSB 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari Filed December 1, 1995 
Certiorari Granted January 16, 1996 


Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-865 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 


TABLE OF CONTENTS! 


Page 
WINSTAR 


Court of Federal Claim Docket Entries, States- 
man Savings, et al. v. United States (No. 90- 
CV-773) 

Court of Federal Claims Docket Entries, Winstar 
Corp., et al. v. United States (No. 90-CV-8) 
Court of Federal Claims Docket Entries, Glendale 

Federal v. United States (No. 90-CV-772) 

Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit Docket 
Entries, Winstar Corp. v. United States (No. 
92-5164) 


' The en banc and panel opinions of the Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit and the opinions of the Court of Federal 
Claims are printed in the appendix to the petition for writ of 
certiorari and have not been reproduced here. 


(i) 


Complaint (Jan. 2, 1990).........ce cece ee eeees 
FHLBB Memorandum from Kevin Aucello to 
Bob Brick (March 14, 1984)...........0ee08: 
Letter from McGladrey Hendrickson & Pullen 
to Harlan G. Halsne (May 10, 1984) ........ 
Financial Information Presentation (May 29, 
1OBE) . ov ccsaccccvcccdececugedseuveseneaness 
FHLLB Memorandum from Nancy Shaen to 
Bob Brick (May 30, 1984) .............-0e5 
FHLBB Memorandum from Robert Moore to 
Joseph Arendes (June 1, 1984).............. 


FHLBB Memorandum from Harlan G. Halsne . 


to JJ. Finn (June 28, 1984) ..........eseee- 
FHLBB Resolution No. 84-363 (July 6, 1984).. 
FHLBB Resolution No. 84-364 (July 6, 1984).. 
Assistance Agreement (July 12, 1984)......... 
Combination Agreement and Plan of Merger 
(June 29, 1984 and July 12, 1984)........... 
FHLBB Forbearance Letter (July 13, 1984)... 
Affidavit of E. Ted Yoch in Support of Plain- 
tiffs Motion for Summary Judgment As To 
Liability (Mar. 27, 1900)... .cccccsscsccceces 


STATESMAN 


Complaint (Aug. 15, 1990) ............eeeeeeee 
FHLBB Memorandum SP-37a, with attach- 
ment (March 7, 1966) ...icccccrccnsssasbuce 
Excerpts from Instructions for Thrift Finan- 
cial Reports (Jan. 1987) ...........eeee evens 
FHLBB Acquisition Proposal (Jan. 8, 1988) ... 
Excerpts from FHLBB Business Plan (Jan. 8, 
19BB) . .cccccccccccccnsesecceusen eanEEE 
Excerpts from Holding Company Application 
H-(e)1 (Feb. 12, 1988).........cccecceeecees 
FHLBB S-Memorandum—Proposed FSLIC- 
Assisted Acquisition (Feb. 26, 1988)......... 


FHLBB Memorandum from Darrel W. 
Dochow to John M. Buckley, Jr. (Mar. 11, 


EE ae 276 
Excerpts from FHLBB Board Meeting Min- 
utes, Closed Session (Mar. 11, 1988) ........ 283 


Merger Agreement And Plan Of Merger for 
Merger of First Federal Savings Bank into 
Statesman Bank (Mar. 11, 1988)............ 286 

Merger Agreement And Plan Of Merger for 
Merger of Peoples Feeral Savings and 
Loan Association into Statesman Bank 
Cree ccc eevetéccccccceccece 292 

Merger Agreement And Plan Of Merger for 
Merger of The Perpetual Savings and Loan 
Association into Statesman Bank (Mar. 11, 

DC iscneeGeseseeeebeecedocececcecccces 298 

Acquisition Agreement Between FSLIC As 
Receiver For First Federated Savings Bank 


and Statesman Bank (Mar. 11, 1988)........ 304 
Assistance Agreement (March 11, 1988)....... 318 
Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agreement 

EEE EE 412 
Bank Board lution No. 88-169 (March 11, 

EEL LLL 439 
Letter from FHLBB to Statesman Bank 

Granting Forbearance (March 14, 1988) ..... 475 


Excerpts from Oversight On The Condition Of 
The Financial Services Industry: Hearings 
Before The Senate Comm. On Banking, 
Housing, And Urban Affairs, 100th Cong., 
2d Sess. (May 19, 25, and 26, 1988)......... 481 

Illustrative Thrift Financial Reports filed by 
Union Federal Savings Bank of Frankton 
and Coast Federal Bank (1988-1989) ........ 491 

Comptroller General Op. B-240860, with 
enclosure (Aug. 27, 1990)................... 507 


iv 


Affidavit Of D. J. Noble In Support Of Plain- 
tiffs Motion For Summary Judgment As To 


Liability (Sept. 5, 1990) ............eeeeeees 517 
GLENDALE 
Complaint (Aug. 15, 1990) .............-eeeees 543 


FHLBB Memorandum R 31b, Accounting For 
Goodwill In Accordance With GAAP Is Ac- 
ceptable (Sept. 1, 1981). ...........eeeeeeee 571 

Letter from Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. to 
Glendale Board of Directors, with attach- 
 f Se S | a ee 675 

Excerpt from Agreement Of Merger Between 
Glendale Federal Savings And Loan Asso- 
ciation and First Federal Savings And Loan 


( @ Fees pee rr ere 578 
FHLBB Letter to Richard Fink (Nov. 16, 

PE ncosnkineankecesesasdsenabhatoendeedds 580 
Letter from Glendale to Lawrence Hayes 

Ce: Me, Un ccndensnnbeasedbonanesetens 583 
FSLIC Memorandum, Financial Information 

Presentation (Nov. 18, 1981)................ 586 


Supervisory Action Agreement (Nov. 19, 1981).. 587 
Bank Board (Forbearance Letter) (Nov. 19, 

SEED onudénccéceccaseductundeevecuecesianses 602 
FHLBB Resolution No. 81-710 (Nov. 19, 1981).. 605 
FHLBB Resolution No. 81-712 (Nov. 19, 1981).. 611 
Excerpts from Transcript Of Client-Furnished 

Tapes of FHLBB Meeting (Nov. 19, 1981) .. 613 
Letter from Glendale to Milton Feinerman, 

with enclosures (Mar. 19, 1982)............. 618 
OTS Thrift Bulletin 38-1 (Jan. 9, 1990)........ 625 
Affidavit Of Raymond D. Edwards In Support 

Of Plaintiffs Motion For Surumary Judg- 

ment As To Liability (Aug. 23, 1991)....... 628 
Affidavit Of David T. Hansen In Support Of 

Plaintiffs Motion For Summary Judgment 

As To Liability (Sept. 3, 1991) ............. 633 


Vv 


Affidavit Of Harold B. Shore In Support Of 
Plaintiffs Motion For Summary Judgment 
As To Liability (Sept. 4, 1991) ............. 

Glendale’s Proposed Findings Of Uncon- 
troverted Fact (Sept. 13, 1991) 

Orders Allowing Certiorari 


UNITED STATES COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS 


No. 90-CV-773 


STATESMAN SAVINGS, ET AL. 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE PROCEEDINGS 

8/15/90 Complaint filed. Filing fee $120. 

7/24/92 Opinion entered in this and 90-772C deny- 
ing [5-1] motion to Dismiss pursuant to 
Rule 12(b), granting [4-1] motion for 
Summary Judgment as to liability. 

8/27/92 See 90-8C for Order from CAFC granting 


defendant’s interlocutory notice of appeal 
in this case and 90-772C. 


11/13/92 Order entered in this, 90-773C and 90-772C 
directing defendant to file its answer 30 
days after the CAFC rules in the 


pending interlocutory appeal. 


(1) 


2 
UNITED STATES COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS 


No. 90-CV-8 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, ET AL. 
v~. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE PROCEEDINGS 
1/2/90 Complaint filed. Filing fee $120. 

4/21/92 Opinion entered finding that a binding 
contract existed between the govern- 
ment and plaintiffs and that a breach 
occurred, with the case to move forward 
to determine plaintiffs’ injury etc. 

7/24/92 See 90-773C for Opinion Consolidating this 
Case with 90-773C and 90-772C. 

8/27/92 Order from CAFC granting defendant’s 
interlocutory notice of appeal filed in this 
ease and 90-772C and 90-773C. 

11/13/93 Order entered in this, 90-773C and 90-772C 
directing defendant to file its answer 30 
days after the CAFC rules in the 
pending interlocutory appeal. 


3 
UNITED STATES COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS 


No. 90-CV-772 


GLENDALE FEDERAL 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE PROCEEDINGS 
8/15/90 Complaint filed. Filing fee $120. 


7/24/92 See 90-773C for Opinion granting [4-1] 
motion for Summary Judgment as to 
liability; denying defendant’s motion to 
dismiss ete. 


8/27/92 See 90-8C for Order from CAFC granting 
defendant’s interlocutory notice of appeal 
in this case and 90-773C. 


11/13/92 Order entered in this, 90-8C and 90-773C 
directing defendant to file its answer 30 
days after the CAFC rules in the 
pending interlocutory appeal. 


4 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


No. 92-5164 


WINSTAR CORPORATION 
v. 


UNITED STATES 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE PROCEEDINGS 


August 28, 1992 Docket entries, docketed. Notice 
sent to the parties. 


January 6, 1993 Argued. (Nies, CJ, Rich & New- 
man, JJ). 


May 25, 1993 Reversed and remanded. (Nies, 
CJ) “Judgment entered” 


August 18, 1993 Order: Petitions for rehearing 
granted, but only to make 
changes [as shown in order] in 
the text of the opinion; judg- 
ment of the court entered May 
25, 1993, is vacated and opinion 
of the court, as amended, ac- 
companying said judgment is 
withdrawn. 


5 


February 10, 1994 Submitted after oral argument 
by Douglas Letter, Charles J. 
Cooper and Jerry Stouck (in 
bane) (Nies, Rich, Newman, 
Archer, Mayer, Michel, Plager, 
Lourie, Clevenger, Rader and 
Schall) 


August 30, 1995 Affirmed. Opinion for the Court 
filed by. Chief Judge Archer, in 
which Circuit Judges Rich, 
Newman, Mayer, Michel, Pla- 
ger, Clevenger, Rader, and 
Schall join. “Judgment 
entered” 


| August 30, 1995 Dissenting opinions filed by Cir- 


cuit Judges Nies, and Lourie. 


6 
UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


Civil Action No. 154-90-8-C 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, 
1711 West County Road B 
Suite 300 South 
Roseville, Minnesota 55113, 


and 


UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK 
1715 West County Road B2 
Roseville, Minnesota 55113, Plaintiffs, 


V. 


THE UNiTEeD States, Defendant. 


COMPLAINT 


For its Complaint against the United States 
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “gov- 
ernment”), the plaintiffs Winstar Corporation 
(“Winstar”) and United Federal Savings Bank 
(“United”) state as follows: 

1. Winstar is a Minnesota corporation organized 
in 1984 for the purpose of acquiring an insolvent 
savings and loan institution, Windom Federal 


7 


Savings and Loan Association (“Windom”), in a 
merger induced by the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation (“FSLIC”) and the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board (“FHLBB”) pursuant to 
thei statutory and supervisory authority over fed- 
erally insured savings and loan institutions (hereinaf- 
ter referred to as “thrifts” or “thrift institutions”). 

2. United is a Minnesota corporation, all of the 
stock of which is owned by Winstar. United was 
formed in 1984 for the purpose of acquiring Windom, 
which was merged into United that year. 

3. As shown in more detail below, Winstar forn.ed 
United and acquired Windom pursuant to Winstar - 
and United’s contract with the government, which 
obviated Windom’s liquidation by FSLIC and 


_FHLBB and, consequently, saved FSLIC’s insurance 


fund millions of dollars that it would have been 
obligated to pay to creditors and depositors of 
Windom had FSLIC and FHLBB been forced to 
liquidate it. Winstar and United have fully performed 
their obligations under their contract with the United 
States. Although the United States has received all of 
the benefits of its contract with Winstar and United, 
the United States has breached its contract with the 
enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (“FIRREA”), 
Pub. Law. No. 101-75, 103 Stat. 183. The United 
States’ breach of its contract with Winstar and 
United entirely frustrates the purpose of the con- 
tract. Additionally, FIRREA’s repudiation and abro- 
gation of the government’s contractual promises to 
Winstar and United constitute a taking of Winstar 
and United’s property without just compensation in 
violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution and a deprivation of Winstar and 
United’s property without due process of law in 


8 


violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. 


JURISDICTION 


4. This court has jurisdiction over the subject 
matter of this action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1491(a)(1). 


BACKGROUND 


5. During the late 1970’s and early 1980’s unprece- 
dented high interest rates pushed the thrift indus- 
try’s cost of retaining and obtaining new deposits 
substantially above the rate of return on long-term, 
fixed-rate mortgages in thrift portfolios, precipitating 
a financial crisis in the thrift industry. By mid-1981, 
the thrift industry’s cost of funds had risen to 10.31 
percent, substantially exceeding the 9.75 percent 
average return on thrift mortgage portfolios. This 
“negative spread” widened in 1982. 

6. In order to present massive withdrawals by 
depositors, thrift institutions were forced to pay 
higher rates on savings accounts. Savers nonetheless 
withdrew $31.8 billion more than they deposited in 
1981-1982. 

7. As a result of the substantial negative spread 
between the thrift industry’s cost of funds and its 
return on assets, and the large net withdrawal of 
deposits, the thrift industry sustained an operating 
loss of $8.9 billion in 1981-1982, with a record $3.3 
billion loss in the first half of 1982 alone. During that 
period the thrift industry’s net worth declined more 
than $7 billion. In March 1982 Richard T. Pratt, then 


9 


Chairman of FHLBB, advised a congressional com- 
mittee: “(T]he thrift industry in the United States is 
undergoing a severe financial crisis ... [H]igh and 
volatile interest rates ... are literally threatening the 
survival of this industry....” 

8. Many FSLIC-insured thrift institutions either 
became insolvent or were threatened with insolvency 
in the early 1980’s, and FSLIC’s insurance fund was 
faced with the potential loss of many billions of 
dollars in claims by depositors of these insolvent or 
troubled thrifts. For example, during the last half of 
1981 and the first half of 1982, more than 80 percent 
of all FSLIC-insured thrift institutions incurred 
operating losses. As of the end of 1981, almost 10 
percent of FSLIC-insured thrift institutions had a net 


worth of less than 2 percent of their total assets. 


Three hundred fifty-six (356) FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions with $72 billion in assets fell into this 
category. 

9. Under the National Housing Act of 1934, as 
amended, FSLIC was at all times relevant to this 
action authorized to facilitate, upon terms and 
conditions prescribed by FSLIC, the merger of a 
failing FSLI1C-insured thrift institution into a finan- 
cially sound FSLIC-insured thrift institution by 
providing financial assistance in the form of prom- 
issory notes (“FSLIC notes”) or cash contributions to 
the healthy institution or by guaranteeing it against 
loss by reason of the merger, so long as the cost of 
the financial assistance provided by FSLIC did not 
exceed the expense that would have been incurred in 
liquidating the institution and paying insurance claims 
upon its accounts. 

10. Faced with a large number of failing thrift 
institutions, FHLBB adopted and aggressively imple- 
mented a policy of requiring insolvent or troubled 


10 


thrift institutions to merge into financially sound 
acquired institutions. With respect to many such 
“supervisory” mergers, FSLIC exercised its au- 
thority under the National Housing Act to provide 
assistance in the form of cash contributions, FSLIC 
notes, and/or guarantees to induce financially sound 
acquired institutions to merge with insolvent or 
troubled thrifts. 

11. During the first 5 months of 1981, FSLIC 
provided financial assistance in 7 supervisory mer- 
gers. These 7 troubled FSLIC-insured thrifts had 
assets totaling $1.5 billion. FSLIC provided assist- 
ance in the form of cash contributions, FSLIC notes, 
and asset purchases at a total cost (at present value) 
of $344 million. FSLIC’s present value cost of 
arranging these supervisory mergers was thus 22 
percent of the total assets of the troubled thrifts, a 
typical cost-asset ratio for FSLIC-assisted super- 
visory mergers over the previous several years. 
Measured another way, the cost of arranging these 
supervisory mergers was 75 percent of the cost of 
liquidating the 7 trouble thrifts, also a typical ratio 
for FSLIC-assisted supervisory mergers. The finan- 
cial assistance provided by FSLIC in these super- 
visory mergers represented a cash outflow of about 
200 percent of the cash inflow to FSLIC during the 
5-month period. In May 1981 FSLIC ran out of cash 
and was forced to sell at a discount over $150 million 
from its long-term bond portfolio to fund its current 
operations. 

12. As the crisis in the thrift industry continued to 
worsen, and more and more FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions became insolvent or troubled, FSLIC and 
FHLBB recognized that continuing to facilitate 
supervisory mergers with cash contributions and 
FSLIC notes would quickly and entirely exhaust the 


11 


insurance fund, which at the end of 1981 had total 
assets of $7 billion. Indeed, during the last 7 months 
of 1981, FSLIC provided financial assistance in 
connection with 23 supervisory mergers. The 23 failed 
thrift institutions had assets of $12.3 billion. If FSLIC 
had provided cash contributions and FSLIC notes at 
historic levels in order to induce financially healthy 
acquirer institutions to enter into these supervisory 
mergers, the cost to FSLIC would have been 
approximately $2.7 billion. Similarly, in 1982 FSLIC 
provided financial assistance in connection with 49 
supervisory transactions (44 FSLIC-assisted mergers 
and 5 FSLIC-assisted holding company acquisitions), 
involving 77 insolvent or failing thrift institutions 
with assets totaling $31.2 billion. If FSLIC had 
provided cash contributions and FSLIC notes at 
historic levels in connection with these supervisory 
mergers, the cost to FSLIC would have been at least 
$6.9 billion. According to FSLIC’s own calculations, 
providing financial assistance at historic levels would 
have exhausted the FSLIC insurance fund by April of 
1982. 

13. In mid-1981, FSLIC and FHLBB were thus 
forced to revise their policies and practices regarding 
the provision of financial assistance in supervisory 
mergers in order to prevent, or at least forestall, 
exhaustion of the FSLIC insurance fund. As de- 
scribed below, because FSLIC and FHLBB could no 
longer provide the amount of cash or other tangible 
financial assistance necessary to induce healthy 
acquirer institutions to merge with insolvent or 
troubled FSLIC-insured thrifts, FSLIC and FHLBB 
began inducing and arranging supervisory mergers by 
providing assistance in the form of an intangible 
asset—“supervisory goodwill.” FSLIC and FHLBB 
also expanded the number of potential acquirers of 


12 


insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured thrift institu- 
tions by permitting interstate mergers (in the 
absence of an acceptable merger proposal from a 
financially sound in-state acquirer institution), and 
inter-industry mergers (in the absence of an accept- 
able merger proposal from either an in-state or out- 
of-state thrift institution). In evaluating merger 
proposals, FSLIC’s principal objective was to merge 
the insolvent or troubled thrift institution into a 
healthy acquirer at the lowest possible cost to 
FSLIC. As H. Brent Beesley, then Director of 
FSLIC, stated in April 1982: “Our criterion used in 
evaluating our alternatives is simple: Which alterna- 
tive represents the least cost to the FSLIC and the 
public—all things considered?” 

14. In order to induce financially sound acquirer 
institutions to merge with insolvent or failing FSLIC- 
insured thrifts with little or no cash contributions, 
FSLIC notes, or other tangible financial assistance 
‘rom FSLIC, FSLIC and FHLBB relied primarily 
upon an aggressive application of the “purchase 
method” of accounting for the mergers. The Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) applicable 
at the time provided that in mergers and acquisitions 
using the purchase method of accounting, the book 
value of the assets and liabilities of an acquired thrift 
institution should be adjusted (“marked to market”) 
to fair market value at the time of the acquisition, 
and that any excess in the cost of the acquisition 
(which includes any liabilities assumed by the ace 
quirer) over the fair market value of the acquirer 
assets should be separately recorded on the acquirer 
institution’s books as “goodwill”—an intangible, non- 
earning asset that may be amortized on a straight- 
line basis over a period of up to 40 years. 

15. Because of the high interest rates prevailing at 
the time, the fair market value of the lower yielding 


13 


fixed-rate mortgage loans held by most acquired 
institutions was significantly less than the mortgage 
loans’ book value (the face amount of the loans). 
Accordingly, in the typical supervisory merger at that 
time, the aggregate fair market value of the liabilities 
assumed by the acquirer institution exceeded the 
aggregate fair market value of the acquired institu- 
tion’s fixed-rate loans and other assets. The amount 
by which the acquired institution’s liabilities exceed 
its assets is reflected on the merged institution’s 
books as goodwill. Goodwill recorded in connection 
with a supervisory merger is known as “supervisory 
goodwill.” 

16. Supervisory goodwill was recorded on the 
merged institution’s balance sheet as an asset 
includable in capital under GAAP and under 
FHLBB’s regulations governing the minimum capital 
requirements of FSLIC-insured thrift institutions. 
The ability to include supervisory goodwill as capital 
for purposes of satisfying FHLBB’s minimum capital 
requirements and to amortize it over a period of up to 
35 years was essential to inducing healthy acquirer 
institutions to merge with insolvent or troubled 
FSLIC-insured thrifts. By assuring acquirer institu- 
tions in supervisory mergers that supervisory good- 
will would be treated in the above-described manner 
for regulatory purposes, FSLIC and FHLBB were 
able to induce and arrange supervisory mergers with 
minimal cash contributions and other tangible finan- 
cial assistance. FSLIC and FHLBB thus saved many 
billions of dollars in financial assistance that FSLIC 
would otherwise have had to pay in order to resolve 
scores of insolvent and troubled FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions. 

17. As part of its effort to induce and arrange 
supervisory mergers by using supervisory goodwill in 


14 


the above-described manner, FHLBB took steps to 
assure the thrift industry that GAAP would control in 
determining the application of purchase method 
accounting and the treatment of supervisory goodwill 
in supervisory mergers. In August 1981, FHLBB 
withdrew a proposed rule change that would have 
imposed regulatory standards more stringent than 
GAAP for accounting for supervisory goodwill. The 
proposed rule would have limited the inclusion of 
supervisory goodwill in regulatory capital to 30 
percent of the merged institution’s net worth and 
would have required that supervisory goodwill be 
amortized over a period no longer than ten years. In 
withdrawing the proposed rule, the FHLBB stated 
that a principal reason for its action was that the 
proposal could “discourage potential merger partners 
from consummating necessary mergers.” In Septem- 
ber 1981 FHLBB issued Memorandum R31b, which 
made clear that, as a matter of FHLBB policy, GAAP 
would control in determining the application of 
purchase method accounting and the treatment of 
supervisory goodwill in supervisory mergers. 

18. During the last 7 months of 1981, FSLIC 
provided tangible financial assistance (e.g. cash, 
FSLIC notes) in connection with the merger of 23 
insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured thrift institu- 
tions with assets totaling $12.3 billion. These 23 
supervisory mergers were arranged at a present 
value cost to FSLIC of $663 million, or 5.1 percent of 
assets—approximately one-fourth of the historical 
cost-asset ratio of FSLIC-assisted supervisory mer- 
gers. Measured as a percentage of the cost of 
liquidation, the present value cost of these 23 cases 
was only 18 percent, down from historical levels of 
65-75 percent. Similarly, in 1982 FSLIC provided 
financial assistance in connection with 49 supervisory 


15 


mergers involving 77 FSLIC-insured insolvent or 
troubled thrifts with assets totaling $31.2 billion. The 
present value cost to FSLIC of these supervisory 
mergers was $1.2 billion, or 3.8 percent of assets. As 
a percent of the cost of liquidation, this present value 
cost was 16.3 percent. During this 19-month period, if 
FSLIC had been required to provide cash and other 
tangible financial assistance at historic levels in order 
to induce and arrange these supervisory mergers, the 
cost to FSLIC would have been approximately $9.6 
billion. The cost to FSLIC would have been higher 
still if FSLIC had been forced to liquidate the 
acquired thrifts. The substantial reductions in costs to 
FSLIC of financial assistance in FSLIC-assisted 
supervisory mergers during this 19-month period 
were due in large part to FSLIC’s use of supervisory 
goodwill through purchase method accounting. As 
then-Chairman Pratt stated in March 1982: “(Bly 
using mergers as a supervisory tool ..., we are 
seeking to spread as much of the industry’s own net 
worth as possible over the industry’s trouble spots as 
a means of conserving FSLIC’s insurance fund.” In 
effect, by using supervisory goodwill in accounting for 
supervisory mergers under the purchase method, 
FSLIC transferred most of its cost of resolving 
insolvent or failing thrifts to the healthy members of 
the industry and their shareholders. 

19. Many acquirer institutions were induced by 
FSLIC and FHLBB to merge with insolvent or 
failing FSLIC-insured institutions with no tangible 
financial assistance from FSLIC, but only super- 
visory goodwill. In 1981 FSLIC and FHLBB ar- 
ranged supervisory mergers for 58 insolvent or 
troubled FSLIC-insured thrifts with total assets of 
$3.6 billion, without providing any tangible financial 
assistance. In 1982 FSLIC and FHLBB arranged 166 


16 


supervisory mergers without providing tangible finan- 
cial assistance. Most of these unassisted supervisory 
mergers arranged by FSLIC and FHLBB in 1981 and 
1982 involved substantial amounts of supervisory 
goodwill. 

20. In 1982 the Financial Accounting Standards 

Board, which promulgates GAAP, issued Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 72 (“FASB 
72”), which amended GAAP applicable to mergers 
initiated after September 30, 1982. As applied to 
United, FASB 72 generally would require that 
goodwill be amortized over a period of approximately 
15 years. This change in GAAP did not alter 
FHLBB’s and FSLIC’s regulatory policies and prac- 
tices with regard to supervisory goodwill. For 
regulatory accounting purposes, FHLBB and FSLIC 
continued to induce healthy institutions to acquire 
failing thrifts by allowing supervisory goodwill to be 
included in capital and amortized over a period of 
time exceeding that now allowed by GAAP. 

21. The nature of the problems affecting the thrift 
industry changed in 1983-1984. After mid-1982, mar- 
ket interest rates declined, and the thrift industry’s 
“negative spread” improved. But in 1983 and 1984 
thrifts increasingly faced severe asset quality prob- 
lems. This asset quality problem threatened many 
thrift institutions that were just recovering from the 
negative spread problems of 1981-1982. Thirty-five 
percent of all FSLIC-insured thrifts lost money in the 
second half of 1983. 

22. Although economic conditions improved in 1983, 
the number of problem cases and the volume of assets 
handled by FSLIC in default prevention transactions 
continued at record level in the year. The FSLIC 
resolved 53 problem cases involving $17.6 billion in 
assets in 1983. This marked a decrease from 77 


17 


FSLIC-resolved cases in 1982, but the complexity of 
the problem cases increased significantly. FSLIC 
realized significant cost savings by resolving most of 
these problem cases through interstate and inter- 
industry acquisitions. Through aggressive use of 
purchase method accounting, FSLIC saved an esti- 
mated $2.4 billion over the cost of liquidation in 
resolving these problem cases. 

23. Overall thrift industry profitability declined in 
1984, despite the fact that interest rates were far 
below the 1981-1982 levels. In 1984 FSLIC resolved 
27 problem cases involving $5.5 billion in assets. The 
continued growth in the size and complexity of 
problem cases requiring FSLIC intervention, how- 
ever, created a record-high demand on FSLIC 


' resources, precipitating a decline in FSLIC reserves 


from $6.4 billion at the end of 1983 to approximately 
$5.6 billion at the end of 1984. During 1984, despite 
FSLIC’s efforts to obtain less costly resolutions, 
FSLIC was forced to place 9 institutions into 
liquidating receiverships. The other 18 problem cases 
were resolved by FSLIC at approximately 45 percent 
of the estimated cost of liquidation, or a savings of 
$693 million, largely through the use of supervisory 
goodwill to induce healthy institutions to take over 
the failing thrifts. One of the 27 problem cases of 
1984, resolved through the use of supervisory 
goodwill, was the FSLIC-assisted takeover of Win- 
dom Federal Savings & Loan. 


THE MERGER 
24. In late 1983 Windom faced insolvency. In March 


of that year Windom’s Board of Directors acknowl- 
edged that grounds existed for the appointment of a 


18 


conservator or receiver, and that Windom’s failure 
could not be prevented without action by FSLIC. For 
the fiscal year ended June 30, 1983, the accounting 
firm of McGladrey Hendrickson & Co. reported a net 
loss for Windom of $2,766,269.00, and concluded that 
Windom “may be unable to continue in existence.” As 
of December 31, 1983, Windom reported a net worth 
of negative $2.63 million on assets of $50.1 million. 

25. As the FHLBB stated in a Resolution approv- 
ing United’s merger with Windom, “{sJevere financial 
conditions exist which threaten the stability of 
Windom.” In 1984 FHLBB specifically found that 
“Windom is insolvent in that its assets are less than 
its obligations to creditors and others, including its 
members.” In an effort to avoid the expense of 
liquidating Windom, FHLBB began seeking finan- 
cially sound merger partners in 1983. 

26. In soliciting merger proposals, FSLIC and 
FHLBB sought to attract financially sound acquirer 
institutions with sufficient financial and managerial 
resources to arrest Windom’s further deterioration, 
and, over time, to place it on a sound financial footing. 
Winstar was such an institution. 

27. In 1983 Winstar submitted a bid for the 
acquisition of Windom, and Winstar began negotiating 
with FHLBB and FSLIC regarding its proposed 
acquisition of Windom. Throughout the entire bidding 
and negotiating process it was understood that the 
entity that acquired Windom would be able to record 
as supervisory goodwill the amount by which the 
market value of Windom’s liabilities exceeded the 
market value of its assets, and to amortize that 
goodwill over a long period of time, such as 30 to 40 
years. 

28. Under the terms negotiated by the parties, 
FSLIC promised to provide to United a cash 


19 


contribution of $1,950,000, plus a sum equal to 
Windom’s aggregate negative net worth (the amount 
by which its liabilities exceeded its assets, measured 
at book value rather than fair market value). In 
return, Winstar agreed to form United and to invest 
$2 million in cash in United through the purchase of 
all of United’s common stock. 

29. FSLIC and FHLBB determined that Winstar’s 
bid was the most attractive of all bids made for 
Windom. After FSLIC and FHLBB selected tie bid, 
Winstar formed United, which entered into a “Com- 
bination Agreement and Plan of Merger” (“Merger 
Agreement”) with Windom setting out the terms of 
the acquisition. The Merger Agreement was expressly 


_ conditioned upon FSLIC’s execution of an Assistance 


Agreement approved by FHLBB. 

30. The Merger Agreement was incorporated by 
reference into the Assistance Agreement among 
FSLIC, Winstar, and United. The Assistance Agree- 
ment expressly states that FSLIC had determined, 
pursuant to Section 406 of the National Housing Act, 
that Windom “is in danger of default and that the 
amount of [FSLIC’s financial] assistance and indem- 
nification would be less than the losses [FSLIC] 
would sustain upon the liquidation of [Windom] 
through a receivership accompanied by the payment 
of insurance of accounts.” 

31. In entering into the Assistance Agreement with 
Winstar and United, FSLIC determined that Winstar 
and United’s proposal would entail the least amount 
of tangible financial assistance from FSLIC and that 
Winstar and United possessed the financial and 
managerial resources necessary to halt Windom’s 
further decline and, over time, to restore it to 
profitability. In keeping with the terms negotiated by 
the parties, the Assistance Agreement called for 


20 


FSLIC to provide to United a cash contribution of 
$1,950,000, plus a sum equal to Windom’s aggregate 
negative net worth (the amount by which its 
liabilities exceeded its assets, measured at face value 
rather than fair market value). The Assistance 
Agreement provides that the $1,950,000 cash contri- 
bution shall be directly credited to United’s regula- 
tory net worth requirements. 

32. The Assistance Agreement provides that the 
accounting treatment for the transaction shall be 
governed by GAAP, except that where GAAP conflict 
with the Assistance Agreement, FHLBB or FSLIC 
regulations, or FHLBB or FSLIC resolutions or 
actions, then the Agreement, regulation, resolution, 
or action shall govern. 

33. The Assistance Agreement expressly referred 
to FHLBB’s Resolution No. 84-363 approving the 
supervisory merger. In that resolution, FHLBB, as 
the operating head of FSLIC, expressly determined, 
pursuant to its authority under Section 406 of the 
National Housing Act, that “(1) financial assistance by 
the FSLIC is necessary to prevent the default of 
Windom and to facilitate the Merger with [United], 
and (2) the amount of such assistance, to be provided 
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the 
proposed Assistance Agreement, would not exceed 
the amount reasonably necessary to save the cost of 
liquidating Windom through a receivership accom- 
panied by the payment of insurance of accounts....” 

34. The FHLBB Resolution recognized that the 
merger would result in goodwill, providing that 
_ United 


shall furnish an analysis, accompanied by a 
concurring option from its independent public 
accountants, satisfactory to the Supervisory 
Agent and to the Office of Examinations and 


21 


Supervisions, which (i) specifically describes as of 
the closing date, any intangible assets, including 
goodwill or the discounts and premiums arising 
from the acquisition to be recorded on [United’s] 
consolidated books; and (ii) substantiates the 
reasonableness and conformity with regulatory 
requirements of the amounts attributed to intan- 
gible assets, including goodwill, and the discounts 
and premiums and the related amortization 
periods and methods.... 


The conditions referred to in the FHLBB Resolution 
were satisfied by Winstar and United. 

35. Also as part of the inducement for the merger, 
FHLBB set forth its commitment regarding the 


_ accounting treatment to be given to supervisory 


goodwill in a separate forbearance letter to United’s 
Board of Directors. That forbearance letter confirms 
the parties’ understanding that: 


For purposes of reporting to [FHLBB], the value 
of any intangible assets resulting from accounting 
for the merger in accordance with the purchase 
method may be amortized by [United] over a 
period not to exceed 35 years by the straight-line 
method .... 


36. The forbearance letter also confirmed that 
United may book the $1,950,000 cash contribution 
from FSLIC “as a direct credit to its net worth.” 

37. The supervisory merger between United and 
Windom was consummated on July 12, 1984, in 
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in 
the agreements described above. Under the merger 
Winstar paid out of its pocket $2 million to acquire 
Windom through its merger with United. The 
resulting institution became United. 


22 


38. Under the Assistance Agreement FSLIC con- 
tributed $1,950,000 in cash. FSLIC ultimately paid 
$3,694,499 as its contribution based on Windom’s 
aggregate negative net worth. 

39. In reliance upon FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s express 
agreements concerning the use of purchase method 
accounting, the assets and liabilities of Windom were 
adjusted to fair market value at the time of the 
supervisory merger, and the resulting excess of 
liabilities over assets was recorded on United’s books 
as supervisory goodwill to be included in capital and 
amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of 35 
years. The amount of supervisory goodwill ultimately 
recorded by United as a result of the acquisition of 
Windom was $10,654,419. United also included the 
FSLIC cash contribution of $1,950,000 as capital. In 
financial reports filed with FSLIC and FHLBB since 
the supervisory merger, United has consistently 
booked supervisory goodwill as an asset included in 
capital for regulatory purposes, in accordance with, 
and in reliance upon, FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s express 
agreements. United has also consistently amortized 
the supervisory goodwill over a period of 35 years on 
a straight line basis, in accordance with the agree- 
ments. Prior to the enactment of FIRREA, neither 
FSLIC nor FHLBB ever objected to United’s 
treatment of supervisory goodwill. 

40. FSLIC and FHLBB benefited enormously from 
the use of supervisory goodwill in connection with the 
supervisory merger of United and Windom. At tie 
time of the merger, the fair market value of 
Windom’s liabilities far exceeded that of its assets by 
$14.3 million. Liquidating Windom at that time would 
have cost FSLIC considerably more than $143 
million, due to resolution costs such as brokerage fees 
and holding costs. Moreover, if the purchase method 


23 


of accounting for the supervisory merger had not 
been used and FSLIC and FHLBB had been required 
to provide tangible financial assistance to Winstar and 
United at pre-1981 levels, it would have cost FSLIC 
and FHLBB approximately $11 million to induce and 
arrange the supervisory merger. 

41. After the merger with Windom, United’s 
tangible net worth (i.e., exclusive of supervisory 
goodwill) was approximately negative $6.7 million. 
Obviously the purchase method of accounting for the 
proposed merger was integral to Winstar and United. 
Had Winstar and United not been permitted to 
record on United’s books supervisory goodwill in the 
amount by which Windom’s liabilities exceeded the 
fair market value of its assets, their acquisition of 


‘Windom on the financial terms proposed in their bid 


would have rendered United insolvent and subject to 
liquidation by FSLIC and FHLBB. Winstar and 
United would not have entered into such a transac- 
tion. Nor would they have made a proposal or entered 
into a transaction for the acquisition of Windom that 
did not include a lengthy amortization period in which 
to return Windom to profitability and to gradually 
replace the supervisory goodwill with tangible assets. 
Thus, Winstar’s willingness to form United and to 
acquire Windom on the financial terms proposed in 
the bid, and Winstar’s willingness to invest $2 million 
in United, were absolutely conditioned on FHLBB’s 
and FSLIC’s agreement to permit United to report 
supervisory goodwill as an asset included in capital 
for regulatory purposes and to amortize that super- 
visory goodwiil over a 35-year period. Absent the 
specified accounting treatment, Winstar and United 
either would have insisted upon receiving more than 
$5,644,500 in tangible financial assistance from FSLIC 
or would have withdrawn the offer. In order to 


24 


maintain United’s tangible capital at 3 percent of 
liabilities, the regulatory minimum prevailing at the 
time, FSLIC would have had to contribute $15.8 
million in cash or other tangible financial assistance. 

42. In 1988 Winstar purchased additional common 
stock of United for an additional $800,000. Winstar 
would not have made this investment in the absence 
of the United States’ agreement to the specified 
accounting treatment for goodwill, or if Winstar or 
United had foreseen that the government would 
renege on that agreement. 

43. Winstar and United have complied in good faith 
with all the terms and conditions of the agreements 
relating to the supervisory merger and have other- 
wise fully performed their undertakings in connection 
therewith. 

44. Since the acquisition of Windom by Winstar and 
United, the institution’s financial position has greatly 
improved. As of September 30, 1989 it would have 
cost approximately $13.2 million to liquidate United, 
more than $1 million less than the estimated $14.3 
million cost to liquidate Windom before the merger. 

45. FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s contractual promises, 
for which Winstar and United provided substantial 
consideration and on which Winstar and United 
detrimentally relied in fully performing their obliga- 
tions under their agreements with FSLIC and 
FHLBB, entitle United to record supervisory good- 
will arising from the above-described supervisory 
merger as an asset included in capital for purposes of 
regulatory capital requirements. Winstar aad 
United’s contract rights arising out of the above- 
described agreements with FSLIC and FHLBB 
constitute property within the meaning of the Fifth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution. 


25 
FIRREA 


46. FIRREA was signed into law by President 
Bush on August 9, 1989. Section 301 of FIRREA 
establishes OTS as an office in the Department of the 
Treasury. Section 301 also establishes the position of 
the Director of OTS, who shall be subject to the 
general oversight of the Secretary of the Treasury, 
except that the Secretary may not intervene in any 
matter or proceeding before the Director unless 
otherwise provided by law. The Director is the chief 
regulator of the thrift industry, empowered by 
FIRREA to conduct examinations, proscribe regula- 
tions, and issue orders as necessary to insure the safe 


and sound operation of thrifts. 


47. Section 301 of FIRREA requires the Director of 
OTS to promulgate final regulations establishing 
minimum capital requirements for federally insured 
thrifts. These minimum capital requirements became 
effective December 7, 1989, and require federally 
insured thrifts to: 


(a) maintain “tangible capital,” which excludes 
supervisory goodwill, in an amount not less than 
1.5 percent of the thrift’s assets; 

(b) maintain “core capital,” as defined in the 
statute, in an amount not less than 3 percent of 
the thrift’s assets; and 

(c) maintain “risk-based capital” in an amount not 
materially less than that required by the 
Comptroller of the Currency for national banks. 


48. FIRREA provides that “tangible capital” shall 
not include supervisory goodwill, and that only 
limited amounts of “core capital” may be made up of 
supervisory goodwill. Prior to January 1, 1992, the 
amount of supervisory goodwill includable in core 


capital may not exceed 1.5 percent of total assets. 
Thereafter, the amount of supervisory goodwill (as a 
percentage of assets) includable in core capital 
declines each year, in accordance with the following 
schedule: 


January 1, 1991, to December 


31, 1992— 1.0 percent 
January 1, 1993, to December 

31, 1993— 0.75 percent 
January 1, 1994, to December 

31, 1994— 0.375 percent 
BROSGEEE acocccccoscsenscsesusenl 0 percent 


For purposes of the minimum capital requirements, 
supervisory goodwill must be amortized over a period 
not to exceed 20 years. 

49. FIRREA also requires the Director of OTS to 
enforce the following sanctions against federally 
insured thrifts that do not meet the minimum capital 
standards promulgated under FIRREA: 


(a) After January 1, 1991, the Director must 
prohibit the asset growth of any federally 
insured thrift not in compliance with regulatory 
capital standards, except that the Director may 
approve a “limited growth exception” upon 
specified conditions. In addition, the Director 
may restrict the asset growth of any such thrift 
at any time prior to January 1, 1991. 

(b) No later than January 6, 1990, the Director 
must require thrifts that do not meet minimum 
capital standards under FIRREA to submit a 
plan that (1) addresses the thrift’s need for 
increased capital under FIRREA; (2) describes 
the manner in which the thrift will increase its 
capital to achieve the minimum capital stand- 
ards; (3) specifies types and levels of activities 


27 


the thrift will engage in; (4) requires any 
increase in assets to be accompanied by 
specified increases in tangible and risk-based 
capital; and (5) is acceptable to the Director. 
The Director must treat any material failure to 
comply with such a plan as an unsafe and 
unsound practice. 

(c) After January 1, 1991, the Director must 
require federally insured thrifts that do not 
meet minimum capital standards under FIR- 
REA to comply with a capital directive which 
may include restrictions on the payment of 
dividends and on compensation, as the Director 
determines to be appropriate. FIRREA per- 
mits, but does not require, the Director to 
exempt thrifts from receipt of a capital directive 
in certain circumstances. 

50. The Director may impose other sanctions on 

federally insured thrifts that do not meet minimum 
capital standards promulgated under FIRREA: 


(a) The Director, in his discretion, may treat any 
thrift’s failure to maintain capital at minimum 
regulatory levels as an unsafe or unsound 
practice subjecting the thrift to a range of 
further actions by the Director, including, 
among other things, issuance of cease and desist 
orders, appointment of a conservator or re- 
ceiver, and suspension or removal of officers 
and directors. 

(b) Such thrifts also must notify the Director of the 
proposed addition of any individual tu the board 
of directors or of the employment of any 
individual as a senior executive officer of the 
thrift 30 days before such addition or employ- 
ment becomes effective, and the Director may 


28 


before the end of that 30 days disapprove the 
addition or employment. 


51. Federally insured thrifts that do not meet 
minimum capital standards are characterized by 
FIRREA as “troubled institutions” and beginning 
February 4, 1990, will be prohibited form accepting 
brokered deposits subject only to a case-by-case 
waiver by the FDIC. 


OTS CAPITAL REGULATION 


52. On November 8, 1989, OTS published minimum 
capital regulations (“OTS capital regulation”) pur- 
suant to FIRREA. The OTS capital regulation 
became effective on December 7, 1989. 

53. In accordance with FIRREA, the OTS capital 
regulation establishes a minimum “tangible” capital 
requirement of 1.5 percent of total assets and a 
minimum “core” capital requirement of 3 percent of 
total assets. Supervisory goodwill cannot be counted 
as “tangible” capital at all, and can be counted as 
“core” capital only in accordance with the phase-out 
schedule set forth in FIRREA (see paragraph 48 
above). 

54. FIRREA does not require that supervisory 
goodwill be excluded from capital for purposes of 
determining compliance with minimum “risk-based” 
capital requirements. Nonetheless, the OTS capital 
regulation permits the inclusion of supervisory good- 
will in capital for purposes of the minimum “risk- 
based” capital requirement only in accordance with 
the phase-out schedule set forth in FIRREA for 
determining compliance with the minimum “core” 
capital requirement (see paragraph 48 above). 

55. Apart from the requirements and restrictions 
imposed by FIRREA on. federally insured thrift 


institutions that fail to meet minimum capital require- 
ments, the OTS capital regulation mandates a variety 
of additional consequences. For example, in addition 
to submitting a capital plan for achieving compliance 
with the minimal capital requirements, a non- 
complying thrift must, under the OTS capital regula- 
tion, certify that while the plan is under review by 
OTS, it will not (absent OTS approval) (1) grow 
beyond net interest credited, (2) make any capital 
distributions, or (3) act inconsistently with any other 
limitations on activities established by statute, regula- 
tion, or by OTS in supervisory guidance. If a plan is 
not approved by OTS, the submitting thrift “shall 
immediately and without any further action” refrain 
from increasing its assets beyond the amount held on 
the day it receives notice of the disapproval and 
comply with any other restrictions or limitations set 
forth in OTS’s written disapproval of the plan. The 
OTS capital regulation further provides that OTS 
may, “through enforcement proceedings or other- 
wise,” require any thrift that fails to meet any of its 
regulatory capital requirements to take one or more 
of the following corrective actions: 


(a) increase the amount of its regulatory capital to 
a specified level or levels’ 

(b) convene a meeting or meetings with the OTS 
supervision staff for the purpose of accomplish- 
ing the objectives of this section; 

(c) reduce the rate of earnings that may be paid on 
savings accounts; | 
(d) limit the receipt of deposits to those made to 

existing accounts; 

(e) cease or limit the issuance of new accounts of 
any or all classes or categories, except in 
exchange for existing accounts; 


30 


(f) cease or limit lending or the making of a 
particular type or category of loan; 

(g) cease or limit the purchase of loans or the 
making of specified other investments; 

(h) limit operational expenditures to specified 
levels; 

(i) increase liquid assets and maintain such in- 
creased liquidity at specified levels; or 

(j) take such other action or actions as the Director 
may deem necess y or appropriate for the 
safety and soundness of the savings association, 
or depositors or investors in the savings 
association. 


On or after January 1, 1991, these restrictions, “and 
any other restrictions the Director [of OTS] deter- 
mines appropriate,” may be included in a “capital 
directive” issued by the Director against a non- 
complying thrift. Finally, according to the OTS capital 
regulation, OTS must treat as an unsafe and unsound 
practice “any material failure by a savings association 
to comply with any plan, regulation, written agree- 
ment undertaken or order or directive issued to 
comply with the requirements of [the capital 
regulation].” 

56. In “Thrift Bulletin 36,” now effective, OTS 
specified that acceptance of a capital plan submitted 
by a non-complying thrift will be predicated on 
certain additional stringent conditions, including 
among others: 


(a) The management and the board of directors 
must execute an operating agreement which 
may provide, among other things, that if 
specific targets within the plan are not met or 
the thrift takes any action that does not 
comport with the plan, certain activities will be 


31 


significantly restricted, a consent to merge 
agreement will be executed, or management 
and the board of directors will resign. 

(b) The board of directors and senior management 
for the thrift must file an amendment, accept- 
able to the OTS District Director, to the capital 
plan within 15 days following an event or 
circumstance that materially affects the validity 
of the capital plan or its underlying assump- 
tions. At a minimum, the capital plan must be 
reviewed and revised as necessary on an annual 
basis. 

(c) The thrift must submit to the OTS District 
Director, within 20 days following the close of 
each calendar quarter, quarterly variance re- 
ports comparing actual capital to the targets 
established in the capital plan. Failure to file 
such variance reports shall constitute an unsafe 
and unsound practice. Variances that the Dis- 
trict Director deems to be material may be 
grounds for revoking acceptance of the capital 
plan. 


57. According to Thrift Bulletin 36, a thrift that 
fails to comply with any of its minimum capital 
requirements will be deemed to be in non-compliance 
upon “adoption” of the OTS capital regulation, rather 
than upon the rejection of any capital plan submitted 
by the thrift. 

58. Thrift Bulletin 36 recognizes that, apart from 
the specific restrictions set forth in FIRREA and the 
OTS capital regulation, there are a significant number 
of related OTS regulations, rules, and policy state- 
ments that limit or restrict a variety of essential 
business activities (e.g., payment of dividends, 
establishment of branches, receipt of Federal Home 
Loan Bank advances, investments in securities and 


32 


real estate), by thrifts that do not meet minimum 
capital requirements. Thrift Bulletin 36 requires that 
thrifts “request and receive approval of specific, 
express exemptions” from the operation of such 
related regulations “as part of the capital plan to be 
deemed in capital compliance.” 

59. Because of the provisions of FIRREA and the 
OTS capital regulation excluding supervisory goodwill 
from capital for regulatory reporting purposes, 
United cannot currently satisfy the minimum capital 
requirements established by FIRREA and the OTS 
regulation and cannot come into compliance with such 
requirements in the foreseeable future. 


COUNT I 


60. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 59 above. 

61. Winstar invested $2 million to acquire Windom 
in express reliance on the United States’ agreement 
that, for regulatory purposes, the supervisory good- 
will resulting from the acquisition of Windom was to 


be treated as an asset includable in the capital of 


United and amortized on a straight-line basis over a 
period not to exceed 35 years. Winstar later invested 
$800,000 in United in reliance on the same agreement. 
Also in reliance on the agreement, Winstar and 
United have operated and managed United since the 
merger, improving its financial position and greatly 
reducing the cost of liquidating United. 

62. The United States has breached its contract 
with Winstar and United by refusing to allow 
United’s supervisory goodwill to be treated as an 
asset included in the capital of that institution, and by 
refusing to allow that the supervisory goodwill be 
amortized over 35 years, for regulatory purposes. 


33 


63. Winstar and United are entitled to restitution in 
the amount of Winstar’s investment of $2.8 million, 
plus the return of all benefits conferred upon the 
government through plaintiffs’ purchase, operation, 
and management of Windom. Winstar and United 
currently estimate the value of such benefits, which is 
to be determined at trial, to exceed $1 million. 


COUNT II 


64. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 63 above. 

65. The parties’ agreement concerning the treat- 
ment of goodwill was an essential term and condition 
of the transaction, and was essential to the parties’ 
purpose of allowing Winstar and United a reasonable 
opportunity to turn Windom from a failing institution 
into a profitable venture. 

66. Winstar and United would not have agreed to 
acquire Windom in the absence of such accounting 
treatment, because United would have been left 
insolvent and because United would otherwise have 
been unable to manage itself without substantial 
regulatory oversight that would interfere with its 
business and prospects. 

‘ . The parties to the transaction could not 
reasonably have foreseen that Congress would enact 
legislation that would be construed to extinguish 
Winstar and United’s existing contract rights. 

68. FIRREA’s abrogation of the United States’ 
contractual agreements renders United hopelessly 
insolvent, frustrates the entire purpose of Winstar 
and United’s contract with the government for the 
acquisition of Windom, and deprives Winstar and 
United of the consideration for which they bargained. 


34 


69. Winstar and United are entitled to rescission of 
the transaction with the United States, and the 
return of Winstar’s investment of $2.8 million, plus 
the return of all benefits conferred upon the 
government through plaintiffs’ purchase, operation, 
and management of Windom. Winstar and United 
currently estimate the value of such benefits, which is 
to be determined at trial, to exceed $1 million. 


COUNT III 


70. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 69 above. 

71. The provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of United’s super- 
visory goodwill for purposes of satisfying minimum 
capital requirements constitute a repudiation and 
abrogation of Winstar and United’s contract rights, as 
described above, and effect a taking of Winstar and 
United’s property without just compensation, in 
violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. 

72. Winstar and United are entitled to just 
compensation in the amount of their investment of 
$2.8 million, plus the return of all benefits conferred 
upon the government through plaintiffs’ purchase, 
operation, and management of Windom. Winstar and 
United currently estimate the value of such benefits, 
which is to be determined at trial, to exceed $1 
million. 


COUNT IV 


73. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 72 above. 


35 


74. The provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of United’s super- 
visory goodwill in capital for purposes of satisfying 
the minimum capital requirements constitute a re- 
pudiation and abrogation of Winstar and United's 
contract rights, as described above, and effect a 
deprivation of Winstar and United’s property without 
due process of law, in violation of the Fifth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution. 

75. Winstar and United are entitled to monetary 
relief in the amount of their investment of $2.8 
million, plus the return of all benefits conferred upon 
the government through plaintiffs’ purchase, opera- 
tion, and management of Windom. Winstar and 
United currently estimate the value of such benefits, 


‘which is to be determined at trial, to exceed $1 


million. 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, Winstar and United respectfully 
ray: 
: a) That the Court award Winstar and United 
monetary relief in the amount of their investment of 
$2.8 million, plus the value of all benefits conferred 
upon the government through plaintiffs’ purchase, 
operation, and management of Windom. Winstar and 
United currently estimate the value of such benefits, 
which is to be determined at trial, to exceed $1 
million; 

(b) That the Court award Winstar and United their 
costs, attorney’s fees, and interest allowed by law; 
and 


36 


(c) That the Court grant such other and further 
relief as the law and evidence may justify and as the 
Court may deem just and proper. 


Respectfully submitted, 
Robert R. Vieth 


Attorney of Record for Plaintiffs 
WINSTAR CORPORATION and 
UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS 
BANK 


Of Counsel: 


Charles J. Cooper 

Michael A. Carvin 

McGUIRE, WOODS, BATTLE & BOOTHE 
The Army & Navy Club Building 

1627 Eye Street, N.W., Suite 1000 
Washington, D.C. 20006 

(202) 857-1700 


37 


Federal Home Loan Bank Board Memo 
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 


Inter-Office Communication 
DATE: March 14, 1984 


SUBJECT: Viability Analysis 
of Windom FS&LA, 
Windom, MN 
FHLBB No. 3058 


FROM: Kevin Aucello 
Financial Analyst, AED 


TO: Bob Brick 
Finanical Analuysis, MAD 


I have performed a viability analysis regarding the 
proposed acquisition of the subject association by 
Windom Holding Company of Windom, Minnesota. 


Relevant Assumptions 


1. Balance sheet date as of January 31, 1984 and a 
ten year horizon was used for the analysis. 


2. Purchase accounting is applied to the assets of 
Windom. The mortgage rate is 13.26%, the other 
loans rate is 13.13%. Goodwill is amortized over 40 
years. 


3. Cash up to the 5% of total assets will be invested 
at the average T-Bill rate. Cash above the 5% level 
will invested at a rate equal to the associations cost of 
money plus 250 basis points. 


4. New mortgages earning the market rate will be 
made equal to 80% of available liquidity. Two points 


38 39 


will be taken into income for each dollar of mortgages Results: (000’s omitted) 

originated. These mortgages will be ARMS with an 

assumed adjustment every five years. Year Total Net Net WW/Assets 
Assets Worth Income (%) 


5. The savings growth and future cost and invest- 


r $4 $— 7.6 

ment assumptions are those contained in the January as ae orn nase (1,450) 46 
market standard market scenario. 9 67,650 2,920 90 43 
41 

6. The initial composite cost of money is 11.25%. : Tom “rs te 40 
7. Th ti tio is 1.10%. 5 83,620 3,250 160 3.9 
Acquirer Assistance: : saan cae p . 
1. The acquirer will make a cash contribution of i) 115,260 4,850 560 4.2 
$2,800,000 at the time of acquisition. 10 125,070 5,540 690 44 


2. It is estimated that the resulting association will 
make dividend payments to the stockholders of: 


Year: 188 4@€ 6 £ F  e 
$ of Net 50 60 70 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 
Income 


$ in Thou- 0 140 150 150 160 250 340 450 560 690 
sands 


FSLIC Assistance: 


1. The FSLIC will make a cash contribution of 
$1,950,000 at the time of acquisition. 


2. The FSLIC will infuse cash at the time of 
acquisition sufficient to bring net worth to zero. 


40 


McGladrey Hendrickson & Pullen 
Certified Public Accountants 


May 10, 1984 


Mr. Harlan G. Halsne 
Supervisory Agent 

Federal Home Loan Bank Board 
907 Walnut Street 

Des Moines, lowa 50309 


RE: Accounting Treatment For the Merger of Win- 
dom Federal Savings and Loan Association into 
United Federal Savings Bank (an entity to be 
formed) 


Dear Mr. Halsne: 


As you are aware on May 3 and 4, 1984, Mr. E. Ted 
Yoch and Mr. Gregg Schneider, both of Rosewood 
Corporation, Mr. James Stephenson of the Faegre & 
Benson law firm in Minneapolis and myself met in 
Washington D.C. with members of the Federal 
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and the 
Office of the General Counsel. 


During the meeting we discussed the fact that 
perhaps a better approach to the accounting treat- 
ment for the assistance from FSLIC could be utilized. 
It was felt that rather than recording the entire 
amount of the assistance as a permanent increase in 
the net worth of United Federal Savings Bank it 
might be better to split the assistance between net 
worth and a reduction in the recorded goodwill. 


Accordingly, United Federal Savings Bank requests 
approval through this letter for recording the finan- 
cial assistance received from the Federal Savings and 


41 


Loan Insurance Corporation at the date of acquisition 
in the following manner: 


1. The amount of assistance applicable to specific 
scheduled loans in an amount totaling $1,950,000 to 
be recorded as a permanent increase in the net 
worth of United Federal Savings Bank. 


2. The balance of the assistance which will be an 
amount equal to the negative net worth of Windom 
Federal Savings and Loan Association at the date 
of closing to be recorded as a reduction of the 
goodwill recorded in connection with the formation 
of United Federal Savings Bank. 


If the accounting treatment requested herein is 


permitted, United Federal Savings Bank will have 


beginning net worth of $3,950,000 resulting from the 
$1,950,000 assistance from FSLIC and $2,000,000 
injected by Winstar Corporation. This will mean that 
United Federal Savings Bank will begin its opera- 
tions with an approximately 6.8% capital to asset 
ratio. It will also mean that the recorded goodwill at 
the date of acquisition will be reduced by the amount 
applicable to negative net worth which we estimate to 
be approximately $3,100,000, assuming that closing 
occurs prior to June 1, 1984. This will benefit United 
Federal Savings Bank’s future operations since the 
amortization of the goodwill over the 35 year period 
will be reduced. 


This request will modify the accounting treatment 
for the FSLIC assistance asked for in our letter 
dated December 6, 1983 to the attention of Ms. 


- Margaret M. Meagher, which was signed by Duane D. 


Taut, Partner. All other matters in the December 6, 
1983 letter will remain as stated. During our 


42 


discussion in Washington it was felt that this 
modification would hopefully not delay or present an 
impediment to the closing of this transaction at your 
earliest convenience. If you have any questions 


regarding this request, please do not hesitate to 
contact me. 


Very truly yours, 


Robert E. Hiller 
Partner 


Encl. 


ec: Mr. L. Ted Yoch 
Mr. Rohan J. Samaraweera 
Mr. Alan Hawkins 
Mr. Brian Vooght 


43 


Windom FS&LA 
Windom, Minnesota 
FHLBB No. 3058 


May 29, 1984 


FINANCIAL INFORMATION PRESENTATION 


Summary of Cost $Cash $ Present 
Alternatives Outlay Value 
Liquidation 8,830,000 12,336,000 
Winstar Corporation 5,211,000 5,211,000 
Liquidation 
Liquidation Assumptions 
1. Insured Savings $43,368,000 
2. Uninsured Savings 789,000 
3. Number of Insured Accounts 7,965 
4. Insurance Cost Per Account $25 
5. Receivership Life 3 year 
6. FSLIC Opportunity Cost | 10,28% 
7. Assets as of 1/31/84 49,200,000 
8. Net Worth as of 1/31/84 (3,061,037) 
9. Mortgage Market Yield 14.73% 
Cost of Liquidation $ Net $ Present 
Cash Value 
Outlay 
Payout Insured $43,368,000 $43,368,000 
Insurance Payment Cost 199,000 199,000 
Total Cash Outflow 43,567,000 43,567,000 


Recovery from Receivership 34,737,000 31,231,000 
Total Cost to FSLIC “B.830,000 12,336,000 


44 


Windom FS&LA 
Windom, Minnesota 
FHLBB No. 3058 


Costing Sheet 
($000) 


Proposal of Bidder: Winstar Corporation 
Date Prepared: May 29, 1984 


AED Analyst: Nancy Schaen 
MAD Analyst: Bob Brick 


Assistance: 


1. The FSLIC will make a cash contribution of $1,950 
at the time of acquisition. 


2. FSLIC will infuse cash at the time of acquisition 
sufficient to cover Windom’s negative net worth. 
(Net worth as of 4/30/84 equals -3,061 plus $200 for 
anticipated losses for two months to follow). 


3. The acquirer will make a cash contribution of 
$2,000 at the time of acquisition. 


4. It is estimated that the resulting association will 
make dividend payments to the acquiring stock- 
holders of: 


Year: 123 45 6 7 8 9 W 
$ of Net 50 60 70 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 
Income 


$ in Thou- 240 300 410 420 430 590 770 970 1220 1490 
sands 


Data for: April 1984 


Cost of Proposal: 
Cash Contribution 
Negative Net Worth 
Total Cost to FSLIC 


45 
Scenario: April 1984 


$ Net Cash $ Present 
Outlay Value 


1,950 1,950 
3,261 3,261 
5,211 5,211 


46 


Federal Home Loan Bank Board Memo 
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 


Inter-Office Communication 


DATE: May 30, 1984 


SUBJECT: Windom FS&LA 
Windom, MN 
FHLBB No. 3058 


FROM: Nancy Schaen 
Financial Analyst, AED 


TO: Bob Brick 
Financial Analyst, MAD 


Per your request I have performed a_ viability 
analysis regarding the proposed acquisition of the 
subject association by Winstar Corporation, a unitary 
holding company in Windom, Minnesota. 


Relevant Assumptions 


1. Balance sheet data as of April 30, 1984 was used as 
well as up-to-date costs and yields for the 
association. 


2. The mortgage discount rate at the time of the 
analysis is 14.73%. 


3. The April 1984 standard market rate scenario and 
a ten year horizon were used for the analysis. 


4. Goodwill is amortized over 35 years. © 


5. As per Winstar’s business plan, it was assumed the 
association will immediately sell $24,800 of their 
original mortgage portfolio and reinvest at higher 
yields. 


47 
Acquirer Assistance 


1. The acquirer will make a cash contribution of 
$2,000,000 at the time of acquisition. 


2. It is estimated that the resulting association will 
make dividend payments to the acquiring stock- 
holders of: 


Year: -eeauwse 6 ts 8 
$ of Net 50 60 70 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 


Income 


$ in Thou- 240 300 410 420 430 590 770 970 1220 1490 
sands 


' FSLIC Assistance 


1. The FSLIC will make a cash contribution of 
$1,950,000 at the time of acquisition. 


2. The FSLIC will infuse cash at closing sufficient to 
cover Windom’s negative net worth. 


Viability Results 


1. Total assets of Windom FS&LA as of 4/30/84 equal 
$49,200,000. 

2. Net income remains positive over the life of the 
analysis. 

3. New worth remains positive over the life of the 
analysis. 

4. The total assets, net worth, net income, and net 
worth to total liabilities figures are as follows: 


0 


($000 Omitted) ~ 

Net Worth/ 
Total Net Net Total 

Year Assets Worth Income Liabilities % 
55,080 3,950 — 7.73 
61,020 4,190 240 7.37 
67,260 4,380 200 6.97 
73,230 4,560 180 6.64 
79,110 4,840 280 6.52 
85,650 5,270 430 6.56 
92,840 5,860 590 6.74 
100,760 6,630 770 7.04 
109,470 7,600 970 7.46 
119,070 8820 1,220 8.00 
129,620 10,310 1,490 8.64 


ee eaonook WSN = 


——s 


48 


49 


Federal Home Loan Bank Board Memo 
Office of Examinations and Supervision 


Inter-Office Communication 
DATE: June 1, 1984 


SUBJECT: Windom FS&LA 
Windom, MN 
FHLBB No. 3058 
FSLIC-Assisted 
Conversion to a FSB, 
and Acquisition by 
Winstar, a Holding Company 


FROM: Robert J. Moore 


| TO: Joseph M. Arendes 


Assistant Director 


We have reviewed the materials forwarded with your 
memo of February 17, 1984 relative te the subject 
FSLIC-assisted conversion and acquisition. 


We concur with the opinion of the independent public 
accounting firm, McGladrey, Hendrickson & Co. (now 
McGladrey, Hendrickson & Pullen) that the purchase 
method of accounting is appropriate for the acquisi- 
tion of Windom. 


Further, we have no objection to the accounting 
forbearance outlined for purposes of reports to the 
FHLBB. 


Deputy Director 
Program/Administration 


OES:TH:njw 


50 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 
Office of Supervisory Agent * Eighth District 
MEMORANDUM 
DATE: June 28, 1984 


TO: JJ. Finn 
Secretary to the Board 


FROM: Harlan G. Halsne 
Supervisory Agent 


SUBJECT: S-Memorandum—Proposed Supervisory 
Conversion of: 


Windom FS&LA 
Windom, Minnesota 
Docket No. 3058 


from the Federal Mutual to Federal Stock Savings 
Bank Form of Organization 


The Merger of Windom FS&LA 
with 


United Federal Savings Bank, a de novo stock saving 
bank wholly-owned by: 


Winstar Corporation, a newly formed holding 
company 


1. Proposal 
Winstar Corporation (Winstar), a newly formed 


Minnesota Corporation, proposes to acquire Win- 
dom Federal Savings and Loan Association, 


51 


Windom, Minnesota (Windom). The transaction will 
involve the supervisory conversion of Windom 
Federal Savings and Loan Association from a 
federally-chartered mutual savings and loan asso- 
ciation to a federally-chartered stock savings bank. 
Following the conversion, Windom Federal Savings 
and Loan Association will be merged with United 
Federal Savings Bank (United FSB), a de novo 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Winstar. 


The Office of Examinations and Supervision (OES) 
has no supervisory objection to this proposal. The 
remainder of this memorandum will discuss its 
financial and supervisory aspects. 


_ IL. Condition of Failing Association—Windom 


FS&LA 


As of April 30, 1984, Windom’s assets totalled 
$49.2 million, with a-.deficit net worth of $3.1 
million. Insolvency resulted from both substan- 
tial operating losses and substantial actual or 
indicated losses on loans and real estate owned. 
Operating losses were incurred during the past 
several years due to (1) increased cost of 
savings resulting from a shift in savings capital 
to higher rate accounts; (2) excessive levels of 
borrowed money resulting from the need to 
fund nationwide loan participation commit- 
ments; and (3) falling yields resulting from high 
levels of non- or low-earning assets. Actual or 
indicated losses on loans and real estate owned 
were incurred or recognized over the past 
several rears primarily as a result of deficient 
underwriting of major nationwide participation 
loans. The following table summarizes Windom’s 
relevant financial history: 


52 


SEMIANNUAL DATA 
(in thousands) 


Quarterly 
Period Ended Semiannual Periods Ended 
(in thousands) (in thousands) 
3-31-84] 12-31-83] 6-30-83) 12-31-82] 6-30-82] 12-31-41 
Assets $47,711] $49,367] $49,176) $49,724) $49,562] $46,765 
Net Worth $(2,963)| $(2,635)| $(1,648) $442} $1,161] $1,327 
Net Woth/Assets (6.2%) (564%)| (3.3%) I% 2.3% 2.45% 
Yield on Invest- 
ments 10.1%| 10.0%) 108%) 11.2%) 124%) 124% 
Cost of Money 106%| 113%) 110%) 123%) 124%) 11.7% 
Spread (5%) (L3%)| (.2%)| (9%) 0} 1% 
Net Income $(32%)| $(987)) $(2,090)| $(719)} $(166)) $11) 
Savings $44,514] $43,870) $42,085] $36,964) $35,366] $33,937 
Advances and 
Borrowed 
Money $6,000} $7,000) $8,600) $12,205) $12,746) $11,157 
Specific 
Reserves: 
Repossessed 
Property $1,290] $1,290] $1,130 =) 0 0 
Mortgage 
Loans $162 $133 $370 0 0 0 
Scheduled Items/ 
Assets NA 5.B% 7.0% 8AM 5.1% 3A% 


53 


Windom’s existing problem assets are briefly 
summarized as follows: 


A. Perkins Road Development, Inc.—122 Unit 


Ramada Inn—Stillwater, Oklahoma—Loan to 
Facilitate Sale of Real Estate Owned 


Perkins Road Development, Inc. (Perkins) was 
formed by Windom and three other origina! loan 
participants to dispose of a 122 unit motel 
acquired by deed in lieu of foreclosure. Perkins 
sold the property in 1982. The sale involved 
below market rate financing, deferred equity 
contributions and other favorable terms. As of 
December 31, 1983, Perkins’ investments total- 
led $3,908,959. Windom’s share equals 
$1,200,113. There is no current appraisal of this 
property. As of June 1, 1984, payments were 
$245,000 in arrears. The buyers have invested 
$510,000 equity in the project. 


. Carson, Inc.—Macienda Taos—13 Unit Con- 


dominium Project—Taos, New Mexico—Real 
Estate Owned 


Carson, Inc. was formed by Windom and six 
other original loan participants to complete and 
market a 13 unit condominium acquired by deed 
in lieu of foreclosure. Total investment in this 
project as of July 31, 1983 totalled $4,681,676. A 
May, 1983 appraisal estimated value at 
$1,750,000 indicating a $2,931,575 loss. Windom’s 
share of this loss equals $1,064,187. A specific 
reserve was established in this amount in June, 
1983. 


od 


C. Tonapah, Nevada—30 Townhouses—Real 
Estate Owned 


This property was acquired by deed in lieu of 
foreclosure in October, 1982. The association’s 
75 percent interest totalled $1,217,378 as of 
July 31, 1983. The most recent appraisal 
indicated a loss of $159,878 for Windom. A 
specific reserve was established in this amount 
in September, 1983. 


D. Other Major Scheduled Loans 


Windom’s interest in five (5) other major 
scheduled loans and real estate owned totalled 
$1,926,781 as of July 31, 1983. Appraisals 
indicated losses totalling $74,880 on two of the 
projects. Specific reserves have been 
established in the amount of $66,200. 


III. Condition of Industry in Des Moines Bank 


IV. 


District 
There are 199 insured institutions in the Eighth 


FHLBB District. Assets of these insured institu- 
tions totalled $43.6 billion as of March 31, 1984. 


As of March 31, 1984, OES projects that eight (8) 
Eighth District insured institutions, representing 
assets of .8 billion dollars of 1.8 percent of total 
Eighth District insured assets, will be insolvent 
within the next twelve months. 


Supervisory History 


Primary supervisory concerns in Windom’s most 
recent regular and special examination reports 


55 


were directed to (a) poor operating results and 
net worth position and (b) serious nationwide 
participation loan underwriting deficiencies which 
resulted in indicated losses and high levels of low- 
and non-earning assets. The need for close moni- 
toring became apparent in December, 1981 when 
a regular examination first disclosed large in- 
creases in scheduled items and numerous par- 
ticipation loan underwriting deficiencies. A subse- 
quent follow-up examination conducted in July, 
1982 disclosed the possibility of significant indi- 
cated losses and a rapidly declining net worth 
position. Upon receipt of this follow-up report, 
supervision immediately arranged a meeting with 
Windom’s Board. The discussion at the meeting 
focused on the possibility of Windom’s continued 
existence in light of operating results and possible 
indicated losses. The association did not agree 
that the indicated losses were warranted. They 
were given until December, 1982 to support their 
contention. The Board was apprised of what ac- 
tions would be necessary should the association’s 
position continue to deteriorate. It was suggested 
that the Board begin to consider all options. 


The next development took place in January, 1983 
when a review of the December, 1982 monthly 
report disclosed significantly greater operating 
losses than anticipated and a consequent potential 
for insolvency by March, 1983. When contacted, 
management indicated that the December results 
were due to extraordinary adjustments and that 
1983 losses would be manageable. In early 1983, 
Supervision assisted Windom’s attempt to obtain 
net worth certificates. However, during March, 
1983, it was determined that insolvency could not 
be avoided even with net worth certificates. 


56 


Operations had continued to decline, and the 
receipt of appraisals confirmed the existence of 
indicated losses on association real estate owned 
and participation loans. The association became 
insolvent in March, 1983 upon the establishment 
of certain requested specific reserves. Windom’s 
Board signed a Consent Resolution on March 11, 
1983. The resolution provided, among other 
things, that the FSLIC and Supervision could 
negotiate for Windom, and that the Windom 
Board would approve any resulting plan of 
merger, consolidation, or transfer of assets and 
liabilities. Supervision worked towards an unas- 
sisted merger until additional indicated losses on 
association assets made such a_ solution 
impossible. 


The following table provides information regard- 
ing Windom’s recent examination report ratings: 


Composite CRA 


Date Exam Type Evaluation Evaluation 


8-15-83 Special Limited 40 3 
2-24-83 Supervisory 40 3 
7-29-82 Special Limited NA NA 
12-07-81 Supervisory 20 3 


Since the Special Limited Examination dated 


August 16, 1983, Windom has continued to incur 
substantial operating losses primarily as a result of 
high levels of low- and non-earning assets and the 
continued shift in savings capital to higher rate 
accounts. 


V. Pledged Accounts 


There are no pledged accounts at Windom. 


57 


VI. Condition of Acquirer—Winstar Corporation, 


Roseville, Minnesota 


A. General 

Winstar Cerporation is a newly formed cor- 
poration, which, if its application for acquisi- 
tion of Windom is approved, will become a 
holding company. Winstar will be capitalized 
with $2,250,000 in cash, of which $1,750,000 
will be borrowed from Norwest Bank, Min- 
neapolis. The balance of $500,000 will be 
contributed by the five principals. The 
$1,750,000 to be borrowed from Norwest will 
be secured by 100 percent of the capital stock 
of United FSB issued at the time of its 
organization. Winstar principals will person- 
ally guarantee $500,000 of this debt. Interest 
will be at prime plus 1 percent, adjustable 
annually. Repayment will be according to a 
“Minimum Principal Debt Reduction Sched- 
ule”. (See Exhibit S-14). Norwest reserves the 
right to alter the terms and conditions of the 
credit at each annual renewal. 


Winstar will initially capitalize United FSB by 
purchasing its stock for $2,000,000 cash. 


Winstar will pay a $100,000 brokerage fee to 
Newlin Bank Sales in connection with the 
acquisition of Windom. The fee, at 5 percent of 
sales price, involves an assumption by Winstar 
of a finder’s fee obligation of Douglas Kratz. 
Kratz’s obligation arose out of a written 
agreement between Newlin Bank Sales and 
himself to pay a 5 percent sales price finder’s 
fee upon the consumation of any purchase of 
any institutions brokered by Newlin Bank 


58 


Sales. Newlin Bank Sales had originally presented 
the Windom opportunity to Kratz. Kratz would 
have been obligated to pay the fee upon consuma- 
tion of purchase. Kratz, however, chose not to 
pursue this investment. Kratz presented the 
Windom opportunity to the organizers of Winstar 
on the condition that if the transaction was 
consumated, Winstar would pay the $100,000 
Newlin fee, plus a $15,000 fee to Kratz. These fees 
will be paid entirely from Winstar funds. No fees 
will be paid from FSLIC funds infused into the 
institution as FSLIC assistance. We have no 
objection to the payment of these fees. 


The five (5) principals of Winstar have a combined 
net worth exceeding 14 million dollars. This 
amount consists primarily of real estate equities 
and stock in closely-held corporations. The corpo- 
rations are involved in mortgage banking ac- 
tivities and in real estate management, finance, 
development, and syndication. Net worth of the 
principals are thus concentrated in non-liquid real 
estate and real estate related investments. Net 
income of the principals ranged from $82,000 to 
$131,750 and aggregated $505,000 in 1983. 


One of the principals of Winstar, E. Ted Yoch, 
was director of Northern Federal Savings and 
Loan Association, Minneapolis, Minnesota, from 
1978 to 1981. Northern was the subject of a 
supervisory merger in 1983. Mr. Yoch’s selection 
as a director was pursuant to a supervisory 
request that Northern replace certain board 
members with outsiders. The selection of Mr. 
Yoch was approved by Supervision. We have no 
objection to Mr. Yoch as a principal in the 
acquisition of Windom. 


59 


B. Business Plan 
Winstar has prepared a comprehensive busi- 
ness plan for United FSB. (See Exhibit S-13). 
The plan meets the content requirements of 
SP-24, and appears to present a reasonable 
formuia for the initial operation of United 
FSB. We have no supervisory objection to the 
business plan. In addition to reviewing the 
business plan, we have reviewed the viability 
analysis prepared by the Analysis and Evalua- 
tions Division FSLIC. In our opinion, the 
association will be viable following conversion. 


C. Holding Company Act Standards 


We find no statutory basis for disapproval of 
the application of Winstar for approval to 
become a savings and loan holding company 
through its acquisition and control of Windom. 
Pursuant to Section 584.4(c) of the Holding 
Company Regulations, this office, in conjunc- 
tion with the Office of the FLIC, has 
reviewed the financial and managerial re- 
sources and future prospects of Winstar. We 
have no reason to believe that the proposed 
acquisition of Windom would be deterimental 
to the savings accountholders of Windom or 
the insurance risk of FSLIC. 


D. Change of Control Issues 


Winstar is a de novo holding company. There 
are no change of control issues or require- 
ments in connection with this proposal. 


E. Community Revinvestment Act 


Windom’s recent examination reports indicate 
satisfactory CRA ratings. The business plan 
prepared by Winstar for United FSB appears 


60 


to establish community reinvestment goals and 
policies which would, if adhered to, provide 
continued CRA compliance. 


VII. Personnel Issues 


Winstar proposes to retain an advisory board at 
the Windom United FSB office to consist of 
John Gelle, Ted M. Weeks, August W. Lerner, 
Roger L. Benson, J.A. Dick and Frank C. 
Jungas, all current Windom Board members. 
The advisory board will meet monthly. Each 
member will receive $100 per meeting attended. 
The advisory board’s responsibilities will be to 
generate goodwill and new business, participate 
in planning meetings, and give advice on 
borrower credit worthiness, marketing strategy 
and history of troubled loans. Each member will 
serve at the pleasure of the Board of United 
FSB. 


The principal managment change will be the 
addition of Thomas C. Daniel as Chief Executive 
Officer of United FSB. Winstar entered into an 
employment contract with Mr. Daniel on June 1, 
1984. (See Exhibit S-9(e). We have reviewed this 
contract and find that it conforms to the 
requirements of Sections 563.39 and 571.5(d)(4) 
of the Insurance Regulations, and Section 
545.122 of the Federal Regulations. Mr. Daniel 
apparently has 12 years experience in various 
phases of finance and banking. We have no 
objection to the selection of Mr. Daniel as Chief 
Executive Officer of the proposed United FSB. 


FSLIC has agreed to allow United FSB to be 
governed by a Board of Directors of between 
6 and 15 members. This is below the 


61 


standard seven (7) member minimum charter 
requirement of Section 552.3. We have no 
objection. 


VIII. Stipulations 


A. Requested Dividend Restriction Waiver 


Winstar has requested that United FSB be 
allowed to pay dividends from available net 
income as follows: 


1984 50% 
1985 50% 
1986 60% 
1987 70% 
1988 60% 


1989 and after 50% 


The Analysis and Evaluations Division of FSLIC 
has estimated that with the requested dividend 
restriction waiver, the dividends from United 
FSB wil permit Winstar to meet its debt service 
requirements. FSLIC has agreed to the re- 
quested dividend forbearance. We have no objec- 
tion to this request. We recommend that the 
Resolution limit payment of dividends to 50 
percent of available net income, but that the 
limitation be waived during the years and for the 
percentages requested by Winstar. The for- 
bearance letter attached at Exhibit S-12, 
provides the waiver of the dividend restriction 
for the years requested by Winstar. 


B. Net Worth Maintenance Restriction 


We recommend that Winstar be required to 
maintain net worth at the level required by 
Section 563.13(b) of the Insurance Regulations 


62 


for institutions insured 20 years or more 
without regard to any net worth assistance 
for which United FSB may qualify, and to 
infuse additional equity if necessary. We also 
recommend that United FSB be required to 
waive any right to net worth assistance 
under the net worth certificate program. 


C. Stock Issuance and Transfer Restriction 


We recommend that Winstar and United 
FSB be required to stipulate to certain 
stock issuance and transfer restrictions. 
Specifically, that, for the term of the 
Assistance Agreement or three years from 
the date of the merger, whichever is longer: 


1. Winstar stipulates to maintain control 
over United FSB and to not sell, pledge 
(except as security for initial acquisitions 
to Norwest Bank, Minneapolis, Min- 
nesota), transfer, or otherwise dispose of 
United FSB stock, unless the Corpora- 
tion gives its written consent. 


2. United FSB stipulates that it will not 
issue stock, stock options or warrants to 
any person other than Winstar without 
the Corporation’s written consent. 


XI. 


63 


In a letter dated June 1, 1984 to Regional 
Director Arendes, Deputy Director Moore stated 


that purchase accounting was appropriate for the 
transaction. 


Service Corporation Issues 


There are no service corporation issues. The 
association wholly-owns Azure, Inc., and partially 
owns two other service corporations. The ac- 
tivities of these three corporations are limited to 
the salvage of Windom problem assets. 


Forbearances 


In addition to their request for a waiver of the 
dividend restrictions for 1986, 1987 and 1988 as 
discussed above, United FSB has requested 
three standard forbearances presently approved 
by the Bank Board in connection with superv- 
visory mergers. A copy of the forbearance 
language is attached at Exhibit S-12. We have no 


objection to the granting of these additional 
forbearances. 


/s/ Harlan G. Halsne 
HARLAN G. HALSNE - 
Supervisory Agent 


X. Accounting Issues Enclosures 


The independent accounting fire of McGladrey, I concur: 

Hendrickson and Company stated in a December 

6, 1983 letter to FSLIC that the proposed /s/ Joseph M. Arendes 
acquisition requires the use of the purchase JOSEPH M. ARENDES 

method of accounting, and that loan discounts and Assistant Director for Regional Operations 
intangible asets will be amortized under regula- 

tory accounting principles. 


I concur: 


/s/ William J. Schilling 


WILLIAM J. SCHILLING 
Director, OES 


64a 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting: 


I CERTIFY that hereto annexed are true copies of 
documents described below made from records of the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which records are 
in the official custody of the Secretary to said Board 
and are on file in its offices at 1700 G Street, 
Northwest, Washington in the District of Columbia, 
to wit: 


Copy of Resolution No. 84-363, adopted by the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board on July 6, 1984. 


In testimony whereof, J.J. Finn Secretary to the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Boad have hereunto 
caused the Seal of said Board to be affixed and my 
name subscribed hereto, in the District of Colum- 
bia, this 6th day of July, 1984 


/s/ J.J. Finn 
Secretary to the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board 


THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


65 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


Acquisition of Windom Federal Savings 
and Loan Association 
No. 84-363 
Date: July 6, 1984 


Recitals 


WHEREAS, the board of directors of Windom 
Federal Savings and Loan Association, Windom, 
Minnesota (“Windom”), has adopted, by at least a 
two-thirds vote of the board, a plan of merger 
evidenced by a Combination Agreement and Plan of 
Merger (“Merger Agreement”) (a copy of which is in 
the Minute Exhibit File), pursuant to which Windom 
will merge with and into United Federal Savings 
Bank, (“Savings Bank”), a proposed federal stock 
savings bank; and 


WHEREAS, Winstar Corporation, a Minnesota cor- 
poration (“Winstar” or “Applicant”), has applied to 
the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 
(“FSLIC”), pursuant to § 408 of the National Housing 
Act, as amended, (the “Act”), 12 U.S.C. § 1730 (1982), 
for prior written approval to acquire control of 
Windom through the merger of Windom with and into 
Savings Bank, a proposed federal stock savings bank 
to be organized pursuant to § 5(p) of the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended, (“HOLA”), 12 
U.S.C. § 1464(p) (1982), the stock of which is to be 
purchased and held by Winstar, and the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board (“Bank Board”), as operating 
head of the FSLIC, has considered the Holding 
Company Application and accompanying materials of 
Applicant (hereafter referred to as the “Application”); 
and 


66 


WHEREAS, Applicant, as the organizer of Savings 
Bank, has applied to the Bank Board for approval of 
the merger of Windom into Savings Bank (“Merger”); 
and 


WHEREAS, The acquisition by Applicant of control 
of Windom and its successor Savings Bank (“Acquisi- 
tion”) and the Merger are conditioned upon the 
execution of an Assistance Agreement by and among 
Winstar, Savings Bank, and the FSLIC, under which 
the FSLIC will provide certain financial assistance 
and indemnification to Savings Bank to facilitate the 
Merger; and 


WHEREAS, The Bank Board has considered pro- 
posed forms of the following documents: Plan of 
Organization, Application for Insurance of Accounts, 
Agreement for Operating Policies, Federal Stock 
Charter, Bylaws, Stockholders’ Consent to Action, 
Directors’ Consent to Action, Directors’ Resolutions, 
Stock Certificate, Combination Agreement and Plan 
of Merger, Assistance Agreement, Net Worth Mainte- 
nance Stipulation, Stock Transfer Stipulation, Stock 
Issuance Stipulation, Dividend Limitation Stipulation, 
Stipulation of Affiliate Status, and Stipulation 
restricting Securities Brokerage Activities; and 


WHEREAS, The Bank Board has considered memo- 
randa from its Office of Examinations and Supervi- 
sion (“S-Memo”), dated June 28, 1984, Office of the 
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 
(“A-Memo”), dated June 29, 1984, and Office of 
General Counsel (“L-Memo”), dated July 3, 1984, 
together with accompanying attachments and exhibits 
(copies of which memoranda are in the Minute 
Exhibit File), with respect to Windom: 


67 
Review of Record and Proceedings 


NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS RESOLVED That the 
Bank Board has reviewed, and considered the record 
before it regarding the financial condition of Windom 
and the proposed Acquisition transaction; and 


Exercise of Authority under § 5(p) of the HOLA 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board 
deems and finds that: 


(1) Pursuant to approvals given in this resolution 
for the provision of assistance to facilitate the 
merger of Windom with Savings Bank, for the 
purposes of § 5(p) of the HOLA, the FSLIC has 
contracted to provide assistance to Windom 
under § 406(f) of the Act; and 

(2) Severe financial conditions exist which threaten 
the stability of Windom, and authorization of 
the chartering of Savings Bank and the Merger 
of Windom into Savings Bank is likely to 
improve the financial condition of Windom; and 

(3) The Bank Board may authorize or require the 
chartering of Savings Bank and the Merger 
pursuant to § 5(p) of the HOLA; and 


Chartering of New Federal Stock Association 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That under the authority 
of § 5(p) of the HOLA, and as part of a plan to 
prevent the failure of Windom, pursuant to a proposal 
by the FSLIC, the organization and incorporation of 
Savings Bank as a new federal stock savings bank, in 
accordance with the proposed Plan of Organization 
and attached documents, is hereby approved, 
provided that: 


68 


. Applicant shall authorize the execution of all 
documents necessary to consummate such 
transactions in accordance with all applicable 
statutory and regulatory requirements, and the 
conditions imposed by this Resolution; 

. Applicant, shall, on or before the effective date 
of the Merger, submit to the FSLIC an 
executed Plan of Organization in the form, or 
substantially in the form, of the proposed Plan 
of Organization; 

. The issuance and sale of Savings Bank’s stock 
to Winstar in accordance with the terms of the 
proposed Plan of Organization as executed shall 
be completed promptly upon the issuance of a 
Federal Stock Charter to Savings Bank; 

. The stock issued by Savings Bank shall be 
evidenced by a certificate in the form of the 
proposed certificate, which is hereby approved, 
including a statement to the effect that the 
shares are restricted as to transfer until the 
expiration of the longer of the proposed 
Assistance Agreement or three full years 
following the Merger, except with prior written 
consent of the FSLIC; 

. Winstar shall, promptly after it has made full 
payment for Savings Bank’s stock, elect Sav- 
ings Bank’s board of directors, and the board of 
directors shall, promptly after being elected, 
appoint officers, approve the Merger and execu- 
tion of the Merger Agreement on behalf of 
Savings Bank, and approve the execution of an 
assistance agreement with the FSLIC, and take 
all other actions necessary to effect the organi- 
zation of Savings and the Merger; 

. The chief executive officer of the Applicant or 
other officer authorized to act for the Applicant 


69 


shall submit to the Bank Board, on behalf of the 
Applicant, promptly after completion of the 
acquisition of Savings Bank’s stock, a letter 
stating that the purchase was made solely for 
the purpose of investment and not with a view 
toward resale or distribution; that the Appli- 
cant was provided with all material information 
requested concerning Windom and the Acquisi- 
tion; that at the time of consummation of the 
Acquisition no material adverse change had 
occurred with respect to the business and 
operations of the Applicant since the date of the 
financial statements submitted with the Ap- 
plication; that the acquisition was consummated 
consistent with the pro forma statements of 
condition filed with the Application, or if any 
such change has occurred, stating in which 
respect there has been such a change or 
inconsistency with such statements of condition; 
that no expense has been incurred by Applicant 
in organization that is chargeable to Savings 
Bank and no such expense will be incurred; and 
that no funds were accepted for deposit by 
Savings Bank until organization of Savings 
Bank was completed in accordance with the 
Plan of Organization as executed and the terms 
of this resolution; 


. Savings Bank shall promptly file with the Bank 


Board a copy of the Plan of Organization on 
which its President shall have certified to the 
completion of the steps of organization as 
described therein; 


. Savings Bank shall promptly file with the Bank 


Board five copies of its charter and bylaws in 
the forms herein approved; 


. Savings Bank shall promptly file a Stock 


Issuance Stipulation with the Bank Board 


70 


stipulating that, for the longer of the term of 
the Assistance Agreement or three full years 
following the Merger, no voting stock, voting 
stock options, or warrants for voting stock shall 
be issued to any person or entity other than 
Winstar, or a direct or indirect wholly-owned 
subsidiary thereof, without the prior written 
approval of the FSLIC; and 

10. Savings Bank shall promptly file with the 
Supervisory Agent an Agreement for Operating 
Policies in the form submitted to the Bank 
Board or in substantially similar form; and 


Provided further, that if the above conditions are not 
met: 


1. The Federal Stock Charter of Savings Bank 
shall be cancelled and withdrawn and _ its 
corporate existence shall then be terminated; 

2. All approvals given under this Resolution and 
concurrent resolutions shall be cancelled and 
withdrawn; and 

3. The membership of Savings Bank in the 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines (“Des 
Moines Bank”) and the insurance of accounts by 
the FSLIC shall be cancelled and withdrawn by 
reason of failure to meet a condition; and 


The Director, Deputy Director, or Associate Director, 
Office of the FSLIC, or any person designated in 
writing by any of the foregoing (hereafter referred to 
as “Director”’), the General Counsel, and the Secre- 
tary or an Acting or Assistant Secretary to the Bank 
Board are authorized and directed to take all 
necessary and appropriate actions to effect the 
foregoing provisions of this resolving paragraph of 
this Resolution; and 


71 


Issuance of Forms 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That all forms issued after 
the completion of the organization of Savings Bank 
evidencing funds on deposit with Savings Bank shall 
be in the form approved by the Principal or other 
Supervisory Agent of the Bank Board or the FSLIC, 
Des Moines, lowa (“Supervisory Agent”), and shall 


ae that Savings Bank is a stock savings bank; 
an 


Issuance of Charter and Bylaws 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That a Charter in the form 
of the proposed Federal Stock Charter is hereby 
approved and shall be issued to Savings Bank, and 
the Secretary or an Assistant Secretary may attest 
and date the Charter, upon the direction of the Office 
of the General Counsel, and such Charter shall be 
deemed issued at the time of such dating and 


—- by the Secretary or Assistant Secretary; 
an 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the bylaws of Savings 
Bank in the form proposed are hereby approved; and 


Completion of Organization 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That, pursuant to § 552.2-3 
of the Federal Regulations, the organization of 
Savings Bank shall be deemed complete when all 
actions provided for in paragraphs (A) through (O) of 
the Plan of Organization have been taken and the 


Assistance Agreement has been executed on behalf of 
the FSLIC; and 


72 


Membership in the Federal Home Loan Bank 
and FSLIC Insurance of Accounts 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That upon receipt of its 
Charter, Savings Bank shall be a member of the Des 
Moines Bank and the Secretary or an Assistant 
Secretary shall issue a certificate of bank membership 
to Savings Bank; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That insurance of accounts 
of Savings Bank is hereby approved, and the 
Secretary or an Assistant Secretary is authorized to 
issue a certificate of insurance to Savings Bank, and 
the FSLIC admission fee is waived, and the initial 
premium, if any, shall be paid upon determination by 
the Director, Office of the FSLIC, provided that the 
proposed Application for Insurance of Accounts and 
Agreement for Operating Policies are executed by 
Savings Bank in accordance with the Plan of 
Organization and returned to the FSLIC; and 


Further Actions 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Director, the 
General Counsel, and the Secretary or an Acting or 
Assistant Secretary to the Bank Board are hereby 
authorized and directed to take all other actions 
necessary or appropriate to further document or 
implement the incorporation and organization of 
Savings Bank, its membership in the Des Moines 
Bank, its insurance of accounts or any related matter 
contemplated in this resolution; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That any documents neces- 
sary to the organization of Savings Bank as approved 
in this Resolution shall be executed in the form or 


73 


substantially in the form of the proposed documents 
presented to the Bank Board, provided that the 
Director, with the concurrence of the Office of 
Examinations and Supervision, may agree to such 
changes as do not involve matters of policy, and 
provided further that the final form of any such 
document has been approved by the Office of General 
Counsel; and 


Supervisory Conversion 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, finds that: 


(1) Windom is insolvent in that its assets are less 
than its obligations to creditors and others, 
including its members; 

(2) The Bank Board has the power to appoint a 
receiver for the purpose of liquidating Windom; 

(3) Upon the liquidation of Windom, accompanied 
by the payment of insurance on accounts, the 
members of Windom would have no realizable 
equity interest in Windom; 

(4) Pursuant to this Resolution, the FSLIC has 
contracted to provide assistance to Windom 
under section 406 of the Act; 

(5) Severe financial conditions exist which threaten 
the financial condition of Windom, and authori- 
zation of the supervisory merger conversion of 
Windom is likely to improve its financial 
condition; 

(6) Following the merger conversion of Windom, 
the resulting association will be a viable entity; 

(7) The conversion to stock form as part of the 
supervisory merger of Windom into Savings 
Bank is part of a supervisory transaction, and 


74 


may be and is hereby approved under § 5(i) of 
the HOLA, 12 U.S.C. § 1464(i) (1982), § 5(p) of 
the HOLA, 12 U.S.C. § 1464(p) (1982), and 
§ 402(j) of the Act, 12 U.S.C. 1725(j) (1982); and 

(8) Pursuant to the exception provisions in 
§ 563b.1(a) and § 563b.20 of the Rules and 
Regulations for the FSLIC (“Insurance Regula- 
tions”), the rules set forth in Part 563b of the 
Insurance Regulations shall not- govern the 
conversion of Windom; and 


Approval of Combination Agreement and Plan of 
Merger 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the merger of Win- 
dom into Savings Bank and the resulting increase in 
the insurable accounts of Savings Bank are hereby 
approved pursuant to § 5(p) of the HOLA, §$§ 546.2 
and 552.13 of the Federal Regulations, and § 563.22 of 
the Insurance Regulations, and notwithstanding any 
provision of §§ 546.2 or 552.13 of the Federal 
Regulations and § 563.22 of the Insurance Regula- 
tions, (i) Savings Bank may enter into a Plan of 
Merger in the form or substantially in the form of the 
proposed Merger Agreement with Windom, (ii) the 
application for approval of the Merger is determined 
to be complete and in acceptable form; and (iii) the 
Director, with the concurrence of the Office of the 
General Counsel, may waive any provisions of 
$§ 546.2 or 552.13 of the Federal Regulations and 
$ 563.22 of the Insurance Regulations not otherwise 
waived in this Resolution as the Director determines 
appropriate or necessary, provided that: 


(1) Windom and Savings Bank shall have executed 
a Merger Agreement in the form or substan- 
tially in the form of the proposed Merger 


75 


Agreement, and the Office of the General 
Counsel shall have determined that such action 
has been taken; 

(2) On or before the Effective Date of Merger, 
Applicant and Savings Bank shall file with the 
Bank Board a certification, in form and sub- 
Stance satisfactory to the Office of General 
Counsel, stating that none of the directors of 
the Applicant, Savings Bank, or Windom have 
received or will receive any payment, compen- 
sation, or inducement in connection with the 
Merger; and 

(3) Upon consummation of the Merger, Applicant 
and Savings Bank shall submit a certification to 
the FSLIC and the Supervisory Agent stating 


the date on which the Merger became effective; 
and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board 
deems it necessary, in order to avert the imminent 
failure of Windom, to waive or deem inapplicable 
certain provisions of § 552.13 of the Federal Regula- 
tions, and hereby deems inapplicable and waives 
paragraphs (f), (i), (1) and (m) of § 552.13; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board 
deems the Merger Agreement between Windom and 
Savings Bank and the application for approval of the 
merger to be in substantial compliance with § 546.2 


and paragraphs (g) and (h) of § 552.13 of the Federal 
Regulations; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That for purposes of 
determining its required net worth level under 
$ 563.13(b) of the Insurance Regulations following the 
Merger, Savings Bank shall be treated as an 
institution insured for 20 years or longer; and 


76 
Accounting 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That in accounting for the 
Merger and the acquisition of assets and liabilities of 
Windom by Savings Bank, Savings Bank and the 
Applicant shall use generally accepted accounting 
principles prevailing in the savings and loan industry, 
as accepted, modified, clarified or interpreted by 
applicable regulations of the Bank Board and the 
FSLIC; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That Savings Bank shall 
furnish an analysis, accompanied by a concurring 
opinion from its independent public accountants, 
satisfactory to the Supervisory Agent and to the 
Office of Examinations and Supervision, which (i) 
specifically describes as of the closing date, any 
intangible assets, including goodwill or the discounts 
and premiums arising from the acquisition to be 
recorded on Savings Bank’s consolidated books; and 
(ii) substantiates the reasonableness and conformity 
with regulatory requirements of the amounts at- 
tributed to intangible assets, including goodwill, and 
the discounts and premiums and the related amortiza- 
tion periods and methods; and 


Prevention of Failure 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board finds 
that approval of the Merger is necessary to prevent 
the probable failure of windom; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board finds 
that the Merger is instituted for supervisory reasons; 
and 


77 
Holding Company Approval 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, has considered the 
financial and managerial resources and future pros- 
pects of the Applicant, Savings Bank, and Windom 
and the convenience and needs of the communities 


—s by Windom and to be served by Savings Bank; 
an 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, finds that the acquisi- 
tion of control of Savings Bank proposed in the 
Application would not be detrimental to Savings Bank 


age or to the insurance risk of the FSLIC; 
an 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, determines that the 
proposed acquisition of control of Windom by the 
Applicant by reason of the Supervisory Merger meets 
the approval standards of § 408(e)(1)(B) and (e)(2) of 


or Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1730a(e)(1)(B) and (e)(2) (1982); 
an 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That, the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, hereby approves and 
authorizes, pursuant to §§ 408(e)(1)(B) of the Act, 12 
U.S.C. $§ 1730a(e)(1)(B) (1982), the acquisition by 
Applicant of control of Windom, provided that: 


(1) Upon the chartering of Savings Bank, Winstar 
causes Savings Bank to execute the Merger 
Agreement executed by Windom: 

(2) Upon consummation of the Acquisition, the 
Applicant shall file with the FSLIC and the 


(3) 


78 


Supervisory Agent a Net Worth Maintenance 

Stipulation, pursuant to which (A) the Appli- 

cant, stipulates to the FSLIC that, so long as it 

controls Savings Bank, as the term “control” is 

defined by § 408 of the Act, and § 583.26 of the 

Regulations for Savings and Loan —Tt 

Companies (“Holding Company Regulations”), it 

shall cause the net worth of Savings Bank to be 

maintained at a level consistent with that 

required by § 563.13 of the Insurance Regula- 

tions, as now or hereafter in effect, jor 
institutions insured 20 years or longer, witheut 

regard to any net worth certificate assistance 
for which Savings Bank may qualify under 
§ 406(f)(5) of the Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1729(f)5) 
(1982), and it shall, as necessary, cause suffi- 
cient cash to be contributed to Savings Bank to 
effect compliance with such requirement, 

(B) the Applicant and Savings Bank waive any 
claim to assistance under § 406(f)(5) of the Act; 
Upon consummation of the Acquisition, Winstar 
shall file with the FSLIC and the Supervisory 
Agent a Stock Transfer Stipulation, pursuant to 
which Winstar stipulates to the FSLIC that for 
the longer of the term of the Assistance 
Agreement or three full years following the 
Merger it will maintain control of Savings Bank, 
as control is defined in § 408(e) of the Act and 
§ 583.26 of the Holding Company Regulations 
and will not sell transfer, pledge or otherwise 
dispose of, stock of Savings Bank except for the 
security interest granted to Northwest Bank, 
Minneapo's, Minnesota, for Its $1,750,000.00 
joan te Winstar for its initial purchase of 
Savings Bank’s stock; 


79 


(4) Upon consummation of the Acquisition, the 


Applicant shall file a Dividend Limitation 
Stipulation with the Supervisory Agent pur- 
suant to which the Applicant stipulates that, so 
long as the Applicant directly or indirectly 
controls Savings Bank, as control is defined by 
§ 583.26 of the Holding Company Regulations, 
Savings Bank shall not declare or pay a 
dividend in any fiscal year that exceeds 50% of 
Savings Bank’s net income, as defined in 
§ 563¢.12 of the Insurance Regulations, for the 
fiseal year, as reflected on Savings Bank’s 
quarterly or other financial reports to the Bank 
Board, without the prior written approval of the 
Supervisory Agent and the concurrence of the 
Director of the Office of Examinations and 
Supervision, provided that any dividends per- 
mitted under this limitation may be deferred 
and paid in a subsequent year, but in no event 
may dividends be paid that would reduce 
Savings Bank’s net worth below the level 
required under § 563.13(b) of the Insurance 
Regulations for institutions insured 20 years or 
longer; 


(5) Upon consummation of the Acquisition, the 


Applicant and its shareholders shall file a 
Stipulation of Affiliate Status in the form 
submitted to the Bank Board or in substantially 
similar form, with the Supervisory Agent, 
pursuant to which the Applicant and _ its 
shareholders stipulate that they jointly and 
severally control Savings Bank and further 
stipulate that, to the extent that certain entities 
are not otherwise included within the definition 
of affiliated person in § 561.29 of the Insurance 
Regulations, or within the definition of affiliate 


80 


in § 583.15 of the Holding Company Regula- 
tions, such entities shall be deemed to be 
affiliates for purposes of compliance with the 
regulations of the Bank Board and the FSLIC 
regulating conflicts of interest and transactions 
with iates; 

(6) Upon consummation of the Acquisition, the 
Applicant shall file with the Supervisory Agent, 
as an addendum to its business plan, a 
Stipulation Restricting Securities Brokerage 
Activities in the form submitted to the Bank 
Board or in substantially similar form, pursuant 
to which the Applicant stipulates to restrictions 
on the conduct of any securities brokerage 
business by the Applicant and its subsidiaries; 
and 

(7) Not later than 30 days from the Closing Date, 
counsel to Savings Bank shall submit a certifica- 
tion to the Supervisory Agent stating the 
effective date of the Acquisition and that the 
Acquisition has been consummated in accord- 
ance with the provisions of all applicable laws 
and regulations, the Application, and this Reso- 
lution; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board finds 
that approval of the Acquisition by Applicant of 
control of Windom is necessary to prevent the 
probable failure of Windom; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board finds 
that the Acquisition by Applicant of control of 
Windom is instituted for supervisory reasons; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Director be and 
hereby is authorized and directed to take such steps 


81 


or actions as may be desirable or necessary to the 
completion of the Acquisition on the terms approved 
by this Resolution; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That any of the stipula- 
tions required to be submitted by the Applicant and 
Savings Bank in connection with the Acquisition of 
control of Windom, and any other documents neces- 
sary to effect such Acquisition shall be in the form or 
substantially in the form of the proposed documents 
presented to the Bank Board, provided that the 
Director, with the concurrence of the Office of 
Examinations and Supervision, may agree to such 
changes as do not involve matters of policy, and 
provided further that the final forms of such 
documents have been approved by the Office of 
General Counsel; and 


Assistance Agreement 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board, as 
operating head of the FSLIC, hereby determines, 
pursuant to § 406(f1-4) of the Act, 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1729(f)(1-4) (1982), that (1) financial assistance by 
the FSLIC is necessary to prevent the default of 
Windom and to facilitate the Merger with Savings 
Bank, and (2) the amount of such assistance, to be 
provided in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of the proposed Assistance Agreement, would not 
exceed the cost reasonably necessary to save the cost 
of liquidating Windom through a receivership accom- 
panied by the payment of insurance of accounts; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the proposed Assist- 
ance Agreement is hereby approved, and the Direc- 
tor, or such persons as the Director may designate, 


82 


be and hereby are authorized to execute on behalf of 
the FSLIC an agreement in the form or substantially 
in the form of the proposed Assistance Agreement, 
provided that the final form of such Agreement has 
been approved by the Office of the General Counsel; 
and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Directo: is au- 
thorized to take such further actions as may be 
necessary or appropriate to exercise the rights and 
fulfill the obligations of the FSLIC contained in the 
Assistance Agreement; and 


Tax Certification 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board 
hereby finds and certifies that the ground set forth in 
12 U.S.C. § 1464(d)(6)(A\i) (1982) exists with respect 
to Windom in that Windom is insolvent in that the 
assets of Windom are less than its obligations to its 
creditors and others, including its members; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Secretary or any 
Assistant Secretary is hereby authorized and directed 
to send to Savings Bank a letter certifying on behalf 
of the Bank Board the determination made in the 
immediately preceding resolving paragraph, and to 
provide copies of such letter to any agency of the 
United States upon request; and 


Bank Stock and Membership 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the transfer of the 
stock of Windom in the Des Moines Bank to Savings 
Bank is approved as of the effective date of the 
Merger; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the cessation of the 
membership of Windom in the Des Moines Bank be 
noted by reason of the Merger hereinbefore approved, 
effective as of the effective date of the Merger; and 


Certificate of Insurance 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Secretary or an 
Assistant Secretary hereby is directed to cancel the 


certificate of insurance of Windom upon its surrender 
to the FSLIC; and 


Branch Offices 


RESOLVED FURTHER, The maintenance of the 
home and branch offices of Windom as home and 
branch offices of Savings Bank subsequent to the 
Merger is hereby approved; and 


Forebearance 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Bank Board has 
considered certain regulatory forbearance requested 
by the Applicant and contained in a proposed letter (a 
copy of which is in the Minute Exhibit File); and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Secretary or any 
Assistant Secretary is authorized and hereby directed 
to send Savings Bank a letter in the form considered 
by the Bank Board; and 


Effective Date of Merger 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the effective date of 
the Merger of Windom with Savings Bank shall be 
11:59 p.m., local time, on July 10, 1984, or such other 
date and time as the Supervisory Agent shall 


84 


determine, provided that such date shall be no later 
than July 31, 1984. 


By the Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board 


JJ. Finn 
Secretary 


85 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


Delegation of Authority 
No. 84-364 
Date: July 6, 1984 


WHEREAS, The Director, Deputy Director, or an 
Associate Director, Office of the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation (“FSLIC”), or such 
persons as any of them may designate have been 
authorized by Resolution No. 84-363, dated July 6, 
1984, to execute on behalf of the FSLIC in its 
corporate capacity an Assistance Agreement with 
Winstar Corporation, Roseville, Minnesota and 
United Federal Savings Bank, Windom, Minnesota; 
and 


WHEREAS, The Assistance Agreement imposes 
certain rights, duties, and obligations upon the 
FSLIC in its corporate capacity that do not require 
basic determinations of policy; and 


WHEREAS, In the administration of such agree- 
ments, and of any rights or obligations of the FSLIC 
under them, it may be necessary or desirable that the 
FSLIC in its corporate capacity contract for legal, 
auditing, or other services: 


NOW THEREFORE, IT IS RESOLVED, That the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board (“Bank Board”), as 
operating head of the FSLIC, determines that such 
expenditures of the FSLIC in its corporate capacity 
pursuant to the Assistance Agreement are necessary, 
made under the National Housing Act, and shall be 
incurred, allowed, and paid under the provisions of 
the fourth sentence of § 402(c)(5) of the National 


86 


Housing Act, as amended, 12 U.S.C. § 1725(c)(5) 
(1982), without regard to the provisions of any other 
law governing the expenditure of public funds; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That effective upon the 
execution of the Assistance Agreement, the Director 
or Deputy Director, Office of the FSLIC, or such 
person as either of them may designate is hereby 
authorized and directed to take such actions as may 
be desirable or necessary to fulfill the rights, duties, 
and obligations of the FSLIC in its corporate capacity 
under such Agreement and to incur, allow, and pay all 
expenditures in fulfillment of such rights, duties, and 
obligations, pursuant to the fourth sentence of 
§ 402(c)(5) of the National Housing Act, as amended, 
12 U.S.C. § 1725(c)(5) (1982), including, but not 
limited to: 


(1) The payment of amounts required by such 
Agreement; 

(2) Contracting for legal, accounting or other 
services; 

(3) The assignment and pursuit of claims; and 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the General Counsel 
may also exercise the authority conferred pursuant to 
the preceding paragraph with respect to contracting 
on behalf of the FSLIC for legal or other related 
services needed to implement such agreements. 


RESOLVED FURTHER, That the Director or 
Deputy Director, Office of the FSLIC, or a person 
designated by either is authorized and directed to 
take all other actions necessary and appropriate to 
exercise the rights, and fulfill the duties and 
obligations of the FSLIC in the administration of the 
agreements. 


87 


By the Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board 


J. J. Finn 
Secretary 


88 


ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION 
AND 
WINSTAR CORPORATION, 
ROSEVILLE, MINNESOTA 
AND 
UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK 
WINDOM, MINNESOTA 
Dated July 12, 1984 


SUMMARY OF SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS 


Assistance Provided Section in Agreement 


Cash contribution of $4 
$1,950,000 plus an amount 

equal to aggregate negative 

net worth of the Merging 

Association $ as 

of the Effective Date. 


Indemnification for un- §5 
disclosed liabilities, unre- 
served for claims against the 
Merging Association, and lit- 
igation challenging the mer- 


ger. 


ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION, and WINSTAR 
CORPORATION, ROSEVILLE, MINNESOTA and 
UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, 
WINDOM, MINNESOTA 
dated July 12, 1984 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SE ARR ae iy ET te [91] 
SES RS ee ee Se eee ae [93] 
REE ra a [93] 
a [93] 
SEES en eB [93] 
(c) “Control” and “Controls” .............. [93] 
ty [93] 
(eo) “Pmanelal Report” .........cccccccccce [93] 
(f) “Insurance Regulations”................ [93] 
ee [93] 
(h) “Management Standards” .............. [93] 
og RE ES [93] 
(j) “Merging Association Claim” ........... [93] 
(k) “Net Proceeds Received”.............. [94] 
EE a ee [94] 
gE SEE TNEE SE Ae en a een [94] 
a [95] 
a i ye al [96] 
7 Ee are eee ee [97] 
(a) Cash Contribution..................... [97] 
(b) Indemnification Contributions .......... {99} 
(c) Assignment Contributions.............. [99] 


I a 1100} 


90 


§ 5 Indemnification for Undisclosed Liabilities, 
Claims Against the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION, and Litigation Challenging 


CRW DE Sebrrbsicesesesscseclesccets {100} 
(a) Indemmifications ........cccecsccccsees [100] 
(1) Undisclosed Liabilities.............. [100] 
(2) Unreserved for Claims............. {101} 
(3) Challenges to the Merger .......... [101] 
(b) Pursuit of Matters ................... {102} 
(c) Payments as Contributions............. [102] 
Gi kn casvclancecdctesscades teh {102} 
$6 Merging Association Claims............... {103] 
SU Fee Bess Se cb Ned occ cccceccccwpectees {105} 
§ 8 Reports and Records..................... {105} 
(a) Quarterly Reports.................... [105] 
RP BO BER re [106] 
(c) Access to Books and Records.......... [106] 
GaP INL < cu dacceiude sch es ceuceeu [106] 

§ 9 Covenants of RESULTING ASSO- 
CUMS Bbesictdebosvecenestcdsebears civeced [106] 
(a) Management Standard................. [107] 
(b) Conduct of Litigation.................. [107] 
§ 10 Accounting Principles.................... [108] 
$ 11 Representations and Warranties .......... [109] 
S Be Pe datinn che ccewadacdeeessawccecccked [110] 
$ 13 Termination of Agreement................ [110] 
§ 14 Rights and Forbearance.................. [111] 
DS Oe Ge Be nas eviecieesecensvcesccena {111} 
$ 16 Entire Agreement, Severability........... {112} 
$ 17 Counterparts, Modification, Headings...... [112] 
§ 18 Successors and Assigns................... [113] 
ge FFM ONE rere rer mie [113] 
§ 20 Continuing Cooperation................... [113] 
ED WD Win se eGes svwuvecaweseuesuetiuker {114} 


91 
ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 


THIS ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT (“Agree- 
ment”), dated July 12, 1984, is entered into by and be- 
tween the WINSTAR CORPORATION, Roseville, 
Minnesota, a Minnesota corporation (“WINSTAR”), 
UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, Windom, 
Minnesota, a de novo federal stock savings bank, 
which will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of WIN- 
STAR (“RESULTING ASSOCIATION”), and the 
FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE 
CORPORATION, a corporate instrumentality and 
agency of the United States (“CORPORATION”), 


RECITALS 


A. The CORPORATION insures the accounts of 
WINDOM FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN AS- 
SOCIATION, Windom, Minnesota (“MERGING AS- 
SOCIATION”), and will insure the accounts of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, in accordance with 
$ 403 of the National Housing Act, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. § 1725 (1982). 

B. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (“Bank 
Board”), in Resolution No. 84-363, dated July 6, 1984, 
approved (1) the chartering of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION as a de novo federal stock savings 
bank, the accounts of which will be insured by the 
CORPORATION, (2) a proposal by WINSTAR to 
acquire the MERGING ASSOCIATION by means of 
the merger of the MERGING ASSOCIATION into 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION (“Merger”), (3) 
WINSTAR’s acquisition of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION’s capital stock, which WINSTAR will 
purchase for two million dollars, and (4) the MERG- 
ING ASSOCIATION’s supervisory conversion to 


92 


stock form and merger with the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION, 

C. The MERGING ASSOCIATION has entered 
into a Combination Agreement and Plan of Merger 
(“Merger Agreement”) with WINSTAR, pursuant to 
which WINSTAR has agreed to cause the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION to consummate the Merger 
pursuant to such agreement, which also provides that 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION will succeed to all 
rights, obligations, duties, and liabilities of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION, and all assets and 
property of every kind and character belonging to the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION will be vested in and 
become the property of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. 

D. A condition precedent to the obligation of the 
parties to consummate such merger is that the 
CORPORATION, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, 
and WINSTAR enter into an agreement in the form 
of this Agreement, which will provide financial 
assistance and indemnification to the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION, in order to facilitate the Merger as 
approved by the Bank Board. 

E. The CORPORATION has decided, pursuant to 
§ 406(f) of the National Housing Act, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. § 1729(f) (1982), to provide financial assistance 
and indemnification as set forth in this Agreement, 
having determined that the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION is in danger of default and that the amount of 
such assistance and indemnification would be less 
than the losses the CORPORATION would sustain 
upon the liquidation of the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION through a receivership accompanied by the 
payment of insurance of accounts. 

F. In consideration of the mutual promises con- 
tained in this Agreement, the parties enter into the 
following agreement. 


93 
AGREEMENT 


$1 Definitions. For the purpose of this Agreement 
the following terms have the indicated sn 
. ty “Bank Board”: The Federal Home Loan Bank 

(b) “Claim”: Any claim, demand, cause of action, 
or judgment. 

(ec) “Control” and “Controls”: These terms have 
the meaning indicated in § 583.26 of the Regulations 
for Savings and Loar Holding Companies. 

(d) “Effective Date”: The date and time at which 
the Merger of the MERGING ASSOCIATION into 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION becomes effective 
pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement and 
applicable law. 

(e) “Financial Report”: The Quarterly Report 
required of insured institutions by the Bank Board or 
any other periodic report required of insured 
institutions. 

(f) “Insurance Regulations”: The Rules and 
Regulations for the CORPORATION. 

(g) Liquidation”: The release, compromise, satis- 
faction, settlement, reduction to judgment, or assign- 
ment to other than the CORPORATION of any 
Claim. 

(h) “Management Standard”: The standard of 
prudent business practice generally employed by 
financial institutions in Minnesota in administering 
their assets and liabilities. 

(i) “Merger”: The supervisory merger of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION into the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION under the Merger Agreement. 

(j) “Merging Association Claim”: Any unrealized 
Claim of the MERGING ASSOCIATION or the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, as its successor, 


——  —— 


Ea O—eEEeEITr 


94 


against (1) a person serving on or prior to the 
Effective Date as a director, officer, employee, or 
agent of the MERGING ASSOCIATION or any of its 
subsidiaries, provided that an action or inaction of 
such person on or prior to the Effective Date gave 
rise to such Claim; (2) an insurer who may be liable 
for the indemnification of the loss caused by the 
action or inaction of such person; (3) any administra- 
tor, executor, personal representative, heir, or assign 
of any such person; or (4) any other person or 
persons, partnership, corporation, or legal entity 
(“third party”), and any administrator, executor, 
personal representative, heir, or assign of such third 
party, provided that the Claim against such third 
party is related to a Claim against a party referred to 
under (1), (2), or (3) above. 

(k) “Net Proceeds Received”: As used in reference 
to the amount received upon the Liquidation of a 
Claim, the amount computed by deducting from the 
gross proceeds received all reasonable expenses in 
the form of payments to third parties, incurred or 
paid by the RESULTING ASSOCIATION in connec- 
tion with such Liquidation, provided such expenses 
have not been reimbursed otherwise. Such “reason- 
able expenses” may include, without being limited to, 
attorneys’ and accountants’ fees, travel expenses, 
court costs and related litigation expenses, and such 
other actual costs that are directly related to the 
Liquidation of the Claim. 

(l) “Net Worth”: Regulatory Net Worth as 
defined in § 561.13 of the Insurance Regulations and 
as computed in accordance with the accounting 
principles required by this Agreement. 

(m) “Quarter”: A calendar quarter, provided that 
the first Quarter during the term of this Agreement 
shall be deemed to include the period, if any, from the 


Effective Date to the last day preceding the first day 


of the first full calendar quarter following the 
Effective Date. " 


§ 2 Conditions. 


(a) The obligations of the parties are subject to 
the Merger becoming effective no later than 30 days 
after the date of this Agreement, unless such date is 
extended in writing by the Principal or other 
Supervisory Agent of the Bank Board, Des Moines, 
lowa (“Supervisory Agent”). 

(b) The CORPORATION’s obligations under this 
Agreement are also conditioned upon receipt of the 
following: 

(1) An opinion from independent counsel for 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the CORPORATION and its 
counsel, to the effect that: 

(A) The Merger has been duly authorized by 
the directors of the MERGING ASSOCIATION, 
WINSTAR, and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
and effected in compliance with the Charter and 
Bylaws of the MERGING ASSOCIATION, 
WINSTAR, and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
and with applicable law; 

(B) This Agreement has been duly author- 
ized, executed, and delivered, and constitutes a valid 
and binding obligation of WINSTAR and the RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION, enforceable in accordance 
with its terms; 

(2) A certified copy of the corporate resolutions 
of WINSTAR and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
authorizing execution and delivery of the Merger 
Agreement and this Agreement; 

(3) A certified copy of the corporate resolution 
of the MERGING ASSOCIATION authorizing execu- 
tion and delivery of the Merger Agreement; 


96 


(4) Certification by the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION’s Secretary, after completion of the sale of 
its capital stock, stating that the capital stock has 
been sold, the price at which it was sold, the date of 
the sale, and the net proceeds received; 

(5) A copy of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s stock certificate, which shall include a 
statement to the effect that the shares are restricted 
as to transfer for a period of three years from the 
date of issuance, except with the prior written 
consent of the CORPORATION; 

(6) An opinion of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s independent counsel that all applicable se- 
curities law requirements have been met in connec- 
tion with the sale of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s stock. 

(c) The CORPORATION’s obligations under this 
Agreement are further conditioned upon 
WINSTAR’s: 

(1) Maintaining, for so long as WINSTAR 
directly or indirectly controls the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION, but in no event for less than three 
years, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION’s Net 
Worth at an amount not less than the minimum 
amount prescribed in § 563.13 of the Insurance 
Regulations for institutions insured twenty years or 
longer; 

(2) Causing the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
to perform its obligations under this Agreement; and 

(3) Guaranteeing the satisfaction of any obliga- 
tion the RESULTING ASSOCIATION assumes un- 
der this Agreement. 

$3 Audit. As soon as is practicable after the 
Effective Date, the CORPORATION, at its own 
expense but with the assistance of the RESULTING 


97 


ASSOCIATION’s personnel, whose salaries and ex- 
penses shall be paid by the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION without reimbursement from the CORPORA- 
TION, shall prepare an audit of the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION as of the Effective Date in accord- 
ance with generally accepted auditing standards, as 
modified by the CORPORATION. The scope of the 
audit shall be limited to that which the CORPORA- 
TION determines to be necessary to implement this 
Agreement and shall not include a revaluation of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION’s assets, except that 
valuation reserves established by the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION since June 30, 1983, other than those 
established at the request of the Supervisory Agent, 
shall be revalued if the CORPORATION requests 
such revaluation. Upon its completion and approval 
by the CORPORATION, a copy of the audit, which 
shall be prepared in such form as the CORPORA- 
TION shall determine, shall be furnished to the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
§ 4 Contributions. 

(a) Cash Contribution. The CORPORATION 
shall make a cash contribution to the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION equal to $1,950,000 plus a sum equal 
to the MERGING ASSOCIATION’s aggregate nega- 
tive Net Worth as of the Effective Date (“Net Worth 
Contribution”) as follows: 

(1) As soon as possible following the Effective 
Date, but in any event within ten business days after 
the Effective Date, the CORPORATION shall trans- 
mit to the RESULTING ASSOCIATION a cash 
contribution equal to (A) $1,950,000, plus (B) a sum 
equal to the CORPORATION ’s estimate of the Net 
Worth Contribution, which estimate will be the sum 
of negative net worth shown on the most recent 
Financial Report for the MERGING ASSOCIATION 


filed with the Bank Board prior to the Effective Date, 
plus the estimated loss for the period following that 
of the last filed Financial Report, calculated by 
multiplying the average per diem loss, determined 
from the last Financial Report filed before the 
Effective Date, by the number of days between the 
last day covered by such Financial Report and the 
Effective Date (“Estimated Net Worth 
Contribution”). 

(2) The amount of the Estimated Net Worth 
Contribution shall be adjusted following the Audit 
required by § 3 of this Agreement and, to the extent 
that the MERGING ASSOCIATION’s audited Net 
Worth is greater than the Estimated Net Worth 
Contribution, the CORPORATION shall pay a cash 
sum equal to the amount of such difference to the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION and, to the extent the 
audited Net Worth is lesser than the Estimated Net 
Worth Contribution, the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall pay a cash sum equal to such difference to 
the CORPORATION. Any adjustment payment due 
from the CORPORATION to the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION, as a result of the audit, shall be 
remitted by the CORPORATION within ten business 
days of acceptance by the CORPORATION of the 
final audit report. Further, the CORPORATION will 
utilize its best efforts to obtain, review and accept the 
final audit report within 120 days of the Effective 
Date. Any adjustment payment due to the CORPO- 
RATION from the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, as 
a result of the audit, shall be remitted by the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION within ten business 
days after notification by the CORPORATION that 
such a payment is due. 

For purposes of periodic financial reports to the 
Bank Board, all cash contributions, other than Net 


99 


Worth Contributions, made under this § 4(a) shall be 
directly credited to the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s net worth; provided, however, that such 
accounting treatment of the contributions made under 
this § 4(a) is not hereby authorized for any filings or 
other reports the RESULTING ASSOCIATION may 
make to the Bank Board or others, including, but not 
limited to, financial statements required to be 
prepared in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles as in effect at the time of their 
submission. In the event that a court of competent 
jurisdiction directs the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
to divest itself of the assets and liabilities of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION, the cash contributions 
made pursuant to this § 4(a) shall be repaid to the 
as by the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 

(b) Indemnification Contributions. Within 30 
days after receipt of each of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION’s quarterly reports required pur- 
suant to § 8(a) of this Agreement, and within 90 days 
after receipt of the final accounting required pursuant 
to § 8(b) of this Agreement, the CORPORATION 
shall contribute to the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
any amounts set forth on such report that are owed 
to the RESULTING ASSOCIATION pursuant to 
$$ 5 and 6. 

(c) Assignment Contributions. In the event that 
the CORPORATION exercises its right to the 
assignment of a Merging Association Claim pursuant 
to § 6(c), the amount of any payment made by the 
CORPORATION in excess of the fair market value of 
such Claim shall be deemed to be a contribution by 
the CORPORATION. Fair market value may be 
determined by agreement of the CORPORATION 
and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION or by an 


100 


appraisal by an independent appraiser approved by 
the CORPORATION, the cost of which appraisal 
shall be paid by the CORPORATION. 

(d) Adjustments. Any contribution or payment by 
the CORPORATION or any accounting or report 
furnished by the RESULTING ASSOCIATION un- 
der this Agreement shall be subject to adjustment if 
it subsequently is determined that such contribution, 
payment, accounting, or report was based upon error 
or was not computed in accordance with the account- 
ing principles prescribed by this Agreement. 

$5 Indemnification for Undisclosed Liabilities, 
Claims Against the MERGING ASSOCIATION, and 
Litigation Challenging the Merger. 

(a) Indemnifications. To the extent not otherwise 
reimbursed or reimbursable by the CORPORATION 
or under any insurance policy, bond or other 
provision for funding, provided that the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION complies with the covenants set 
forth in § $, the CORPORATION will indemnify the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION for, and pay as pro- 
vided in § 4(b), the amounts paid by the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION to satisfy, settle, or compromise 
the following liabilities, Claims, and litigation and the 
reasonable costs and expenses of related litigation, 
including attorneys’ and accountants’ fees, travel 
expenses, court costs and related litigation expenses, 
and such other actual costs, including consideration 
by the CORPORATION of the payment of actual out 
of pocket expenses of employees of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION, as may be incurred in connection 
with such satisfaction, settlement or compromise: 

(1) Undisclosed Liabilities. Any liability of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION or any subsidiary corpo- 
ration that (A) was not disclosed in or reflected on 
the MERGING ASSOCIATION’s or a subsidiary 


101 


corporation’s books and records prior to the Effective 
Date and (B) under generally accepted accounting 
principles as of the Effective Date and consistently 
applied, is of the type that should have been so 
disclosed or reflected; provided that for the purposes 
of this § 5(a)(1), the term “liability” shall not be 
construed to include any inadequacy in or the lack of 
a valuation allowance or specific reserve; 

(2) Unreserved for Ciaims. Any Claim against 
the MERGING ASSOCIATION or any subsidiary 
corporation, or the RESULTING ASSOCIATION as 
the successor to the MERGING ASSOCIATION, 
based upon an action or failure to act of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION or any subsidiary corpo- 
ration prior to the Effective Date, whether filed 
before or after such date, to the extent that such 
Claim (A) was not adequately reserved for or 
provision made for its payment on the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION’s or a subsidiary corporation’s books 
and records prior to the Effective Date, and (B) is not 
fully reimbursed or reimbursable under any insurance 
policy, bond, or other provision for funding; and 

(3) Challenges to the Merger. Except for an 
action by the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, any 
litigation brought within a period of one year 
following the Effective Date to challenge or set aside 
the Merger or this Agreement in which an essential 
element is a claim that an action or failure to act by 
the Bank Board or the CORPORATION was not in 
accordance with the Bank Board’s or the CORPORA- 
TION’s enabling legislation and, in the event that a 
court of competent jurisdiction directs the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION to divest itself of the assets or 
liabilities of the MERGING ASSOCIATION, the 
reasonable costs and expenses of such divestiture, 
provided that such damages are directly attributable 


102 


to such action or failure to act by the Bank Board or 
the CORPORATION. 

(b) Pursuit of Matters. The RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall use its best efforts to reduce or 
minimize the CORPORATION’s indemnity payments 
under this § 5 by the pursuit of counterclaims, offsets, 
insurance settlements, and Claims related to the 
liabilities indemnified for and shall promptly notify 
the CORPORATION of any evidence it discovers 
indicating a basis for such pursuit. The CORPORA- 
TION shall indemnify the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION for all reasonable costs and expenses related to 
such pursuit, including, but not limited to, attorneys’ 
and accountants’ fees, travel expenses, court costs 
and related litigation expenses, and such other actual 
costs as may be incurred by the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION in complying with this § 5(b), 
provided that the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
complies with the covenants set forth in § 9. The 
CORPORATION will consider payment of actual out 
of pocket expenses of employees of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION when incurred in the pursuit of 
counterclaims, offsets, insurance settlements and 
claims. All sums recovered from such related coun- 
terclaims, offsets, insurance settlements, and related 
Claims shall be paid over to the CORPORATION to 
the extent that the CORPORATION has made 
contributions pursuant to this Agreement. 

(c) Payments as Contributions. All payments 
made by the CORPORATION to the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION under this §5 shall be considered 
contributions under this Agreement. 

(d) Limitations. The CORPORATION’s aggre- 
gate contributions with respect to the liabilities of a 
subsidiary corporation under § 5(aX1) of this Agree- 
ment and Claims against subsidiary corporations 


103 


under § 5(a)(2) shall be limited to the amount of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION’s investment in that 
subsidiary corporation. 

§ 6 Merging Association Claims. 

(a) The RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall use 
its best efforts in pursuing and filing actions on all 
practicably recoverable Merging Association Claims 
which accrue to the RESULTING ASSOCIATION as 
successor in interest to the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION, whether discovered before or after the 
Effective Date. 

‘b) Provided that the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION complies with the covenants set forth in § 9, 
the CORPORATION shall indemnify the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION for the reasonable costs and 
expenses incurred by it in connection with the 
prosecution of Merging Association Claims, including, 
but not limited to, attorneys’ and accountants’ fees, 
travel expenses, court costs and related litigation 
expenses, and such other actual costs as may be 
incurred in connection with such prosecution, but only 
to the extent that such costs and expenses are not 
otherwise reimbursed or reimbursable. The CORPO- 
RATION will consider payment of reasonable actual 
out of pocket expenses of employees of the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION when incurred in the prosecu- 
tion of Merging Association claims. Any amount paid 
by the CORPORATION pursuant to this subsection 
shall be considered to be a contribution by the COR- 
PORATION to the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

(c) At any time during the term of this 
Agreement and until 90 days after the date on which 
this Agreement terminates, the CORPORATION 
shall have the right, upon its request, to obtain from 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION an assignment of 


104 


any Merging Association Claim. If a Merging Associa- 
tion Claim had a value reflected on the books of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date, the CORPORATION shall pay for 
such assignment that value, as adjusted or deter- 
mined in accordance with the accounting principles as 
required by this Agreement, within 10 business days 
after the assignment is completed. In order to 
facilitate the assignment of a Merging Association 
Claim, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall, at 
the CORPORATION’s request: 

(1) Execute and deliver such instruments of 
assignment or transfer and make endorsements in 
such form and manner, and at such time, as the 
CORPORATION shall require; and 

(2) Execute and deliver all other instruments 
that the RESULTING ASSOCIATION possesses and 
the CORPORATION deems necessary or requisite to 
complete such assignments or transfers. 

(d) If the RESULTING ASSOCIATION has 
recovered on a Merging Association Claim, the Net 
Proceeds Received upon the Liquidation of such 
Merging Association Claim in excess of the value, if 
any, of such claim reflected on the books of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION prior to the Effective 
Date shall be paid over to the CORPORATION to 
the extent that it has made contributions pursuant to 
this Agreement. 

(e) If the CORPORATION has recovered on a 
Merging Association Claim that was assigned to the 
CORPORATION, the Net Proceeds Received upon 
the Liquidation of such Claim shall be retained by the 
CORPORATION to the extent of the amount, if any, 
paid by the CORPORATION for the assignment of 
such Claim and to the extent of any other contribu- 
tions made pursuant to this Agreement. 


105 


(f) Any recoveries on a Merging Association 
Claim exceeding the amount to be retained by or 
reimbursed to the CORPORATION pursuant to 
§ 6(d) or § 6(e) shall be paid to or retained by the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

(g) The RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall 
promptly notify the CORPORATION of any evidence 
that it discovers indicating a basis for a Merging 
Association Claim. 

§ 7 Tax Benefits. 

Any federal or state income tax deduction, credit, 
loss carryovers, or other tax benefit, which now or 
hereafter inures to the benefit of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION or WINSTAR as a result of this 
Merger, may be retained by the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION or WINSTAR respectively. How- 
ever, should the RESULTING ASSOCIATION or 
WINSTAR receive no tax deductions, credits, loss 
carryovers, or other benefits or be liable for taxes as 
a result of the Merger, the CORPORATION has no 
obligation to indemnify or provide additional contribu- 
tions to either the RESULTING ASSOCIATION or 
WINSTAR. 

§8 Reports and Records. 

(a) Quarterly Reports. Within 45 days following 
the end of each Quarter in which the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION receives notice of any Claim or 
liability that may cause a payment by or to the 
CORPORATION pursuant to §§5 or 6, the RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION shall furnish a report to 
the CORPORATION, in a format approved by the 
CORPORATION and supported by such data as may 
be necessary to verify the reporting, that shall 
include: 

(1) Status reports on such Claims and 
liabilities; 


106 


(2) Payments made by and due from the 
CORPORATION; and 

(3) Payments made by and due from the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

(b) Final Accounting. Within 90 days following 
the date this Agreement terminates, or such longer 
time as the CORPORATION may permit, the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall render to the 
CORPORATION a final accounting of the matters 
covered by this Agreement, which accounting may be 


prepared by the RESULTING ASSOCIATION’s. 


staff and shall include such information and be in such 
form as the CORPORATION shall request. 

(c) Access to Books and Records. The RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION and WINSTAR shall make 
available to the CORPORATION all books, papers, 
records, and information of any kind relating to any 
or all matters subject to the provisions of this 
Agreement, including any material or information in 
the possession of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, 
WINSTAR, or any of their affiliates or subsidiaries. 

(d) Examinations. The CORPORATION may 
audit or examine the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
and WINSTAR with respect to transactions affecting 
the implementation of this Agreement at any time or 
times chosen by the CORPORATION. Such audits 
shall be conducted by the CORPORATION at its own 
expense but with the assistance of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION’s and WINSTAR’s personnel, whose 
salaries and expenses shall be paid by the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION and WINSTAR, respectively, 
without reimbursement from the CORPORATION. 

§9 Covenants of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. If the RESULTING ASSOCIATION fails to 
comply with the following covenants concerning the 
pursuit of a Merging Association Claim, the defense 


107 


of a liability, Claim, or litigation described in § 5(a), 
or the pursuit of a counterclaim, offset, insurance 
settlement, or related Claim as required under § 5(b), 
all such items being referred to collectively in this 
section as “matters,” the CORPORATION may 
disallow a related filing of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION for indemnification. 

(a) Management Standard. The RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall use its best efforts to minimize 
losses and maximize gains and recoveries in dealing 
with all matters that may be the basis for, or reduce 
the amount of any indemnification or contribution 
provided by the CORPORATION under this Agree- 
ment. The standard to be applied to determine 
whether the RESULTING ASSOCIATION uses its 
best efforts is the Management Standard defined in 
§ 1(g) above. 

(b) Conduct of Litigation. With respect to all 
matters described in the introductory paragraph to 
this § 9, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall: 

(1) Use its best efforts to keep the CORPORA- 
TION fully informed of their status; 

(2) Observe the right of the CORPORATION 
to monitor and direct their defense or prosecution, 
including the right to direct the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION to file a petition to remove an action 
to the appropriate court or to appeal any determina- 
tion of any court, provided that the CORPORATION 
shall bear the cost of removal and of monitoring and 
directing such defense or prosecution; 

(3) Authorize the CORPORATION, upon the 
CORPORATION’s election and at the CORPORA- 
TION’s expense and with its own attorneys, to defend 
against, or to prosecute in the name of the MERG- 
ING ASSOCIATION, the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, or the CORPORATION, as the case may be, 


108 


any such matter and cooperate fully with the 
CORPORATION in such defense or prosecution, 
including, but not limited to, the furnishing to the 
CORPORATION of all applicable books, records, and 
other information in the possession or within the 
control of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, 
WINSTAR, or any of their affiliates or subsidiaries; 
(4) At the request of the CORPORATION, 
assign to the CORPORATION and subrogate the 
CORPORATION to any right, title, or interest of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION in any such matter, 
any defense related to such matter, and the proceeds 
recovered from such matter, and, in the event of such 
assignment, cooperate fully with the CORPORATION 
in the defense or prosecution of any such matter, 
including, but not limited to, the furnishing to the 
CORPORATION of all books, records, and other 
information in the possession or within the control of 
the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, WINSTAR, or 
any of their affiliates or subsidiaries; and 
(5) Obtain the CORPORATION ’s written con- 
sent before (A) prosecuting any such matter by court 
action, (B) entering into any binding commitment 
with respect to the satisfaction, settlement, or 
compromise of any such matter, or (C) making any 
payment in connection therewith, unless such commit- 
ment or payment is for an amount not in excess of 
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or is made 
pursuant to an adjudication by a court of competent 
jurisdiction which, with the permission of the COR- 
PORATION, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION has 
not appealed. 
$10 Accounting Principles. Except as otherwise 
provided, any computations made for the purposes of 
this Agreement shall be governed by generally 
accepted accounting principles as applied on a going 


109 


concern basis in the savings and loan industry, except 
that where such principles conflict with the terms of 
this Agreement, applicable regulations of the Bank 
Board or the CORPORATION, or any resolution or 
action of the Bank Board approving or adopted 
concurrently with this Agreement, then this Agree- 
ment, such regulations, or such resolution or action 
shall govern. In the case of any ambiguity in the 
interpretation or construction of any provision of this 
Agreement, such ambiguity shall be resolved in a 
manner consistent with such regulations and the 
Bank Board’s resolution or action. If there is a 
conflict between such regulations and the Bank 
Board’s resolution or action, the Bank Board’s 
resolution or action shall govern. For the purposes of 
this section, the governing regulations and the 
accounting principles shall be those in effect on the 
Effective Date or as subsequently clarified, inter- 
preted, or amended by the Bank Board or the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), 
respectively, or any successor organization to either. 
If there is a conflict between what is required by the 
FASB and what is required by the Bank Board, the 
Bank Board’s interpretation and requirements shall 
govern. 

$11 Representations and Warranties. All repre- 
sentations and warranties made to WINSTAR or the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION in the Merger Agree- 
ment or otherwise made to WINSTAR or the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION in connection with the 
Merger shall also be deemed to have been made to, 
and shall inure to the benefit of, the CORPORA- 
TION. The CORPORATION shall not, however, have 
the right to terminate or rescind this Agreement 
because of any breach of any such warranty or 
representation without the written consent of the 


110 


RESULTING ASSOCIATION and shall not assert 
against the RESULTING ASSOCIATION any Claim 
or right arising from the breach of such representa- 
tions and warranties by the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION or its officers, directors, or employees. 

§ 12 Notices. 

(a) Any notice or other communication required 
or permitted under this Agreement, unless otherwise 
specifically provided for, shall be deemed given if sent 
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to a party at its 
address set forth below or at such other address as 
the party shall furnish in writing: 


UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK 
c/o Rosewood Office Plaza 

Suite 300 South 

1711 West County Road B 

Roseville, Minnesota 55113 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 

Attn: Director, Financial Assistance Division 
1700 G Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20552 


(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided for, if 
this Agreement requires that notice be given within a 
certain period of time, notice shall be deemed given 
as of the date of posting. 

§ 13 Termination of Agreement. 

(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in 
this Agreement, this Agreement shall terminate two 
years following the Effective Date or on such other 
date to which the parties or their successors agree in 
writing. However, if a receiver is appointed for the 
purpose of liquidating the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, or the RESULTING ASSOCIATION ceases 


111 


to be an association the accounts of which are insured 
by the CORPORATION, this Agreement and all of 
the CORPORATION’s obligations under it shall 
terminate upon the effective date of such occurrence. 
(b) Notwithstanding termination of this Agree- 
ment as described in § 13(a), provided that the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION continues to observe 
after the termination date all conditions, covenants, 
agreements of cooperation, and agreements for the 
use of best efforts set forth in this Agreement, the 
CORPORATION shall indemnify the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION for (1) any loss arising from lia- 
bilities and Claims described in § 5(a), including the 
reasonable costs and expenses of related litigation, (2) 
the reasonable costs and expenses of pursuing the 
matters described in § 5(b), and (3) the reasonable 
costs and expenses incurred by the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION in the prosecution of any Merging 
Association Claim pursuant to § 6, provided that any 
such liability, Claim, matter, or Merging Association 
Claim is in litigation on the date that this Agreement 
terminates, and provided further that ay recovery 
by the RESULTING ASSOCIATION on any matter 
described in § 5(b) or any Merging Association Claim 
shall be paid over to the CORPORATION, subject to 
the limitations of § 5(b) and § 6(e). 
$14 Rights and Forbearance. The rights, powers, 
and remedies given to the parties by this Agreement 
shall be in addition to all rights, powers, and remedies 
given by any applicable statute or rule of law. Any 
forbearance, failure, or delay by any party in 
exercising or partially exercising any such right, 
power, or remedy shall not preclude its further 
exercise. 
§ 15 Governing Law. This Agreement and the 
parties’ rights and obligations under it shall be 


112 


governed by the law of the State of Minnesota to the 
extent that Federal law does not control. Nothing in 
this Agreement shall require any unlawful action or 
inaction by either party. 

§$ 16 Entire Agreement, Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any inter- 
pretation or understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement between 
the parties and supersedes all prior agreements and 
understandings of the parties in connection with it, 
excepting only the Merger Agreement and any 
resolutions or letters issued contemporaneously with 
this Agreement by the Bank Board or the CORPO- 
RATION, provided, however, that in the event of any 
conflict, variance, or inconsistency between this 
Agreement and the Merger Agreement the provisions 
of this Agreement shall govern and be binding on all 
parties insofar as the rights, privileges, duties, 
obligations, and liabilities of the CORPORATION are 
concerned. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid 
or unenforceable, all of the remaining provisions of 
this Agreement shall nevetheless remain in full force 
and effect and shall be binding upon the CORPORA- 
TION, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, and 
WINSTAR. 

§ 17 Counterparts, Modification, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, each of which shall constitute 
one and the same instrument, and any party may 
execute this Agreement by signing any such 
counterpart. 

(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 


113 


reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. — 

§ 18 Successors and Assigns. All the terms and 
provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon 
and inure to the benefit of the parties and their 
respective transferees, succesors, and assigns, but 
this Agreement may not be assigned to any party nor 
may any rights under it be transferred to or vested in 
any other party, through merger, consolidation, or 
otherwise, without the prior written consent of the 
CORPORATION. 

$19 Sole Benefit. It is the intention of the parties 
that this Agreement, the assumption of obligations 
and statements of responsibilities under it, and all of 
its conditions and provisions are for the sole benefit 
of the CORPORATION and the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION and for the benefit of no other person or 
entity. Nothing expressed or referred to in this 
Agreement is intended or shall be construed to give 
any person other than the CORPORATION or the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION any legal or equitable 
right, remedy, or claim under, or in respect to, this 
Agreement or any of its provisions. 

§ 20 Continuing Cooperation. It is the purpose of 
this Agreement to provide a means by which the 
failure of the MERGING ASSOCIATION may be 
prevented, the savers and other creditors of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION may be protected against 
losses, the thrift and economical home financing needs 
of the community in which the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s home office is located may be served, the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION and WINSTAR may 
receive the benefits and assume the risks contracted 
for, and expenses to the CORPORATION may be 
reduced. WINSTAR, the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, and the CORPORATION therefore agree that 


114 


they shall in good faith, and using their best efforts, 
cooperate with one another to carry out the purposes 
of this Agreement as described in this section. 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have 
executed this Agreement by their duly authorized 
officers or agents. 


UNITED FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK 


Date: Ahr) sf By: = — 
Attest: lasers l/, oe ee . ——— 
WINSTAR CORPORATION 
hee 


Date: Puck LZ L2 EY By: 
Attest: Lite hb eaten ir: IF CEC 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE 


Date: Zz? By: ay Haglan 


Attest: Ite: Deputy Bicertoc 
a 


115 


COMBINATION AGREEMENT AND 
PLAN OF MERGER 


THIS COMBINATION AGREEMENT AND PLAN 
OF MERGER is the contract of Windom Federal 
Savings and Loan Association, Windom, Minnesota, a 
federal mutual savings and loan association (“WIN- 
DOM” or “MERGING ASSOCIATION”) and United 
Federal Savings Bank, Windom, Minnesota, a federal 
stock savings bank (“SAVINGS BANK” or “RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION”). 


RECITALS 


1. The accounts of WINDOM and SAVINGS BANK 
are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation. 

2. This merger, the supervisory conversion of 
WINDOM to the stock form of ownership, and the 
resulting acquisition of control of WINDOM are 
authorized by the provisions of the Home Owners 
Loan Act of 1933, as amended (“HOLA”), the National 
Housing Act, as amended, (the Act), and the rules and 
regulations promulgated under and pursuant to the 
HOLA and the Act by the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board (“BANK BOARD”). 

3. It is deemed to be in the best interests of the 
members of WINDOM that WINDOM and SAVINGS 
BANK effect a merger upon the terms and conditions 
stated in this Agreement (the transaction provided for 
in this agreement being referred to as the “Merger”). 

4. It is believed that this merger will enable the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION to maintain and im- 
prove WINDOM’s savings, mortgage and other serv- 
ices, and improve the financial condition of WINDOM. 


116 


5. The following agreement is entered into in 
consideration of the mutual promises contained in this 
Agreement. 


AGREEMENT 


$1 Merger. WINDOM shall merge with and into 
SAVINGS BANK. 

§2 RESULTING ASSOCIATION. The RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall be United Federal Savings 
Bank, Windom, Minnesota. 

§$ 3 Name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. The 
name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall be 
United Federal Savings Bank. 

$4 Home Office of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. The home office of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shail be located at 930 Fourth Avenue, 
Windom, Minnesota. 

$5 Charter and Bylaws of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. After the merger the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall operate under the present 
charter and bylaws of SAVINGS BANK which are 
attached as Exhibit Al and A2 respectively and 
constitute part of this Merger Agreement. 

§ 6 Directors of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The number of directors of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be six (6). The names and residence 
addresses of those persons who shall serve as directors 
of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION are listed in the 
attached Exhibit B, which constitutes a part of this 
Merger Agreement. 

§ 7 Officers. The officers of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall be the officers of SAVINGS 
BANK. 


§ 8 Branch Offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 


TION. After the merger the branch offices of the 


117 


RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall be the present 
branch offices of WINDOM. The addresses of the 
offices that will be branch offices of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION are listed on the attached Exhibit C, 
which constitutes a part of the Merger Agreement. 
§ 9 Accounts. Upon the effective date of the merger, 
each accountholder of the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
shall receive, without payment, a withdrawable ac- 
count or accounts in the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION equal in withdrawal value to the account or 
accounts held in the MERGING ASSOCIATION on 
such date, featuring the same rate, maturity, and other 
terms. Accounts of WINDOM shall continue as 
accounts of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION but 
accountholders of WINDOM shall not, due to having 
accounts in WINDOM, have any equity interest in the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION. Accounts of the RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION shall be issued on the 
same bases as accounts issued presently by WINDOM. 
§ 10 Transfer of Assets upon Merger. Upon the 
effective date of the merger, all of the assets and 
property of every kind or character, real, personal, and 
mixed, tangible and intangible, choses in action, rights, 
and credits then owned by the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION, or that would inure to it at any time thereafter, 
shall immediately by operation of law and without any 
conveyance or transfer and without further act or deed 
by vested in and become the property of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, which shall have, hold, 
and enjoy the same in its own right as fully and to the 
same.extent as the same were possessed, held, and 
enjoyed by the MERGING ASSOCIATION prior to 
the merger. The RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall 
be deemed to be and shall be a continuation of the 
entity and identity of WINDOM. All of the rights and 
obligations of the MERGING ASSOCIATION shall 


118 


remain unimpaired, and the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall, on the effective date of the merger, 
succeed to all of such rights and obligations, and duties 
connected with them. 

§ 11 Effective Date of Merger. This Merger Agree- 
ment is effective only when approved by the BANK 
BOARD. The effective date of the merger shall be the 
date on which the merger is approved by the BANK 
BOARD unless another date is specified in such 
approval. 

§ 12 Conduct in Ordinary Course of Business. The 
MERGING ASSOCIATION warrants and represents 
that from the date of this Agreement to the effective 
date of the merger, the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
shall have conducted its business in its ordinary and 
usual course, and shall not have, without the consent 
of the Principal Supervisory Agent for its district, or 
his designee, 

(a) entered into any material transaction other 
than in the ordinary and usual course of business, 
except transactions in connection with this Agreement 
and the transactions expressly permitted by it; 

(b) borrowed any money other than advances from 
a Federal Home Loan Bank; 

(c) encumbered any of its property or other assets 
except as security for advances from a Federal Home 
Loan Bank; 

(d) disposed of, transferred, or contracted to 
dispose of or transfer any property, real or otherwise, 
or other assets, except, in each case, in the ordinary 
and usual course of business; 

(e) entered into any contract or agreement for the 
purchase, sale or lease of goods, materials, equipment, 
supplies, capital assets, real estate or any interest in 
real estate except, in each case, in the ordinary and 
usual course of its business; 


119 


(f) incurred any material obligation or liability or 
had any contingent liability arise except in the 
ordinary and usual course of business; 

(g) except for individual merit increases in 
accordance with standard personnel practices adopted 
prior to the date of this Agreement, and normal 
periodic employee salary and wage increases scheduled 
prior to the date of this Agreement, made or agreed to 
make any increase in the rate of compensation or 
remuneration to any of its directors, officers, 
employees, agents, or other representatives; 

(h) employed any person to serve as an officer, 
director, or senior manager who is not employed as of 
the date of this Agreement; employed any person 
pursuant to an agreement which is not terminable at 
the will of the MERGING ASSOCIATION; or entered 
into any of the following types of contracts with any 
employee, director, or officer, or amended any such 
contract that is presently binding on the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION: collective bargaining agreements, 
pension or profit sharing, bonus, severance pay, 
retirement, fringe benefit or other employee benefit 
plans, or other employment contracts; 

(i) amended or permitted the amendment of its 
charter or bylaws; 

(j) made any material change in accounting 
method; or 

(k) engaged in transactions described in 
$§ 563.17-4 and 563.17-5 of the Rules and Regulations 
for the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation. 

$13 Further Actions. All of the transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement have been or will be 
authorized by all necessary corporate actions by 
WINDOM, and SAVINGS BANK. WINDOM, and 
SAVINGS BANK, by their proper officers, shall 


120 


execute and deliver all instruments, certificates, and 
uther documents as may be necessary or incidental to 
the performance of this Agreement. 

§ 14 Counterparts, Modifications, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, each of which shall constitute 
one and the same instrument, and any party may 
execute this Agreement by signing any such 
counterpart. 

(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 

§ 15 Entire Agreement, Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any interpreta- 
tion or understanding agreed to in writing by the 
parties, constitutes the entire agreement between the 
parties and supersedes all prior agreements and 
understanding of the parties in connection with it. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid or 
unenforceable, then to the extent possible, all of the 
remaining provisions of the Agreement shall remain in 
full force and effect and shall be binding upon the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION and the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. 

§ 16 Governing Law. This Agreement and the rights 
and obligations under this Agreement shall be gov- 
erned by the law of the State of Minnesota. to the 
extent that Federal law does not control. Nothing in 
this Agreement shall require any unlawful action or 
inaction by either party. 

§$ 17 Sole Benefit. Nothing expressed or referred to 
in this Agreement is intended or shall be construed to 


121 


give any person other than the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION or the MERGING ASSOCIATION any 
legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim under, or in 
respect to, this Agreement or any of its provisions, it 
being the intention of the parties that this Agreement, 
the assumption of obligations and statements of 
responsibilities under it, and all of its conditions and 
provisions are for the sole benefit of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION and the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
and for the benefit of no other person. 

§ 18 Acknowledgement. The MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and SAVINGS BANK, by the execution of this 
Agreement, acknowledge and affirm that their boards 
of directors, by at least a two-thirds vote of each 
board, have approved this Agreement and the merger, 
authorized the execution of this Agreement, em- 
powered the signatories to execute this Agreement, 
and authorized the filing of this Agreement with the 
BANK BOARD. 
$ 19 Assistance Agreement. This Merger Agreement 
is conditioned upon the execution of an Assistance 
Agreement between the FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION and the RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION and its parent holding 
company the Winstar Corporation, Roseville, 
Minne. ota. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have ex- 
ecuted this Agreement by their duly authorized 
officers or agents. 


122 


UNITED PROERAL SAVINGS BAWS 


Date: alr [af wy: <a 
mares /Aagy Aira ror 17ne~ * on 


WINDUN FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION 


Date: S-a9- L¢—___ By Hensal. Methane 


SA eae its ee: 


Attest 


123 


Federal Home Loan Bank Board 
July 13, 1984 


Board of Directors R.P.R. 
United Federal Savings Bank 

930 Fourth Avenue 

Windom, Minnesota 56101 


Dear Sirs: 


In connection with the merger of Windom Federal 
Savings and Loan Association, Windom, Minnesota 
(“Merging Association”), into United Federal Savings 
Bank (“Savings Bank”), this is to confirm the 
understanding that: 


1. For purposes of reporting to the Board, Savings 
Bank may show, as a direct credit to its net 
worth, the cash contribution made by the FSLIC 
pursuant to Section 4(a)(1)(A) of the Assistance 
Agreement to be entered into among Winstar 
Corporation, Savings Bank, and the Federal 
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 
(“FSLIC”), 


2. For purposes of reporting to the Board, the 
value of any intangible assets resulting from 
accounting for the merger in accordance with the 
purchase method may be amortized by S#vings 
Bank over a period not to exceed 35 years by 
the straight-line method; 


3. For purposes of reporting to the Board, any 
discount arising from the adjustment of Savings 
Bank’s mortgage loan portfolio to its fair value 
shall be credited to income by the level yield 
method assuming contractually required pay- 
ments will be received for 15 years, and the 


SO a tee 


124 


remaining balance will be repaid at the end of 
the 15th year or by other methods of applying 
the level yield method as described in R 
memoranda or other accounting documents ac- 
ceptable under generally accepted accounting 
principles; and 


4. The limitation of 50%, on Savings Bank’s net 
income available for payment of dividends, as set 
forth in the Dividend Limitation Stipulation and 
Bank Board Resolution No. 84-363, is waived for 
its fiscal years beginning on July 1, 1985, July 1, 
1986, and July 1, 1987. During Savings Bank’s 
fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1985, it may pay 
as dividends up to 60% of its net income. During 
Savings Bank’s fiscal year beginning on July 1, 
1986, it may pay as dividends up to 70% of its 
net income. During Savings Bank’s fiscal year 
beginning on July 1, 1987, it may pay as 
dividends up to 60% of its net income. But in no 
event may Savings Bank by the payment of 
dividends reduce its net worth below the level 
required by § 563.13 of the Insurance Regula- 
tions for institutions insured for twenty years or 
longer. 


The accounting forbearances in the preceding 
paragraphs 1 through 3 are not acceptable in any 
financial statements which are required to be pre- 
pared in accordance with generally accepted account- 
ing principles. 


The forbearances or waivers extended by this 
letter do not relieve Savings Bank of its continuing 
obligations to maintain records of its reserve and net 
worth condition and to report its financial condition in 
accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. 


124a 


This letter does not and shall not be construed to 
constitute forbearance or waiver by the Board or the 
FSLIC with respect to any regulatory or other 
requirements other than those encompassed within 
the preceding paragraphs 1 through 4. Other than 
actions to enforce the regulatory requirements 
waived in accordance with paragraphs 1 through 4 
and the statutory provisions authorizing imposition of 
the waived requirements, insofar as such require- 
ments are waived, the Board and the FSLIC 
expressly reserve all of their statutory rights and 
powers with respect to Savings Bank, including, 
without limitation, those under Section 5 of the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended, and Sections 


406 and 407 of the National Housing Act, as 
Amended. 


By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board 


JJ. Finn 
Secretary 


THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


125 
UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


Civil Action No. 90-8-C 
Chief Judge Loren Smith 


WINSTAR CORPORATION, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 


Vv. 


THE UNITED States, 
Defendant. 


AFFIDAVIT OF E. TED YOCH 
IN SUPPORT OF PLAINTIFF’S MOTION 
FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AS TO LIABILITY 


Before me, a notary public for the State of 
Minnesota, on this date personally appeared E. Ted 
Yoch, being by me first duly sworn, upon his oath 
deposes and says: 

1. | am Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of Winstar Corporation 
(“Winstar”). I am also Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of United Federal Savings Bank (“United”). 

2.1 submit this affidavit in support of the 
Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment on the 
issues of defendant’s liability. I am familiar with the 
matters set forth herein from my own personal 
knowledge or from a review of materials in the files 
and possession of Winstar or United. 

3. Winstar was formed as a Minnesota corporation 
in 1984 for the purpose of acquiring control of 


126 


Windom Federal Savings and Loan Association 


(“Windom”), an insolvent institution at the time. 
United is a federal stock savings bank chartered in 
1984, all of the stock of which is owned by Winstar. 

4. In 1983, the organizers of Winstar, including 
myself, began negotiating with the Federal Home 
Loan Bank Board (“FHLBB”) and the Federal 
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (“FSLIC”) 
regarding the proposed acquisition of Windom. Win- 
dom was on the brink of financial ruin in 1983. 
Exhibit A is a true copy of a Consent Resolution 
adopted by Windom’s Board of Directors on March 
11, 1983, which was obtained from United’s files. 

5. Exhibit B is a true copy of a report to Windom’s 
Board of Director from the accounting firm of 
McGladrey Hendrickson & Co. dated September 16, 
1983, which was obtained from United’s files. 

6. Throughout the entire bidding and negotiating 
process between Winstar and FHLBB and FSLIC, it 
was understood by all parties that the entity that 
acquired Windom would be able to record as 
supervisory goodwill the amount by which the market 
value of Windom’s liabilities exceeded the market 
value of its assets, and to amortize that goodwill over 
a long period of time, such as 30 to 40 years. 

7. Ultimately, FHLBB and FSLIC agreed that 
FSLIC would provide to United a cash contribution 
of $1,950,000.00, plus a sum equal to Windom’s 
aggregate negative net worth (the amount by which 
Windom’s liabilities exceeded its assets, measured at 


book value). In return, Winstar agreed to form — 


United and to invest $2 million in cash in United 
through the purchase of all of United’s common stock. 

8. After an agreement in principle was reached, the 
organizers of Winstar incorporated Winstar under the 
laws of the State of Minnesota on March 1, 1984. 


127 


Exhibit C is a true copy of a certificate from the 
State of Minnesota Depariment of State certifying 
that Winstar is a legally organized corporation under 
the laws of Minnesota. 

9. In accordance with its agreement with FSLIC 
and FHLBB, Winstar formed United. Exhibit D is a 
true copy of the Plan of Organization for United. 

10. United entered into a Combination Agreement 
and Plan of Merger with Windom setting out the 
terms of the acquisition. Exhibit E is a true copy of 
the Combination Agreement and Plan of Merger. 

11. At the time of the merger between United and 
Windom, FSLIC entered into an Assistance Agree- 
ment with Winstar and United. Exhibit F is a true 
copy of the Assistance Agreement. 

12. FHLBB passed a Resolution approving the 
supervisory merger. Exhibit G is a true copy of 
FHLBB Resolution No. 84-363 approving the merger. 

13. FHLBB delegated certain authority pertaining 
to the Assistance Agreement in Resolution No. 
84-364, a true copy of which is attached as Exhibit H. 
14. FHLBB issued Resolution No. 84-365, further 
indicating its approval of the merger. A true copy of 
this Resolution is attached as Exhibit I. 

15. In a separate forbearance letter, FHLBB set 
forth its commitment regarding the regulatory ac- 
counting treatment pertaining to the merger. Exhibit 
J is a true copy of the forbearance letter. 

16. In accordance with the agreements and docu- 
ments listed above, the supervisory merger between 
United *»d Windom was consummated on July 12, 
1984. " wstar infused $2 million into United, receiv- 
ing al. of the common stock of United. United merged 
with Windom, and the resulting institution was 
known as United. 

17. Under the Assistance Agreement FSLIC con- 
tributed $1,950,000.00 in cash to United. FSLIC 


128 


ultimately contributed $3,694,499.00 as its contribu- 
tion based on Windom’s aggregate negative net worth 
under § 4 of the Assistance Agreement. 

18. Exhibit K is a true copy of a letter and Notes 
to Consolidated Statement of Financial Condition 
dated September 7, 1984 that was provided to 
United’s Board of Directurs by the accounting firm of 
McGladrey, Hendrickson & Pullen. 

19. In reliance upon FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s ex- 
press agreements concerning the use of purchase 
method accounting, the assets and liabilities of 
Windom were adjusted to fair market value at the 
time of the supervisory merger, and the resulting 
excess of liabilities over assets was recorded on 
United’s books as supervisory goodwill to be included 
in capital and amortized on a straight-line basis over 
a period of 35 years. The amount of supervisory 
goodwill ultimately recorded by United as a result of 
the acquisition of Windom was $10,654,419.00. United 
also included the FSLIC cash contribution of 
$1,950,000.00 as capital. In financial reports filed with 
FSLIC and FHLBB since the supervisory merger, 
United has consistently booked supervisory goodwill 
as an asset included in capital for regulatory 
purposes, in accordance with, and in reliance upon, 
FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s express agreements. United 
has also consistently amortized the supervisory 
goodwill over a period of 35 years on a straight-line 
basis, in accordance with the agreements. Prior to the 
enactment of the Financial Institution Reform, Re- 
covery and Enforcement Act of 1989 (“FIRREA”), 
neither FSLIC nor FHLBB ever objected to United’s 
treatment of supervisory goodwill. 

20. After the merger with Windom, United’s 
tangible net worth (i.e., exclusive of supervisory 
goodwill), was approximately negative $6.7 million. 


129 


Clearly, therefore, the purchase method of accounting 
for the proposed merger was integral to Winstar and 
United. Had Winstar and United not been permitted 
to record on United’s books supervisory goodwill in 
the amount by which Windom’s liabilities exceeded 
the fair market value of its assets, the acquisition of 
Windom on the remaining financial terms agreed 
upon would have rendered United insolvent and 
subject to immediate liquidation by FSLIC and 
FHLBB. Winstar and United would not have entered 
into such a transaction. Nor would they have made a 
proposal or entered into a transaction for the 
acquisition of Windom that did not include a lengthy 
amortization period in which to return Windom to 
profitability and to gradually replace supervisory 
goodwill with tangible assets. Thus, Winstar’s willing- 
ness to form United, United’s willingness to acquire 
Windom on the financial terms proposed, and 
Winstar’s willingness to invest $2 million in United, 
were all absolutely conditioned on FHLBB’s and 
FSLIC’s agreement to permit United to report 
supervisory goodwill as an asset included in capital 
for regulatory purposes and to amortize that super- 
visory goodwill over a 35-year period. Absent the 
specified accounting treatment, Winstar and United 
either would have insisted upon receiving more than 
$5,644,500.00 in tangible financial assistance from 
FSLIC or would have withdrawn the offer. 

21. In order to maintain United’s tangible capital at 
3 percent of liabilities, the regulatory minimum 
prevailing at the time of the supervisory merger, 
FSLIC would have had to contribute to United 
approximately $15.8 million in cash or other tangible 
financial assistance. 

22. In 1988, Winstar purchased additional common 
stock from United for an additional $800,000.00. This 


130 


investment was made solely for the purpose of 
boosting United’s capital, as Winstar already held 100 
percent of United’s common stock. Winstar would not 
have made this investment in the absence of 
FHLBB’s and FSLIC’s agreement to the specified 
accounting treatment for goodwill, or if Winstar or 
United had foreseen that the government would 
renege on that agreement. 

23. Winstar and United have complied in good faith 
with all the terms and conditions of the agreements 
relating to the supervisory merger and have other- 
wise fully performed their undertakings in connection 
therewith. 

24. As of June 30, 1989, the end of the last 
reporting period before the enactment of FIRREA, 
United reported supervisory goodwill in the amount 
of approximately $9.1 million. Thus, United had 
written off over $1.5 million of the goodwill it had 
acquired in its 1984 merger with Windom. Prior to 
FIRREA, all of the $9.1 million of supervisory 
goodwill was includable in United’s regulatory capitai. 
FIRREA excludes all of this goodwill for purposes of 
satisfying United’s tangible capital requirement. FIR- 
REA and the capital regulation promulgated by the 
Office of Thrift Supervision exclude all but $2.7 
million of this goodwill for purposes of satisfying 
United’s leverage limit and risk-based capital require- 
ment. These exclusions violate Winstar’s and United’s 
contract with FHLBB and FSLIC. 

25. As of September 30, 1989, it would have cost 
the government less to liquidate United than it would 
have cost FHLBB and/or FSLIC to liquidate Windom 
before or at the time of Windom’s merger into 
United. 

I hereby certify that the foregoing statements are 
true and correct, to the best of my knowledge and 
belief. 


131 
Dated this 27 day of March, 1990. 


/s/ EF. Ted Yoch 
E. Ted Yoch 


Subscribed and sworn to before me this 27th day of 
March, 1990. 


/s/ MaryLou Stephani 
Notary Public — 


My Commission Expires: June 13, 1991. 


e:/1729/united/youch.aff 


132 
UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-773C 


STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CORP., 


405 Sixth Avenue 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309, 


and 


Tue STATESMAN GROUP, INC., 
405 Sixth Avenue 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309, 


and 


AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY 
INSURANCE COMPANY 
601 Locust Street 
Two Ruan Center, Suite 1400 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309, 
Plaintiffs, 


v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Defendant. 


133 
COMPLAINT 


For their Complaint against the United States, 
plaintiffs Statesman Savings Holding Corp. (“SSHC”), 
The Statesman Group, Inc. (“Statesman Group”), and 
American Life and Casualty Insurance Company 
(“American Life”), state as follows: 


NATURE OF ACTION 


1. This action arises out of contractual promises 
made to plaintiffs by the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation (“FSLIC”) and the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board (“FHLBB”) pursuant to 
their statutory supervisory authority over federally 
insured savings and loan institutions and savings 
banks (hereinafter referred to as “thrifts” or “thrift 
institutions”). As more fully described below, these 
contractual promises were made for the purpose of 
inducing plaintiffs to acquire and operate four failed 
thrift institutions. Plaintiffs’ acquisition of these 
insolvent thrift institutions obviated their liquidation 
by FSLIC and FHLBB. If FSLIC and FHLBB had 
been forced to liquidate the institutions, the present 
value cost would have exceeded $173 million. Plain- 
tiffs’ acquisitions of these institutions saved FSLIC 
and FHLBB, by their own admission, $50 million in 
liquidation costs. Plaintiffs have fully performed their 
obligations under their contract with FSLIC and 
FHLBB. Although FSLIC and FHLBB have received 
the benefits of their contractual bargain with plain- 
tiffs, they have broken their contractual promises to 
plaintiffs, partially as a result of the recently enacted 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enfor- 
cement Act of 1989 (“FIRREA”), Pub. Law, No. 


134 


101-75, 103 Stat. 183, and of certain regulations 
promulgated by the Office of Thrift Supervision 
(“OTS”) pursuant to FIRREA. This repudiation and 
abrogation of defendants’ contractual promises to 
plaintiffs constitute a material breach of contract that 
defeats the central object of this agreement, a taking 
of plaintiffs’ property without just compensation in 
violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, and a deprivation of plaintiffs’ 
property without due process of law in violation of 
the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion. In this action, plaintiffs seek (1) a declaration 
that defendants’ actions effect a repudiation and 
material breach of their contractual obligations to 
plaintiffs and, that, thereby, effect a taking of 
plaintiffs’ property without just compensation and a 
deprivation of plaintiffs’ property without due process 
of law, in violation of the Fifth Amendment, and (2) 
an order rescinding the transaction and awarding 
plaintiffs compensation for all monies expended or 
costs incurred by them, and for the value of all 
benefits conferred on defendants, as a consequence of 
plaintiffs’ purchase, operation, and management of the 
four thrifts. 


THE PARTIES TO THE TRANSACTIONS 


2. Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB (“Statesman 
Bank”) is a conservatively managed, financially sound 
savings bank serving the needs of communities in 
lowa and Florida. Headquartered in Des Moines, 
lowa, the Bank is charted by the federal government 
and is a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank 
System. Until August 9, 1989—the date on which 
FSLIC was abolished under FIRREA—accounts of 


135 


the Bank’s depositors were insured by FSLIC. Since 
August 9, 1989, such accounts have been and are now 
insured by defendant FDIC. 

3. SSHC is a holding company organized under the 
laws of lowa. SSHC has 84,000 shares of common 
stock outstanding, all of which is owned by plaintiff 
American Life. SSHC has 126,000 shares of preferred 
stock outstanding, all of which is owned by plaintiff 
Statesman Group. SSHC owns one hundred percent 
(100%) of the issued and outstanding common stock of 
Statesman Bank, is entitled to receive all dividends 
declared by Statesman Bank, and has the right to 
receive the net assets of Statesman Bank upon the 
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the affairs of 
Statesman Bank. 

4. Statesman Group is a publicly owned corporation 
organized under the laws of Delaware. Statesman 
Group owns all of the outstanding preferred stock of 
SSHC, and all of the outstanding common and 
preferred stock of American Life. 

5. American Life is a corporation organized under 
the laws of lowa. All of the common and preferred 
stock of American Life is owned by Statesman Group. 
American Life owns all of the outstanding common 
stock of SSHC. 

6. Prior to enactment of FIRREA, FHLBB was an 
agency of the United States. Under the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended, FHLBB was 
charged with, among other things, regulating and 
supervising federally chartered savings and loan 
associations and savings banks, acting as the operat- 
ing head of FSLIC, enforcing compliance by such 
institutions with regulatory capital requirements, and 
structuring and approving merger and acquisition 
agreements for failing thrifts. FHLBB delegated 
certain of these functions to various Federal Home 


136 


Loan Banks throughout the country, subject to 
FHLBB’s supervision. Under Section 401 of FIR- 
REA, FHLBB was abolished on October 8, 1989; its 
functions and responsibilities, for purposes relevant to 
this action, have been transferred to the Director, 
OTS. 

7. Prior to enactment of FIRREA, FSLIC was an 
agency of the United States established under the 
National Housing Act of 1934, as amended, for the 
purposes of, among other things, insuring the ac- 
counts of depositors in thrift institutions that are 
members of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, 
establishing and enforcing minimum levels of capital 
for insured institutions, enforcing compliance there- 
with, and structuring and approving merger and 
acquisition agreements for failing thrifts. It was 
operated under the direction of the FHLBB. Under 
Section 401 of FIRREA, FSLIC was abolished on 
August 9, 1989, and its responsibilities and functions, 
for purposes relevant to this action, were transferred 
to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(“FDIC”). 

8. FDIC is an agency of the United States 
established under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 
as amended, for the purpose of, among other things, 
insuring the accounts of depositors in certain state 
and federal depository institutions. FDIC is desig- 
nated under FIRREA as the successor in interest to 
FSLIC for purposes relevant to this action. FIRREA 
provides that no action or other proceeding against 
FSLIC shall abate by reason of FIRREA’s enactment 
but that FDIC shall be substituted as its successor in 
interest. 

9. OTS is a bureau of the United States Depart- 
ment of the Treasury, and the Director of OTS is an 
officer and agent of the United States. Under 


137 


FIRREA the Director is charged with regulating and 
supervising all federally insured savings and loan 
associations and savings banks and enforcing com- 
pliance by such institutions with the regulatory 
capital requirements to be established under section 
301 of FIRREA. The Director has been designated 
under FIRREA as the successor in interest to 
FHLBB for purposes relevant to this action. FIR- 
REA provides that no action or other proceeding 
against FHLBB shall abate by reason of FIRREA’s 
enactment but that the Director shall be substituted 
as its successor in interest. 


JURISDICTION 


10. This court has jurisdiction over the subject 
matter of this action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1491. 


BACKGROUND 


11. During the late 1970’s and early 1980’s unprece- 
dented high interest rates pushed the thrift indus- 
try’s cost of retaining and obtaining new deposits 
substantially above the rate of return on long-term, 
fixed-rate mortgages in thrift portfolios, precipitating 
a financial crisis in the thrift industry. 

12. As a result of the substantial negative spread 
between the thrift industry’s cost of funds and its 
return on assets, many FSLIC-insured thrift institu- 
tions either became insolvent or were threatened 
with insolvency in the early 1980’s, and FSLIC’s 
insurance fund was faced with the potential loss of 
many billions of dollars in claims by depositors of 
these insolvent or troubled thrifts. For example, 


138 


during the last half of 1981 and the first half of 1982, 
more than 80 percent of all FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions incurred operating losses. 

13. Under the National Housing Act of 1934, as 
amended, FSLIC was at all times relevant to this 
action authorized to facilitate, “in its sole discretion” 
and “upon such terms and conditions as the Corpora- 
tion may determine,” the merger of a failing FSLIC- 
insured thrift institution into a financially sound 
FSLIC-insured thrift institution by providing finan- 
cial assistance in the form of promissory notes 
(“FSLIC notes”) or cash contributions to the healthy 
institution or by guaranteeing it against loss by 
reason of the merger, so long as the cost of the 
financis! assistance provided by FSLIC did not 
exceed the expense that would have been incurred in 
liquidating the institution and paying insurance claims 
upon its accounts. 

14. Faced with a large number of failing thrift in- 
stitutions, FHLBB adopted and aggressively imple- 
mented a policy of requiring insolvent or troubled 
thrift institutions to merge into financially sound 
acquirer institutions. With respect to many such 
“supervisory” mergers, FSLIC exercised its au- 
thority under the National Housing Act to provide 
assistance in the form of cash contributions, FSLIC 
notes, and/or guarantees to induce financially sound 
acquirer institutions to merge with insolvent or 
troubled thrifts. 

15. As the crisis in the thrift industry continued to 
worsen, and more and more FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions became insolvent or troubled, FSLIC and 
FHLBB recognized that continuing to facilitate 
supervisory mergers with cash contributions and 
FSLIC notes would quickly and entirely exhaust the 
insurance fund. Indeed, if FSLIC had provided cash 


139 


contributions and FSLIC notes at historic levels in 
order to induce financially healthy acquirer institu- 
tions to enter into supervisory mergers during 1981 
and 1982, the FSLIC insurance fund, according to 
FSLIC’s own calculations, would have been ex- 
hausted by April of 1982. 

16. In mid-1981, FSLIC and FHLBB were thus 
forced to revise their policies and practices regarding 
the provision of financial assistance in supervisory 
mergers in order to prevent, or at least forestall, 
exhaustion of the FSLIC insurance fund. As de- 
scribed below, because FSLIC and FHLBB could no 
longer provide the amount of cash or other tangible 
financial assistance necessary to induce healthy 
acquirer institutions to merge with insolvent or 
troubled FSLIC-insured thrifts, FSLIC and FHLBB 
began inducing and arranging supervisory mergers by 
providing assistance in the form of an intangible 
asset—“supervisory goodwill.” FSLIC and FHLBB 
also expanded the number of potential acquirers of 
insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured thrift institu- 
tions by permitting interstate mergers (in the 
absence of an acceptable merger proposal from a 
financially sound in-state acquirer institution), and 
inter-industry mergers (in the absence of an accept- 
able merger proposal from either an in-state or out- 
of-state thrift institution). In evaluating merger 
proposals, FSLIC’s principal objective was to merge 
the insolvent or troubled thrift institution into a 
healthy acquirer at the lowest possible cost to 
FSLIC, 

_ 17. In order to induce financially sound acquirer 
institutions to merge with insolvent or failing FSLIC- 
insured thrifts with little or no cash contributions, 
FSLIC notes, or other tangible financial assistance 
from FSLIC, FSLIC and FHLBB relied primarily 


140 


upon an aggressive application of the “purchase 
method” of accounting for the mergers. ‘Ine Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) applicable 
at the time provided that in mergers and acquisitions 
using the purchase method of accounting, the book 
value of the assets and liabilities of an acquired thrift 
institution should be adjusted (“marked to market”) 
to fair market value at the time of the acquisition, 
and that any excess in the cost of the acquisition 
(which includes any liabilities assumed by the ac- 
quirer) over the fair market value of the acquired 
assets should be separately recorded on the acquirer 
institution’s books as “goodwill”—an intangible, non- 
earning asset that may be amortized on a straight- 
line basis over a period of up to 40 years. _ 

18. Because of the high interest rates prevailing at 
the time, the fair market value of the lower yielding 
fixed-rate mortgage loans held by most acquired 
institutions was significantly less than the mortgage 
loans’ book value (the face amount of. the loans). 
Accordingly, in the typical supervisory merger at that 
time, the aggregate fair market value of the liabilities 
assumed by the acquirer institution exceeded the 
aggregate fair market value of the acquired institu- 
tion’s fixed-rate loans and other assets. The amount 
by which the acquired institution’s liabilities exceed 
its assets is reflected on the merged institution’s 
books as goodwill. Goodwill recorded in connection 
with a supervisory merger is known as “supervisory 
goodwill.” 

19. Certain mergers accomplished under the pur- 
chase method of accounting involved the “push down” 
technique. In a merger accounted for under the push 
down method, the assets and liabilities of the 
acquired institution are marked to market, and the 
difference plus the acquiring institution’s merger 


141 


costs are separately allocated to goodwill on the 
books of the resulting institution. According to 
GAAP, goodwill generated from a merger accounted 
for under this method may be amortized to expense 
by the interest method over a period no longer than 
that over which the discount on the interest-bearing 
assets acquired is to be recognized as interest income. 

20. Supervisory goodwill was recorded on the 
merged institution’s balance sheet as an asset 
includable in capital under GAAP and under 
FHLBB’s regulations governing the minimum capital 
requirements of FSLIC-insured thrift institutions. 
The ability to include supervisory goodwill as capital 
for purposes of satisfying FHLBB’s minimum capital 
requirements and to amortize it over a lengthy period 
was essential to inducing healthy acquirer institutions 
to merge with insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured 
thrifts. By assuring acquirer institutions in super- 
visory mergers that supervisory goodwill would be 
treated in the above-described manner for regulatory 
purposes, FSLIC and FHLBB were able to induce 
and arrange supervisory mergers with minimal cash 
contributions and other tangible financial assistance. 
FSLIC and FHLBB thus saved many billions of 
dollars in financial assistance that FSLIC would 
otherwise have had to pay in order to resolve scores 
of insolvent and troubled FSLIC-insured thrift 
institutions. 

21. As part of its effort to induce and arrange 
supervisory mergers by using supervisory goodwill in 
the above-described manner, FHLBB took steps to 
assure the thrift industry that GAAP would control in 
determining the application of purchase method 
accounting and the treatment of supervisory goodwill 
in supervisory mergers. In August 1981, FHLBB 
withdrew a proposed rule change that would have 


142 


imposed regulatory standards more stringent than 
GAAP for accounting for supervisory goodwill. The 
proposed rule would have limited the inclusion of 
supervisory goodwill in regulatory capital to 30 
percent of the merged institution’s net worth and 
would have required that supervisory goodwill be 
amortized over a period no longer than ten years. In 
withdrawing the proposed rule, the FHLBB stated 
that a principal reason for its action was that the 
proposal could “discourage potential merger partners 
from consummating necessary mergers.” In Septem- 
ber 1981 FHLBB issued Memorandum R31b, which 


made clear that, as a matter of FHLBB ,olicy, GAAP 


would control in determining the application of 
purchase method accounting and the treatment of 
supervisory goodwill in supervisory mergers. 

22. FSLIC also realized savings over the cost of 
liquidating failed thrifts through the creation of 
“FSLIC capital contributions,” a regulatory capital 
credit. If the amount of tangible financial assistance 
provided by FSLIC in connection with a supervisory 
merger was insufficient to restore the insolvent 
thrift’s balance sheet to minimum regulatory capital 
levels, the acquisition would have a negative effect on 
the capital position of the acquirer institution. In 
order to eliminate or reduce this negative effect, 
while holding the cost of assistance and cash outlays 
to a minimum, FSLIC and FHLBB assured certain 
acquirer institutions that FSLIC financial assistance, 
or some portion thereof, would be treated as 
regulatory capital, recordable on the resulting institu- 
tion’s balance sheet for regulatory reporting purposes 
as a direct credit to capital under FHLBB’s regula- 
tions governing the minimum capital requirements of 
FSLIC-insured thrift institutions. This practice devi- 
ated from GAAP, which required that such cash 


143 


contributions be charged against (and thus reduce) 
any goodwill arising out of the transaction. The 
ability to include these contributions as capital for 
purposes of satisfying FHLBB’s minimum capital 
requirements was in some cases essential tu inducing 
a healthy acquirer institution to merge with an 
insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured thrift on the 
terms proposed by FSLIC and FHLBB. By assuring 
acquirer institutions in supervisory mergers that 
some or all of the FSLIC assistance would be treated 
in the above-described manner for regulatory report- 
ing purposes, FSLIC and FHLBB were able to 
induce and arrange supervisory mergers with minimal 
cash payments and other tangible financial assistance. 
FSLIC and FHLBB thus saved large sums of 
financial assistance that FSLIC would otherwise have 
had to pay in order to resolve many insolvent and 
troubled FSLIC insured thrift institutions. 

23. During the last 7 months of 1981, FSLIC 
provided tangible financial assistance (e.g. cash, 
FSLIC notes) in connection with the merger of 23 
insolvent or troubled FSLIC-insured thrift institu- 
tions with assets totaling $12.3 billion. These 23 
supervisory mergers were arranged at a present 
value cost to FSLIC of $663 million, or 18 percent of 
the estimated cost (at present value) of liquidation. 
Similarly, in 1982 FSLIC provided financial assistance 
in connection with 49 supervisory mergers involving 
77 FSLIC-insured insolvent or troubled thrifts with 
assets totaling $31.2 billion. The present value cost to 
FSLIC of these supervisory mergers was $1.2 billion, 
or 16.3 percent of the estimated cost of liquidation. In 
effect, by using supervisory goodwill in accounting for 
supervisory mergers under the purchase method, 
FSLIC transferred much of its cost of resolving 
insolvent or failing thrifts to the healthy members of 


144 


the industry and their shareholders. As then- 
Chairman Pratt stated in March 1982: “(Bly using 
mergers as a supervisory tool ..., we are seeking to 
spread as much of the industry’s own net worth as 
possible over the industry’s trouble spots as a means 
of conserving the FSLIC’s insurance fund. 

24. In 1982 the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board, which promulgates GAAP, issued Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 72 (“FASB 
72”), which amended GAAP applicable to mergers 
initiated after September 30, 1982. i 72 = 
ally requires that goodwill be amortized over a perio 
of Ae se than previously permitted by GAAP. This 
change in GAAP did not alter FHLBB's and FSLIC’s 
regulatory policies and practices with regard to 
supervisory goodwill. For regulatory accounting pur- 
poses, FHLBB and FSLIC continued to induce 
healthy institutions to acquire failing thrifts by 
allowing goodwill to be included in capital and 
amortized over a period of time exceeding that now 
allowed by GAAP. | : 

25. The nature of the problems affecting the thrift 
industry changed in 1983-1984. After mid-1982, mar- 
ket interest rates declined, thus improving the 
“negative spread” that had plagued the industry. But 
in 1983 and 1984 thrifts increasingly faced problems 
with deteriorating assets. This asset quality problem 
threatened many thrift institutions that were just 
recovering from the negative spread problems of 
1981-82. Thirty-five percent of all FSLIC-insured 
thrifts lost money in the second half of 1983. 

26. Although economic conditions improved in 1983, 
the number of problem cases and the volume of assets 
handled by FSLIC in default prevention transactions 
continued at record levels in that year. FSLIC 
resolved 53 problem cases involving $17.6 billion in 


145 


assets in 1983. This marked a decrease from 77 
FSLIC resolved cases in 1982, but the complexity of 
the problem cases increased significantly. FSLIC 
realized significant cost savings by resolving most of 
these problem cases through interstate and inter- 
industry acquisitions. Through aggressive use of 
purchase method accounting, FSLIC saved an esti- 
mated $2.4 billion over the cost of liquidation in 
resolving these problem cases. 

27. Overall thrift industry profitability declined in 
1984, despite the fact that interest rates were far 
below the 1981-1982 levels. In 1984 FSLIC resolved 
27 problem cases involving $5.5 billion in assets. The 
continued growth in the size and complexity of 
problem cases requiring FSLIC intervention, how- 
ever, created a record-high demand on FSLIC 
resources, precipitating a decline in FSLIC reserves 
from $6.4 billion at the end of 1983 to approximately 
$5.6 billion at the end of 1984. During 1984, despite 
FSLIC’s efforts to obtain less costly resolutions, 
FSLIC was forced to place 9 institutions into 
liquidating receiverships. The other 18 problem cases 
were resolved by FSLIC at approximately 45 percent 
of the estimated cost of liquidation, or a savings of 
$693 million, largely through the use of supervisory 
goodwill to induce healthy institutions to take over 
the failing thrifts. 

28. In 1985 the size and complexity of cases 
requiring FSLIC assistance kept the demand on 
FSLIC resources at record levels. The FSLIC 
insurance fund was being depleted so quickly that 
FHLBB in 1985 levied quarterly special insurance 
premiums on insured institutions, adding more than 
$1 billion to the insurance fund. Even with the 
extraordinary assessment, FSLIC’s total insurance 
reserves in 1985 decreased more than $1 billion, to 


146 


$4.6 billion. FSLIC resolved 35 problem cases in 1985 
involving total assets of $6.5 billion. Twenty-five of 
these cases involved assisted acquisitions represent- 
ing $4.4 billion in total assets. Through techniques 
such as interstate, inter-industry, and private- 
investor acquisitions, the 25 assisted acquisitions 
saved FSLIC $547 million over the estimated cost of 
liquidation. During 1985, FSLIC appointed a liquidat- 
ing receiver for 10 institutions. Because of the 
continuing high case load and associated losses, 
FSLIC’s need for capital remained intense at the end 
of 1985. 

29. The intense need for FSLIC capital became 
urgent in 1986, when the total reserves for FSLIC 
diminished by year end to negative $6.3 billion. 
FHLBB’s overriding concern during 1986 was the 
development of a plan to recapitalize the FSLIC 
insurance fund. In 1986 the gap between profitable 
thrifts and unprofitable ones widened, with approx- 
imately one-fifth of the institutions experiencing 
accelerating losses. FHLBB and FSLIC resolved 27 
problem thrifts with assisted mergers and acquisi- 
tions in 1986, involving $7.4 billion in assets. FSLIC 
liquidated 10 institutions in 1986. 

30. In 1987, the thrift industry’s financial condition 
continued to deteriorate, as the industry reported an 
overall net loss of $6.8 billion. FSLIC’s financial 
problems also worsened and, by the end of 1987, its 
reserves had plummeted to a negative $13.7 billion as 
it incurred operating losses of $8.6 billion for the 
year. Of the 48 FSLIC cases resolved in 1987 at an 
estimated cost of $4.5 billion, 31 were resolved by 
assisted sales, saving FSLIC $400 million over the 
cost of liquidation. While FSLIC’s capitalization 
problems were somewhat eased in 1987 by the 
passage of the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 


147 


1987 (“CEBA”), which authorized the sale of bonds to 
recapitalize the FSLIC, by the end of 1987 there 
were still 259 problem institutions in the FSLIC 
caseload. The estimated cost of resolving these was 
$17.4 billion. The General Accounting Office estimated 
that an additional 300 institutions with assets of about 
$88 billion were insolvent under GAAP standards 
thereby exposing FSLIC to further risk. 
31. Recognizing this, the FHLBB continued to seek 
ways in which to facilitate supervisory acquisitions. 
For example, even though CEBA required generally 
that thrift institutions conform their accounting 
practices to GAAP, the FHLBB issued accounting 
regulations implementing CEBA which provided that 
accounting forbearances would continue to be in- 
cluded as a component of regulatory capital. 53 Fed. 
Reg. 324 (January 6, 1988). The rationale for the 
continued infusion of accounting forbearances was 
that such forbearances “have often been required to 
rong acquisition of a troubled institution....” 
32. By the end of 1988, FSLIC’s defici 
increased to $75 billion. It incurred a net magh 906 
billion for the year, and the thrift industry’s net 
losses, at $13 billion, were almost double the year 
before. While FSLIC reported a $43.6 billion loss 
allowance for the estimated cost of resolving 578 
problem thrifts that had not been resolved in 1988, it 
was able to dispose of 205 insolvent thrifts and 
stabilize 18 others by supplementing its CEBA bond 
receipts with FSLIC notes and long-term assistance 
agreements to attract acquirers of insolvent institu- 
tions. As FSLIC did not have the additional billions 
in cash to liquidate insolvent institutions and to pay 
off depositors, FSLIC arranged less expensive trans- 
actions with acquirer institutions through the use of 


148 


assistance agreements continuing provisions to cover 
the negative net worth of failed thrifts and to cover 


losses on nonperforming or poor quality assets. 


THE TRANSACTIONS 


33. On March 11, 1988, plaintiffs, through the newly 
formed Statesman Bank, purchased substantially all 
of the assets and assumed substantially all of the 
liabilities of First Federated Savings Bank, of West 
Palm Beach, Florida (“Federated”), from FSLIC, 
which had recently been appointed receiver for 
Federated. On that same date, March 11, 1988, 
Statesman Bank merged with First Federal Savings 
Bank of Waterloo Iowa (“First Federal”), Peoples 
Savings and Loan Association of Waterloo lowa 
(“Peoples”), and The Perpetual Savings and Loan 
Association of Waterloo, lowa (“Perpetual”). First 
Federal, Peoples, and Perpetual are sometimes here- 
inafter referred to as the “Waterloo Institutions.” 
The acquisitions all took place in a supervisory 
transaction induced and arranged by FSLIC and 
FHLBB. 

34. Federated was a stock savings bank organized 
under the laws of Florida, the accounts of which were 
insured by FSLIC. For the year ended December 31, 
1987, Federated reported a net loss of over $7 million. 
This reported loss did not include various audit 
adjustments made during the year for additional 
charge-offs of approximately $32 million. By Resolu- 
tion No. 88-167 dated March 11, 1988, FHLBB 
concluded that Federated was insolvent and ap- 
pointed FSLIC receiver for Federated contingent 
upon receipt of approval from the Comptroller, 
Bureau of Thrift, Savings and Loan Section, of the 


149 


State of Florida pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 1729. The 
Comptroller provided such approval, and FSLIC was 
— receiver for First Federated that same 

35. Prior to the merger, Perpetual was a mutual 
thrift chartered under the laws of Iowa, the accounts 
of which were insured by FSLIC. For the year ended 
December 31, 1987, Perpetual reported a net loss of 
$4.2 million. By Resolution No. 88-168 dated March 
il, 1988, FHLBB concluded that Perpetual was 
insolvent and appointed FSLIC conservator for 
Perpetual contingent upon receipt of approval from 
the Superintendent of Savings and Loans of the State 
of lowa pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 1729. The Superintend- 
ent of Savings and Loans of Iowa provided such 
approval, and FSLIC was appointed conservator for 
Perpetual that same date. 

36. Prior to the merger, First Federal was a 
federally chartered mutual savings bank, the accounts 
of which were insured by FSLIC. For the year ended 
December 31, 1987, First Federal reported a net loss 
of $12.5 million. At the time of its merger into 
“oe y oa aber Federal was insolvent. 

. Prior to the merger, Peoples was a federal 
chartered mutual savings and a association, the 
accounts of which were insured by FSLIC. For the 
year ended December 31, 1987, Peoples reported net 
loss of $4.4 million. At the time of its merger into 
Statesman Bank, Peoples was insolvent. 

38. In 1987, the Statesman Group explored the 
possibility of acquiring a subsidiary of Federated with 
assistance from FSLIC. In discussions with FSLIC 
thereafter, FSLIC “packaged” Federated with the 
three Waterloo Institutions, and requested bids from 


others for the potential acquisition of the four 
institutions. 


150 


39. On January 8, 1988, plaintiffs submitted a 
proposal (“Proposal”) to acquire the four institutions. 
The Proposal made clear that plaintiffs were not 
content to rely on FHLBB’s policies regarding certain 


aspects of the transaction, as it specified many of the - 


conditions of the proposed acquisitions. The Proposal 
called for the formation and capitalization of SSHC 
and Statesman Bank. The initial capital infusion by 
plaintiffs into SSHC was to be $21 million, of which 
$12.6 million was to be contributed by Statesman 
Group in the form of Statesman Group preferred 
stock, and $8.4 million was to be cash contributed by 
American Life. SSHC was to infuse all of the 
preferred stock and cash into Statesman Bank. 
Statesman Bank was to be organized and chartered 
by FSLIC, and then turned over to SSHC to be a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of SSHC. The Proposal 
called for assistance from FSLIC in the fore of cash 
and a promissory note in the total amount of the 
combined deficit of the four failed associations, with 
adjustments. FSLIC was also to guarantee partial 
reimbursement of losses on certain Covered Assets, 
to provide payments for spread and yield mainte- 
nance on certain covered assets, and to provide 
indemnification against certain losses. 

40. The Proposal also spelled out certain regulatory 
considerations and forbearances. First, the Proposal 
made clear that the purchase method of accounting 
was to be used, and that $21 million of the FSLIC 
cash contribution was to be a “capital credit” and 
would thus become a permanent part of Statesman 
Bank’s regulatory net worth. Specifically the Proposal 
stated: 


For regulatory purposes, with respect to the 
books and records of [Statesman Bank], push- 


151 


down accounting shall be used to record the 
purchase of [Statesman Bank’s] capital stock by 
SSHC. Twenty-one million of the cash contribu- 
tion to be made to [Statesman Bank] pursuant to 
an assistance agreement to be entered into 
between the FSLIC and Statesman [Group] is to 
be a credit to [Statesman Bank’s] regulatory 
capita; therefore, for regulatory accounting pur- 
poses, {Statesman Bank] will book such contribu- 
tion as a direct addition to its net worth. 
Accordingly, immediately after the acquisition, 
the regulatory capital of (Statesman Bank] will 
be $42,000,000, which will consist of $21,000,000 in 
capital infused by SSHC, plus $21,000,000 in 
capital contributed by the FSLIC which will be 
treated as regulatory capital. Not later than 30 
days following the acquisition, [Statesman Bank] 
shall submit to the Supervisory Agent an opinion 
of independent certified public accountants that 
[Statesman Bank] has accounted for the transac- 
tion in accordance with generally accepted ac- 
counting principles (“GAAP”) including the use of 
“push down” accounting, except that as provided 
by the Board, for purposes of reporting to the 
Board, twenty-one million dollars of the cash 
contribution by the FSLIC to [Statesman Bank] 
pursuant to the assistance agreement shall be 
deemed a contribution to regulatory net worth 
and will be booked as a direct credit to 
[Statesman Bank]. 


41. The Proposal called for additional regulatory 
considerations and forbearances, including a regula- 
tory capital maintenance agreemeni, waiver of ceriain 
debt restrictions that may apply to Statesman Group, 
authorization of certain cross-marketing activities by 


152 


plaintiffs, and other considerations and forbearances. 
Many of these considerations and forbearances were 
required to provide for waivers of regulatory restric- 
tions on companies such as Statesman Group and 
American Life, which were engaged in the insurance 
business, to acquire a controlling interest in a thrift 
institution. All regulatory forbearances, including the 
insistence of purchase method accounting and the re- 
quirement of the permanent capital credit, were 
integral to the acquisitions and without which the 
transactions would have been nonsensical. 

42. Attached as Appendix E to the Proposal was a 
letter from the independent accounting firm of Ernst 
and Whinney, which concluded that, “the proposed 
use of the purchase method of accounting will be in 
accordance with [GAAP].” The letter went on to state 
that the Statesman Group’s “proposal presents the 
$25 million excess of liabilities assumed over the 
estimated fair value of assets acquired as an 
unidentified intangible,” [i.e., goodwill]. 

43. The Proposal incorporated by reference the 
plaintiffs’ Business Plan. The Business Plan made 
clear that the purchase method of accounting was 
integral to the proposal, as it stated that, “[t]he 
projected financial statements have been prepared 
with purchase accounting being applied by use of the 
‘Push-Down’ method. Inasmuch as the acquisition 
does not give rise to continuity- of ownership, 
Statesman believes that application of the purchase 
method is appropriate and is in accordance with 
[GAAP}.” The Business Plan also expressly stated 
that it was “based upon the assumption that certain 
regulatory forbearances and considerations will be 
granted,” and stressed that the forbearances were 
“necessary to consummate the transaction.” The 
Business Plan contained projected statements of 


153 


condition, which indicate that the $21 million of the 
cash contribution from FSLIC was to be treated as 
permanent regulatory capital of Statesman Bank and 
not subject to reduction through amortization. The 
notes to the projections made clear that the purchase 
method of secounting was a major assumption on 
which the entire proposal was based: 


(3) Accounting for the Acquisition 


The accompanying projected financial state- 
ments have been prepared assuming purchase 
accounting is applied to record the acquisition of 
the Bank and that purchase accounting is applied 
by the “push down” method as of December 31, 
1987. Purchase accounting is the method of 
recording a business acquisition by adjusting 
assets and liabilities to market value and 
eliminating net worth. “Push-down” refers to 
recording the adjustments on the books of the 
acquired company. 


The Business Plan expressly contemplated that 
Statesman Bank would record on its books “(gloodwill 
of approximately $25.8 million arising from the 
acquisition. ...” 

44. Plaintiffs also submitted to FSLIC an Applica- 
tion H-(e)l1 (“Application”) for approval of the 
acquisition of the banks, dated February 12, 1988. 
The Application incorporated the Proposal and the 
Business Plan. In additional, the Application made 
clear that, “the Acquisition Proposal is subject to a 
number specific terms and conditions, among which 
are certain regulatory forbearances and considera- 
tions to be granted or obtained by the FSLIC.... 
Applicant wishes to emphasize the importance of the 
requested forbearances and considerations to the 


154 


completion of the Acquisition....” The Application also 
summarized the specified conditions, stressing that, 


[flor regulatory purposes with respect to the 
books and records of [Statesman Bank], push- 
down accounting shall be used to record the 
purchase of [Statesman Bank’s] capital stock by 
the Holding Company. Twenty-one million dollars 
of the cash contribution to be made to [Statesman 
Bank] pursuant to an assistance agreement to be 
entered into between the FSLIC and Applicant is 
to be a credit to !Statesman Bank’s] regulatory 
capital; therefore, for regulatory accounting pur- 
poses, [Statesman Bank] will book such contribu- 
tion as a direct addition to its net worth. 


The Application did not even refer to the possibility 
that the $21 million capital credit would be amortized. 
45. The Application also reiterated several other 
regulatory considerations and forbearances that were 
integral to the transaction. On March 1, 1988, 
plaintiffs amended their Application H-(e)1 in certain 
respects, but did not amend any aspect of the 
proposal affecting the use of the purchase-method 
accounting or of the $21 million capital credit. 

46. The purchase method of accounting and the 
capital credit for $21 million of the FSLIC cash 
contribution were integral to plaintiffs’ bid. Had 
plaintiffs not been permitted to record as capital the 
supervisory goodwill in the amount by which the 
acquired institution’s liabilities exceeded their assets 
in addition to the $21,000,000 of FSLIC assistance, 
plaintiffs’ acquisition of the institutions on the 
financial terms proposed would have rendered the 
entire transaction senseless. Had Statesman Bank not 
been permitted to record supervisory goodwill and 


155 


the $21 million of FSLIC assistance as regulatory 
capital, it would have been considered insolvent for 
regulatory purposes on the date of the acquisition, 
and thus immediately subject to liquidation by 
FHLBB and FSLIC. Plaintiffs would not have made 
such a proposal. Nor would they have made a 
proposal which did not include the other requested 
regulatory considerations and forbearances. Thus, 
plaintiffs’ willingness to enter into the supervisory 
transaction on the financial terms set forth in the 
Proposal was absolutely conditioned on FHLBB’s and 
FSLIC’s agreement to permit plaintiffs to report 
supervisory goodwill as capital, and to report the $21 
million of FSLIC assistance as a permanent credit to 
the capital of Statesman Bank for regulatory pur- 
poses. Absent all of the specified regulatory consid- 
erations and forbearances, plaintiffs either would 
have insisted upon receiving far greater tangible 
financial assistance from FSLIC, such as additional 
cash contributions or promissory notes, or would have 
withdrawn their offer. 

47. FSLIC and FHLBB determined that plaintiffs’ 
bid was the most attractive solution for the four 
insolvent institutions. The parties negotiated and 
agreed upon several of the terms and conditions of 
the transaction, set forth below. After FSLIC and 
FHLBB selected plaintiffs’ bid, FHLBB and FSLIC 
organized and chartered Statesman Bank, and caused 
it to issue common stock to SSHC at closing. 
Statesman Bank entered into a separate Merger 
Agreement and Plan of Merger (“Merger Agree- 
ment”) with each of the three Waterloo Institutions. 
Each of the Merger Agreements was expressly 
conditioned upon the execution of an Assistance 
Agreement among FSLIC, Statesman Bank, States- 
man Group, American Life, and SSHC. 


156 


48. Statesman Bank also entered into an Acquisi- 
tion Agreement with FSLIC as receiver for Fede- 
rated, under which Statesman Bank agreed to 
purchase substantially all of the assets, and to assume 
substantially all of the liabilities, of Federated. The 
Acquisition Agreement stated that computations 
made for purposes of the acquisition would be 
governed by GAAP, except that where GAAP 
conflicted with any action, regulations or resolutions 
of FHLBB and FSLIC, then the action, regulation or 
resolution would prevail over GAAP. The Acquisition 
Agreement also incorporated FHLBB Resolutions 
adopted contemporaneously with the Acquisition 
Agreement. 

49. FSLIC and all of the plaintiffs entered into an 
Assistance Agreement pertaining to the transaction. 
Under the Assistance Agreement, FSLIC agreed to 
contribute $60 million to Statesman Bank. The 
Assistance Agreement states that $26 million of the 
$60 million cash contribution from FSLIC was to be 
considered part of Statesman Bank’s regulatory 
capital. In addition, under the Assistance Agreement, 
FSLIC delivered a Promissory Note in the amount of 
the difference between the acquired associations’ 
negative regulatory capital and the $60 million cash 
provided by FSLIC. Also under the Assistance 
Agreement, Statesman Bank delivered to FSLIC a 
Subordinated Debenture in the face amount of $5 
million at a term of ten years. The Assistance 
Agreement provided that it “shall be governed by 
GAAP, except that where such principles conflict 
with the terms of the Agreement, applicable regula- 
tions of the Bank Board or [FSLIC], or any resolution 
or action of the Bank Board approving or relating to 
the Acquisition, the Mergers or to this Agreement, 
then this Agreement, such regulations, or such 


157 


resolution or action shall govern.” The Assistance 
Agreement also provided for continuing FSLIC 
assistance on certain Covered Assets on which 
FSLIC was to assume 93 percent of losses. 

50. Also on March 11, 1988, plaintiffs entered into a 
Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agreement with 
FSLIC, under which plaintiffs agreed that Statesman 
Bank would maintain the regulatory capital of the 
Bank in compliance with regulatory capital require- 
ments. Section 2 of that Agreement defined regula- 
tory capital to include “amounts permitted by the 
FSLIC in the Assistance Agreement and in the 
forbearances issued in connection with the transac- 
tions discussed herein.” The Regulatory Capital 
Maintenance Agreement provided that the computa- 
tions of regulatory capital “shall be perpetual.” Under 
that Agreement, Statesman Group and American Life 
guaranteed to infuse up to $4 million of capital into 
Statesman Bank and SSHC as necessary to maintain 
Statesman Bank’s regulatory capital at required 
levels. Also, under the Regulatory Capital Mainte- 
nance Agreement plaintiffs granted FSLIC voting 
rights for the stock of SSHC, to be exercised in the 
event that Statesman Bank failed to satisfy minimum 
regulatory capital requirements. 

51. The Assistance Agreement and the Regulatory 
Capital Maintenance Agreement incorporated the 
Resolutions of the Bank Board issued in connection 
with the acquisitions. One of the Resolutions issued 
by FHLBB, Resolution No. 88-169, recited that the 
transfer of the assets and liabilities of Federated as 
provided for in the Acquisition Agreement “is the 
most desirable alternative, consistent with Bank 
Board and FSLIC policy, to the liquidation of 
[Federated] and the payment of insurance on its 
accounts....” The Resolution also determined that 


158 


each of the acquired associations was a “failing 
institution,” that the acquisition of Federated and the 
mergers of the Waterloo Institutions “would lessen 
the risk to the FSLIC,” that “no other offer was 
made to acquire all of the Associations,” that there 
was no other qualified offeror who presented an 
acceptable offer “the estimated cost of which was 
within the lesser of 15 percent or $15 million of the 
cost of the offer of the Applicants to acquire all of the 
associations,” that plaintiffs’ bid “presents the lowest 
expense and least risk to the FSLIC of any proposal 
submitted for any of the Associations,” and that “the 
offer of the Applicants is substantially less costly to 
the FSLIC than any alternative proposal or pro- 
posals.” FHLBB further found that “financial assist- 
ance and indemnification by the FSLIC are necessary 
to prevent the default of each Association and to 
facilitate the Acquisition and the Mergers.” 

52. The Resolution approved the Assistance Agree- 
ment, the Promissory Note, the Subordinated Deben- 
ture, and the forbearances from regulatory 
requirements. 

53. With respect to the acquisition of Federated’s 
assets and liabilities and the mergers of the Waterloo 
Institutions, FHLBB resolved that Statesman Bank 
shall report to FHLBB and FSLIC that the transac- 
tions were accounted for in accordance with GAAP as 
interpreted by FHLBB and FSLIC regulations, but 
specifically noted two departures from GAAP: (a) 
that the $21 million contribution by FSLIC and the 
$5 million principal amount of the Subordinated 
Debenture issued to FSLIC “shall be credited to the 
regulatory capital account of’ Statesman Bank; and 
(b) that goodwill could be amortized over a period of 
up to 25 years. FHLBB further resolved that 
Statesman Bank shall furnish an independent certified 


159 


accountant’s opinion within 90 days following the 
effective date which shall “indicate that the Acquisi- 
tion and the Mergers were consummated in accord- 


ance with [GAAP] except as otherwise authori 
the Bank Board,” and : aoe 


which shall (a) specifically describe, as of the 
Effective Date, any intangible assets, including 
goodwill and the discount and premiums arising 
from the Acquisition and the mergers, to be 
recorded on [Statesman Bank’s] books, and (b) 
substantiate the reasonableness and conformity 
with regulatory requirements of the amounts 
attributed to intangible assets, including goodwill 
and the discounted premiums, and the related 
amortization periods and methods.... 


54. At closing FHLBB issued to Statesman Bank a 
forbearance letter which set forth eleven enumerated 


- regulatory forbearances that had been negotiated and 


agreed upon by plaintiffs and FHLBB, and which are 
part of the parties’ contractual commitments. The 
forbearance letter included FHLBB’s agreement (a) 
not to enforce for five years regulatory capital 
deficiencies arising from specified items, including the 
acquired associations’ liabilities and net worth defi- 
ciency, and (b) to include $21 million of FSLIC’s 
contribution, and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture, in Statesman Bank’s regula- 
tory capital. 

55. In accordance with the agreements of the 
parties, at closing FSLIC issued to Statesman Bank a 
promissory note of $43 million which has subse- 
quently been adjusted to a principal amount of over 
$55 million. Statesman Bank also issued to FSLIC a 


Subordinated Debenture in the face amount of $5 
million. 


160 


56. The purchase of Federated’s assets and the 
assumption of its liabilities, and the supervisory 
mergers of the Waterloo Institutions, were all 
consummated on March 11, 1988 in accordance with 
the terms and conditions set forth in the items 
described above. 

57. In reliance upon FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s ex- 
press contractual agreement concerning the use of 
purchase-method accounting, the acquired assets and 
liabilities of Federated, Perpetual, Peoples, and First 
Federal were adjusted to fair market value at the 
time of the transactions, and the resulting excess of 
liabilities over acquired assets was recorded on 
Statesman Bank’s books as an intangible asset to be 
included in capital and amortized in accordance with 
FASB 72. The amount of supervisory goodwill 
ultimately recorded by Statesman Bank as a result of 
the acquisitions was $27,874,583. Also in reliance on 
FHLBB’s and FSLIC’s express agreements, States- 
man Bank recorded as regulatory capital the $21 
million of FSLIC assistance and the $5 million face 
amount of the Subordinated Debenture. In financial 
reports filed with FSLIC and FHLBB since the 
transaction, Statesman Bank has consistently re- 
ported these items as assets included in capital for 
regulatory purposes, in accordance with and in 
reliance upon, FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s express agree- 
ment. In accordance with the agreements with 
FSLIC and FHLBB, Statesman Bank has not 
amortized the $21 million capital credit in its reports 
to FHLBB. FHLBB objected to Statesman Bank’s 
failure to amortize the capital credit, despite its 
agreement that the capital credit shall be perpetual. 
Other than this objection, prior to the enactment of 
FIRREA, neither FSLIC nor FHLBB objected to 
Statesman Bank’s regulatory accounting treatment of 
these items. 


161 


58. FLSIC and FHLBB benefited enormously from 
the use as regulatory capital of supervisory goodwill, 
the capital credit of $21 million, and the $5 million 
face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
connection with the acquisition of Federated’s lia- 
bilities and assets, and the mergers of the Waterloo 
Institutions. As of December 31, 1987, the four failed 
institutions reported an aggregate negative net worth 
of $90.2 million. If these figures were adjusted to 
reflect the fair market value of the assets and 
liabilities, the difference between the liabilities and 
assets would exceed the aggregate negative net 
worth of the institutions. Indeed, the initial audit 
reports (before the GAAP purchase accounting mark 
to market entries), currently in the process of 
finalization, detail the negative regulatory net worth 
of the four institutions at an amount in excess of $115 
million in the aggregate. When the failed thrifts’ 
assets and liabilities were later marked to market, 
Statesman Bank ultimately recorded the difference as 
supervisory goodwill in the amount of $27,874,583. 
This figure did not include FSLIC’s exposure of 93 
percent of the losses on Covered Assets under the 
Assistance Agreement. If all of the Covered Assets of 
the four failed thrifts had been included in the mark 
to market analysis, the difference between the fair 
market value of the four thrifts’ assets and liabilities 
would have increased by more than $30 million. Thus, 
the cost of liquidating the four institutions would 
have exceeded the sum of (a) the aggregate negative 
regulatory capital of $115 million, (b) the goodwill of 
$27.9 million, and (c) $30 million as the allowance for 
loss on the remaining 93 percent of Covered Assets, 
for a total of $172.9 million. Even this figure is a 
conservative estimate of the cost of liquidation, in 
light of operating losses, deterioration of asset 


162 


quality, deposit outflows, and resolution costs such as 
brokerage fees, holding costs, etc. 

59. Indeed, in a Statement Before the Committee 
on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of the United 
States Senate dated May 26, 1988, M. Danny Wall, 
then Chairman of FHLBB, praised many aspects of 
the Statesman transaction, stating that “the financial 
assistance provided by the FSLIC in connection with 
these acquisitions was $50 million less than the cost 
to FSLIC of liquidating the four institutions.” Mr. 
Wall referred to the transaction as “one of the more 
significant acquisitions arranged by FSLIC,” and 
stated that it was “noteworthy not only for the 
number of institutions involved,” but also because 
FHLBB granted forbearances as to cross-marketing 
of products and services between subsidiaries of 
Statesman Group and Statesman Bank. Mr. Wall 
stated that any restrictions on cross-marketing 
“would have been a material impediment” to a 
transaction worth $50 million to the government. 

60. Plaintiffs have complied in good faith with all 
the terms and conditions of the agreements relating 
to the acquisition of the four institutions and have 
otherwise fully performed their undertakings in 
connection therewith. 

61. Plaintiffs’ acquisitions of and investment in 
Federated and the Waterloo Institutions were made 
in reliance upon FHLBB’s and FSLIC’s policies and 
statements encouraging and approving the use of the 
purchase method of accounting and the inclusion of 
goodwill, the $21 million capital credit and the $5 
million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
capital for regulatory reporting purposes. FHLBB 
and FSLIC were fully aware of plaintiffs’ reliance on 
these policies and statements, and well knew or 
should have known that none of the plaintiffs would 


163 


acquire or invest in Federated and the Waterloo 
Institutions absent the specified regulatory account- 
ing treatment of goodwill, the $21 million regulatory 
capital credit, and inclusion of the $5 million face 
amount of the Subordinated Debenture in regulatory 
capital. 

62. The parties’ agreement concerning the use of 
supervisory goodwill, the permanent capital treat- 
ment of the $21 million capital credit, and the 
inclusion of the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture were essential terms and 
conditions of the transaction, and were essential to 
the parties’ purpose of allowing plaintiffs a reasonable 
opportunity to turn the four failed thrifts into a 
profitable venture. Plaintiffs would not have agreed 
to acquire the four failed thrifts in the absence of 
such regulatory accounting treatment, because 
Statesman Bank would have been left insolvent and 
because Statesman Bank would otherwise have been 
unable to manage itself without substantial regulatory 
oversight that would interfere with its business and 


prospects. 


STATESMAN BANK’S POST-MERGER 
PERFORMANCE 


63. Plaintiffs’ acquisition of the four failed institu- 
tions prevented their default and liquidation, thus 
saving the FSLIC insurance fund, by FHLBB’s 
admission, $50 million. Since the acquisition, States- 
man Bank has performed well, achieving the purposes 
of the acquisitions. Statesman Bank has resolved 
problem loans, eliminated non-performing assets, and 
operated soundly. In human terms, the value of 
plaintiffs’ success cannot be measured. By preventing 


164 


the liquidation of the four institutions, the acquisi- 
tions not only saved FSLIC millions of dollars, they 
saved the jobs of hundreds of people and preserved 
important services for thousands of savers, home 
buyers, and other customers in the communities 
served by the insolvent thrifts. 

64. FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s contractual promises, 
for which plaintiffs provided substantial consideration 
and on which they detrimentally relied in fully 
performing their obligations under their agreements 
with FSLIC and FHLBB, entitled Statesman Bank to 
record supervisory goodwill, the $21 million capital 
credit, and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture as credits to capital for 
purposes of defendants’ regulatory capital require- 
ments. These contractual promises also entitled 
Statesman Bank to report the $21 million capital 
credit as perpetual capital that need not be amor- 
tized. Plaintiffs’ contract rights arising out of the 
above-described agreements with FSLIC and 
FHLBB constitute property within the meaning of 
the Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. 


FIRREA 


65. FIRREA was signed into law by President 
Bush on August 9, 1989. Section 301 of FIRREA 
required the Director of OTS to promulgate, no later 
than November 7, 1989, final regulations establishing 
minimum capital requirements for federally insured 
thrifts. These minimum capital requirements became 
effective on December 7, 1989, and require federally 
insured thrifts to: 


165 


(a) maintain “tangible capital,” which excludes 
intangible assets including supervisory good- 
will, in an amount not less than 1.5 percent of 
the thrift’s assets; 

(b) maintain “core capital,” as defined in the 
statute, in an amount not less than 3 percent 
of the thrift’s assets; and, 

(c) maintain “risk-based capital” in an amount 
not materially less than that required by the 


Comptroller of the Currency for national 
banks. | 


66. FIRREA provides that “tangible capital” shall 
not include intangible assets and supervisory good- 
will, and that only limited amounts of “core capital” 
may be made up of supervisory goodwill. Prior to 
January 1, 1992, the amount of supervisory goodwill 
includable in core capital may not exceed 1.5 percent 
of total assets. Thereafter, the amount of supervisory 
goodwill (as a percentage of assets) includable in core 
capital declines each year, in accordance with the 
following schedule: 


January 1, 1992, to December 31, 1992 .... 1.0 percent 
January 1, 1993, to December 31, 1993 .... 0.75 percent 
January 1, 1994, to December 31, 1994 .... 0.375 percent 


For purposes of the minimum capital requirements, 
supervisory goodwill must be amortized over a period 
not to exceed 20 years. 

67. FIRREA does not abrogate contracts and 
forbearances of FHLBB and FSLIC, and indeed 
provides that all orders, resolutions, determinations 
and regulations of FHLBB and FSLIC shall continue 


166 


in effect and be enforceable against OTS and FDIC. 
FIRREA does not exclude FSLIC capital contribu- 
tions on the face amount of Subordinated Debenture 
from capital for purposes of determining compliance 
with any of the minimum capital requirements, at 
least where governed by contrary contractual provi- 
sions and forbearances. Nor does FIRREA require 
that supervisory goodwill be excluded from capital for 
purposes of determining compliance with minimum 
“risk-based” capital requirements. 

68. FIRREA also requires the Director of OTS to 
enforce the following restrictions against federally 
insured thrifts that do not meet the minimum capital 
standards promulgated under FIRREA: 


(a) After January 1, 1991, the Director must 
prohibit the asset growth of any federally 
insured thrift not in compliance with regula- 
tory capital standards, except that the Direc- 
tor may approve a “limited growth exception” 
upon specified conditions. In addition, the 
Director may restrict the asset growth of any 
such thrift at any time prior to January 1, 
1991. 

(b) As of January 8, 1990, the Director required 
thrifts that do not meet minimum capital 
standards under FIRREA to submit a plan 
(“capital plan”) that (1) addresses the thrift’s 
need for increased capital under FIRREA; (2) 
describes the manner in which the thrift will 
increase its capital to achieve the minimum 
capital standards; (3) specifies types and 
levels of activities the thrift will engage in; 
(4) requires any increase in assets to be 
accompanied by specified increases in tan- 
gible and risk-based capital; and, (5) is 


167 


acceptable to the Director. The Director must 
treat any material failure to comply with such 
a plan as an unsafe and unsound practice. 

(c) After January 1, 1991, the Director must 
require federally insured thrifts that do not 
meet minimum capital standards under FIR- 
REA to comply with a capital directive waich 
may include restrictions on the payment of 
dividends and on compensation, as the Direc- 
tor determines to be appropriate. FIRREA 
permits, but does not require, the Director to 
exempt thrifts from receipts of a capital 
directive in certain circumstances. 


69. The Director may impose other restrictions on 
federally insured thrifts that do not meet minimum 
capital standards promulgated under FIRREA: 


(a) The Director, in his discretion, may treat any 
thrift’s failure to maintain capital at minimum 
regulatory levels as an unsafe or unsound 
practice subjecting the thrift to a range of 
further actions by the Director, including, 
among other things, issuance of cease and 
desist orders, appointment of a conservator or 
receiver, and suspension or removal of of- 
ficers and directors. 

(b) Such thrifts also must notify the Director of 
the proposed addition of any individual to the 
board of directors or of the employment of 
any individual as a senior executive officer of 
the thrift 30 days before such addition or 
employment becomes effective, and the Direc- 
tor may before the end of that 30 days 
disapprove the addition or employment. 


70. FIRREA does not define “goodwill” or “super- 
visory goodwill.” 


168 
OTS CAPITAL REGULATION 


71. On November 8, 1989, OTS published minimum 
capital regulations (“OTS capital regulation”) pur- 
suant to FIRREA. The OTS capital regulation 
became effective on December 7, 1989. 

72. In accordance with FIRREA, the OTS capital 
regulation establishes a minimum “tangible” capital 
requirement of 1.5 percent of total assets and a 
minimum “core” capital requirement of 3 percent of 
total assets. Supervisory goodwill cannot be counted 
as “tangible” capital at all, and can be counted as 
“core” capital only in accordance with the phase-out 
schedule set forth in FIRREA (see paragraph 66 
above). 

73. FIRREA does not require that supervisory 
goodwill be excluded from capital for purposes of 
determining compliance with minimum “risk-based” 
capital requirements. Nonetheless, the OTS capital 
regulation permits the inclusion of supervisory good- 
will in capital for purposes of the minimum “risk- 
based” capital requirement only in accordance with 
the phase-out schedule set forth in FIRREA for 
determining compliance with the minimum “core” 
capital requirement (see paragraph 66 above). 

74. Under the OTS capital regulation, the $21 
million dollar capital credit, which the parties had 
agreed would be fully includable in Statesman Bank’s 
regulatory capital without reduction through amortiz- 
ation, is considered “qualified supervisory goodwill.” 
Therefore, it is excluded completely from Statesman 
Bank’s tangible capital, and only limited amounts may 
be used to satisfy Statesman Bank’s core and risk- 
based capital requirements. 

75. Under FIRREA and the OTS capital regula- 
tion, the $5 million face amount of the Subordinated 


169 


Debenture, which the parties had agreed would be 
fully includable in Statesman Bank’s regulatory 
capital, is considered “supplementary capital.” Under 
that designation only portions of that amount are 
includable to satisfy Statesman Bank’s risk-based 
capital requirement, and the amount is entirely 
excluded from Statesman Bank’s tangible and core 
capital requirements. 

76. Apart from the requirements and restrictions 
imposed by FIRREA on federally insured thrift 
institutions that fail to meet minimum capital require- 
ments, the OTS capital regulation mandates a variety 
of additional consequences. For example, in addition 
to submitting a capital plan for achieving compliance 
with the minimal capital requirements, a noncomply- 
ing thrift must, under the OTS capital regulation, 
certify that while the plan is under review by OTS, it 
will not (absent OTS approval) (1) grow beyond net 
interest credited, (2) make any capital distributions, 
or (3) act inconsistently with any other limitations on 
activities established by statute, regulation, or by 
OTS in supervisory guidance. If a plan is not 
approved by OTS, the submitting thrift “shall 
immediately and without any further action” refrain 
from increasing its assets beyond the amount held on 
the day it receives notice of the disapproval and 
comply with any other restrictions or limitations set 
forth in OTS’s written disapproval of the plan. The 
OTS capital regulation further provides that OTS 
may, “though enforcement proceedings or otherwise,” 
require any thrift that fails to meet any of its 
regulatory capital requirements to take one or more 
of the following corrective actions: 


(a) increase the amount of its regulatory capital 
to a specified level or levels; 


170 


(b) convene a meeting or meetings with the OTS 
supervision staff for the purpose of accom- 
plishing the objectives of this section; 

(c) reduce the rate of earnings that may be paid 
on savings accounts; 

(d) limit the receipt of deposits to those made to 
existing accounts; 

(e) cease or limit the issuance of new accounts of 
any or all classes or categories, except in 
exchange for existing accounts; 

(f) cease or limit lending or the making of a 
particular type or category of loan; 

(g) cease or limit the purchase of loans or the 
making of specified other investments; 

(h) limit operational expenditures to specified 
levels; 

(i) increase liquid assets and maintain such 
increased liquidity at specified levels; or 

(j) take such other action or actions as the 
Director may deem necessary or appropriate 
for the safety and soundness of the savings 
association, or the depositors or investors in 
the savings association. 


On or after January 1, 1991, these restrictions, “and 
any other restrictions the Director [of OTS] deter- 
mines appropriate,” may be included in a “capital 
directive” issued by the Director against a non- 
complying thrift. Finally, according to the OTS capital 
regulation, OTS must treat as an unsafe and unsound 
practice “any material failure by a savings association 
to comply with any plan, regulation, written agree- 
ment undertaken or order or directive issued to 
comply with the requirements of [the capital 
regulation].” 

77. In “Thrift Bulletin 36,” now effective, OTS 
specified that acceptance of a capital plan submitted 


171 


by a noncomplying thrift will be predicted on certain 
additional stringent conditions, including among 
others: 


(a) The management and the board of directors 
must execute an operating agreement which 
may provide, among other things, that if 
specific targets within the plan are not met or 
the thrift takes any action that does not 
comport with the plan, certain activities will 
be significantly restricted, a consent to merge 
agreement will be executed, or management 
and the board of directors will resign. 

(b) The board of directors and senior manage- 
ment for the thrift must file an amendment, 
acceptable to the OTS District Director, to 
the capital plan within 15 days following an 
event or circumstance that materially affects 
the validity of the capital plan or its 
underlying assumptions. At a minimum, the 
capital plan must be reviewed and revised as 
necessary on an annual basis. 

(c) The thrift must submit to the OTS District 
Director, within 20 days following the close of 
each calendar quarter, quarterly variance 
reports comparing actual capital to the tar- 
gets established in the capital plan. Failure to 
file such variance reports shall constitute an 
unsafe and unsound practice. Variances that 
the District Director deems to be material 
may be grounds for revoking acceptance to 
the capital plan. 


78. According to Thrift Bulletin 36, a thrift that 
fails to comply with any of its minimum capital 
requirements will be deemed to be in noncompliance 


172 


upon “adoption” of the OTS capital regulation, rather 
than upon the rejection of any capital plan submitted 
by the thrift. 

79. Thrift Bulletin 36 recognizes that, apart from 
the specific restrictions set forth in FIRREA and the 
OTS capital regulation, there are a significant number 
of related OTS regulations, rule, and policy state- 
ments that limit or restrict a variety of essential 
business activities, (e.g., payment of dividends, 
establishment of branches, receipt of Federal Home 
Loan Bank advances, investments in securities and 
real estate) by thrifts that do not meet minimum 
capital requirements. Thrift Bulletin 36 requires that 
thrifts “request and receive approval of specific, 
express exemptions” from the operation of such 
related regulations “as part of the capital plan to be 
deemed in capital compliance.” 


THE IMPACT OF FIRREA AND 
THE OTS REGULATION 


80. As of September 30, 1989, prior to the effective 
date of FIRREA and the OTS capital regulation, 
Statesman Bank’s regulatory capital was $53.2 
million—$15.8 million in excess of its required 
minimum of $37.4 million. As of that date, Statesman 
Bank reported supervisory goodwill and other intang- 
ible assets in the amount of $24,077,000, and fully 
included the OTS capital credit of $21 million and the 
$5 million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture 
in its regulatory capital. Statesman Bank does not 
satisfy the three new capital standards of FIRREA 
and the OTS capital regulation. As of December 31, 
1989, after the OTS capital regulation became 
effective, Statesman Bank reported tangible capital of 


173 


negative $2.8 million ($11.8 million less than the 
required level of $9 million); core capital of $6.8 
million ($11.2 million less than the required level of 
$18 million); and risk-based capital of $13.7 million 
($10 million less than the required level of $23.7 
million). If Statesman Bank were permitted to record 
as regulatory capital its remaining supervisory good- 
will, the $21 million capital credit, and the $5 million 
face amount of the Subordinated Debenture, it would 
have reported as of December 31, 1989, tangible 
capital of $23.2 million, core capital of $32.8 million, 
and risk-based capital of $36.5 million. Therefore, but 
for the provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of these items in 
capital—restrictions that violate plaintiffs’ agree- 
ments with FSLIC and FHLBB—Statesman Bank 
would satisfy each of the three capital requirements. 
Accordingly, Statesman Bank is subject to restric- 
tions and penalties relating to FIRREA’s capital 
requirements solely because of the. repudiation of 
FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s agreements with plaintiffs. 
81. On January 5, 1990, Statesman Bank submitted 
a capital plan together with a proposed modification 
and extension of the March 1988 acquisition agree- 
ments. On March 13, 1990, OTS denied Statesman 
Bank’s capital plan. OTS notified Statesman Bank 
that it must comply with OTS’ policy statements set 
forth in bulletin RB3a-1, under which Statesman 
Bank would not be permitted to make any new loans 
or investments without the prior written approval of 
the District Director of OTS. After negotiations with 
the OTS District Director, Statesman Bank was 
granted only limited exceptions to those restrictions. 
82. Under the restrictions outlined above, -States- 
man Bank was subject to substantial competitive 
disadvantage in the marketplace for loans deposits. 


174 


Statesman Bank—on pain of the full range of 
regulatory economic sanctions, from cease and desist 
orders to receivership and liquidation—was subjected 
not only to OTS’s close supervisory scrutiny, but to 
its direction and control regarding virtually all of its 
business operations. Statesman Bank’s managerial 
discretion, which has produced a record of conserva- 
tive, sound and efficient management, was greatly 
circumscribed. In addition, the collateral con- 
sequences of the restrictions imposed by FIRREA 
and the OTS capital regulation were equally damag- 
ing. For example, Statesman Bank’s ability to attract 
and retain deposits, as well as its ability to borrow in 
capital markets, was impaired. The restrictions also 
reduced Statesman Bank’s ability to generate mort- 
gages and other loans, reduced its access to second- 
ary mortgage markets, and impaired its ability to 
generate profits. The asset growth restrictions re- 
duced Statesman Bank’s ability to obtain the advan- 
tages of growth available to thrifts, banks, and other 
financial institutions competing with it for the 
provision of mortgages and other loans and services 
in its market area. Moreover, the restrictions imposed 
under FIRREA and the OTS capital regulation 
impaired Statesman Bank’s ability to serve the needs 
of savers and home buyers in its market area. In 
these and countless other ways, Statesman Bank was 
denied the benefits of including its supervisory 
goodwill, the $21 million capital credit and the $5 
million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
capital for purposes of complying with regulatory 
capital requirements—benefits that plaintiffs con- 
tracted for in their agreements with FSLIC and 
FHLBB. 

83. In essence confirming that the purpose of the 
Statesman Bank acquisition had been frustrated, on 
July 26, 1990, the Director, OTS concluded that 


175 


the [Statesman Bank] is in an unsafe and 
unsound condition to transact business due to 
having substantially insufficient capital in that 
the [Statesman Bank] has negative tangible 
capital, and ... the [Statesman Bank] has incurred 
or is likely to incur losses that will deplete all or 
substantia!ly all of its capital ... 


As a result, the Director, OTS appointed the 
Resolution Trust Corporation (“RTC”) as receiver for 
Statesman Bank. On that same date, OTS formed a 
new institution, Statesman Federal Savings Bank, to 
take over all of the assets and liabilities of Statesman 
Bank, and appointed RTC as conservator of that new 
institution. On July 27, 1990, RTC took possession of 
Statesman Bank. This action caused additional signifi- 
cant harm to the reputation of the SSHC, Statesman 
Group, and American Life in financial and other 
communities, and otherwise severely impaired their 
ability to conduct their operations in a profitable 
manner free from burdensome and costly government 
interference. 

84. Thus, the repudiation of FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s 
contractual promises frustrated the very purpose of 
the acquisition of Statesman Bank: the conversion of 
four failed thrifts into a sound, profitable institution 
serving the financial needs of the community. 

85. Prior to the appointment of a receiver for 
Statesman Bank by OTS, on June 6, 1990. plaintiffs 
filed a complaint in the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia seeking, on contractual 
and constitutional grounds, to enjoin OTS and FDIC 
from abrogating their contractual commitments to 
include supervisory goodwill, the $21 million capital 
credit and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture in regulatory capital, or, 


176 


alternatively, to have the transaction rescinded and 
otherwise restore the parties to the status quo ante. 
On August 15, 1990, plaintiffs dismissed this district 
court action without prejudice. 


COUNT I 


86. Plaintiffs incorporate paragraphs 1 through 84. 

87. The provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of supervisory 
goodwill, the $21 million capital credit and the $5 
million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
Statesman Bank’s capital for purposes of satisfying 
regulatory capital requirements constitute a repudia- 
tion and abrogation of plaintiffs’ contract rights, as 
described above, and effect a taking of plaintiffs’ 
property without just compensation, in violation of 
the Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. 


COUNT II 


88. Plaintiffs incorporate paragraphs 1 through 86. 

89. The provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of supervisory 
goodwill, the $21 million capital credit and the $5 
million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
Statesman Bank’s capital for purposes of satisfying 
the regulatory capital requirements constitute a 
repudiation and abrogation of contract rights, as 
described above, and effect a deprivation of plaintiffs 
property without due process of law, in violation of 
the Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. 


177 
COUNT III 


90. Plaintiff incorporate paragraphs 1 through 88. 

91. The provisions of FIRREA and the OTS capital 
regulation restricting the inclusion of supervisory 
goodwill, the $21 million capital credit and the $5 
million face amount of the Subordinated Debenture in 
Statesman Bank's capital for purposes of satisfying 
minimum capital requirements constitute a repudia- 
tion and breach of plaintiffs’ contract rights, as 
described above, for which plaintiffs are entitled to 
restitutionary relief. 


COUNT IV 


92. Plaintiffs incorporate paragraphs 1 through 90. 

93. The provisions of the OTS capital regulation 
restricting the inclusion of the $21 million capital 
credit and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture in Statesman Bank’s regula- 
tory tangible capital constitute a repudiation and 
breach of FSLIC’s and FHLBB’s obligations under 
their contracts with plaintiffs, as ‘described above. 


COUNT V 


94. Plaintiffs incorporate paragraphs 1 through 92. 

95. The abrogation of the defendants’ contractual 
agreements by FIRREA and the OTS capital regula- 
tion frustrates the entire purpose of plaintiffs’ 
contract with FHLBB and FSLIC for the acquisition 
of the four thrifts, and deprives plaintiffs of the 
consideration for which they bargained. Plaintiffs are 
entitled to rescission of the transaction with defend- 
ants, and the return of plaintiffs’ investment of $21 


178 


million, plus compensation for all monies expended 
and costs incurred by plaintiffs, and for all benefits 
conferred upon defendants, through plaintiffs’ pur- 
chase, operation, and management of the four 
institutions. 


COUNT VI 


96. Plaintiffs incorporate paragraphs 1 through 94. 

97. Defendants are estopped from asserting or 
enforcing against plaintiffs the provisions of FIRREA 
and the OTS capital regulation restricting the 
inclusion of the supervisory goodwill, the $21 million 
capital credit and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture in Statesman Bank’s capital 
for purposes of satisfying regulatory capital 
requirements. 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, plaintiffs respectfully pray: 

(a) That the Court declare that the provisions of 
FIRREA and the OTS capital regulation restricting 
the inclusion of supervisory goodwill, the $21 million 
capital credit and the $5 million face amount of the 
Subordinated Debenture in capital for purposes of 
satisfying Statesman Bank’s regulatory capital re- 
quirements constitute a repudiation and abrogation of 
plaintiffs’ valid contract rights and effect a taking of 
plaintiffs’ property without just compensation and a 
deprivation of plaintiffs’ property without due process 
of law, in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution; 

(b) That the Court order that the transaction be 
rescinded and award plaintiffs monetary relief in the 


179 


amount of their investment, plus compensation for all 
monies expended and costs incurred by plaintiffs, and 
for the value of all benefits conferred on defendants, 
through plaintiffs’ purchase, operation and manage- 
ment of the four thrifts, a total sum in excess of $30 

(c) That the Court grant plaintiffs their costs, 
interest, and attorney’s fees as allowed by law; and 

(d) That the Court grant such other and further 
relief as the law and evidence may justify and as the 
Court may deem just and proper. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ Charles J. Cooper 
Charles J. Cooper 
Shaw, Pittman, Potts & 
Trowbridge 

2300 N Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 


Of Counsel Attorney of Record for 
Michael A. Carvin _ Plaintiffs 
Robert J. Cynkar STATESMAN SaviNnGs 


Peter J. Ferrara HOLDING CoRrP., 
THE STATESMAN GROUP, 


Inc. and AMERICAN LIFE 
AND CASUALTY INSURANCE 
COMPANY 


180 


FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 
OFFICE OF EXAMINATIONS AND 
SUPERVISION 


MEMORANDUM 


SP-37a 
March 7, 1986 


TO: Principal Supervisory Agents 
FROM: Francis M. Passarealli 


Requests for 
Forbearances and 
Exceptions to 
Filing Require- 
ments Regarding 
Supervisory 
Institutions 


Editor’s Note: This memorandum constitutes a revi- 
sion of SP-37 made in order to accom- 
modate amendments to the net worth 
regulation and to make the language 
contained herein consistent with the 
direct investment regulation and R 
Memorandum 34 (“Level Yield Method 
of Amortization”). SP-37 is hereby 
rendered obsolete and is rescinded. 


The purpose of the instructions in the attached 
material is to expedite the processing of supervisory 
or assisted mergers and acquisitions and to diminish 
the inordinate amount of staff time presently necessi- 
tated to negotiate the terms of forbearance letters 
with potential acquirers of institutions. Washington 


181 


Staff will use these guidelines and the standard 
forbearance language contained herein. In the interest 
of consistency and fairness, Supervisory Agents should 
also use these guidelines where they have a general 
authorization or delegation to grant forbearance. 
Potential acquirers should be encouraged to limit 
forbearance requests to the standardized statements 
provided in Section I of the memo. They should be 
advised that requests for forbearances beyond these 
outlined in Section I will, at a minimum, substantially 
increase the processing time. Requests for for- 
bearances outlined in Section II will likely be rejected 
unless they are shown to be key factors in helping to 
solve exceptionally difficult supervisory cases. For- 
bearances outlined in Section III will not be granted. 


The memorandum is grouped into self-explanatory 
subjects. The first three deal with forbearances in 
connection with supervisory mergers, including mer- 
gers into a subsidiary of a holding company, and 
acquisitions of a problem institution either by a 
holding company or individual(s) without a merger. 
They are: 


I. Stanard forbearances that will be granted. 
II. Forbearance that may be granted on a case-by- 
case basis if circumstances so justify. 
III. Forbearances that will not be granted. 


The last two subjects cover miscellaneous require- 
ments. They are: 


IV. Requests to provide reduced information. 


V. Required concluding paragraphs to all for- 
bearance letters. 


It should be especially stressed that requests for 
forbearances, beyond those outlined in Section I, must 


182 


be convincingly justified. Blanket requests for for- 
bearances (i.e., all available forbearances) are not 
acceptable. The basic purpose in granting forbearances 
is to give realistic incentives to potential acquires of 
problem institutions. The incentives, however, must be 
limited to those actually necessary for an acquirer to 
complete a supervisory merger or acquisition. 


This SP memorandum does not cover forbearances 
appropriate for acquisition of a problem institution by 
a holding company that is an insured institution. 


Francis M. Passarelli 
Acting Director 


Attachment 
ce: Professional Staff—Examinations and Supervision 


Office of the FSLIC 
Office of the General Counsel 


183 


I. Standard forbearances that will be granted in 
connection with supervisory mergers, including 
mergers with a subsidiary of a holding company, 
and acquisitions of a problem institution by a 
holding company or individual(s) without a merger: 


Net Worth Requirements 
Supervisory Mergers 

A-1. Section 563.13 (Regulatory Net Worth Re- 
quirement) of the Rules and Regulations for 
Insurance of Accounts provides in subsection 
(b)(3)(iii) for the possible exclusion or modera- 
tion of the base, amortization, contingency and 
growth factors of (disappearing institution) by 
(resulting institution) in computing the net 
worth requirements of this section provided 
the merger was instituted for supervisory 
reasons. Therefore, the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation will forbear, for a 
period not to exceed (five) years following 
consummation of the merger, from exercising 
its authority, under Section 563.13 of the Rules 
and Regulations for Insurance of Accounts, for 
any failure of (resulting institution), to meet 
the net worth requirements of Section 563.13 
arising solely from (1)(a) any increase in the 
contingency factor attributable to the assets of 
(disappearing institution(s)) existing at the 
Effective Date(s), and, (b) any increase in the 
net growth of (resulting institution) as of the 
Effective Date(s) by reason of (resulting 
institution’s) assumption of (disappearing insti- 
tution(s)) liabilities; or (2) (resulting institu- 
lion’s) assumption of the net worth defi- 
ciency(ies) of disappearing institution(s) as of 
the Effective Date(s). 


184 


Acquisitions by a Holding Company or Individual(s) 


A-2. Section 563.13 (Regulatory Net Worth Re- 
quirement) of the Rules and Regulations for 
Insurance of Accounts provides no exceptions 
in the case of acquisitions which permit the 
exclusion of scheduled items of an institution in 
computing the net worth requirements of this 
section. However, in view of the fact that the 
acquisition was instituted for supervisory rea- 
sons, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation will forbear, for a period not to 
exceed (five) years following consummation of 
the acquisition, from exercising its authority 
under Section 563.13 of the Rules and Regula- 
tions for Insurance of Accounts, for any failure 
of (acquired institution) to meet the net worth 
requirements of Section 563.13 arising solely 
from an increase in the contingency factor 
attributable to (acquired institution) at the 
date of acquisition. 


Exclusion of Scheduled Items 
Supervisory Mergers 


B. The assets acquired by (resulting institution) 
from (disappearing institution(s)) will be 
deemed to have been acquired in a merger 
instituted for supervisory reasons. Therefore, 
pursuant to any section of the regulations 
administered by the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board where scheduled items are referred to 
as “assets acquired in a merger instituted for 
supervisory reason”, scheduled items attribu- 
table to (disappearing institution(s)) shall be 
excluded from the computation of scheduled 


185 


items in determining whether (resulting insti- 
tution) meets the requirements of such sec- 
tions following the effective merger date(s). 


II. Forbearances that may be granted in connection 
with supervisory mergers, including mergers into a 
subsidiary of a holding company, and acquisitions 
of a problem institution, either by a_ holding 
company or individual(s), without a merger, if 
circumstances so justify: 


Regulations Which Reference Reserve and Net Worth 
Requirements 
Supervisory Mergers 


A. For a period of five years following the Effective 
Date(s), the Board will waive or forbear from 
enforcement of the reserve or net worth require- 
ments as stated in Insurance Regulation 563.13 
provided that the Board may lawfully waive or 
forbear with respect to such requirements, and 
provided further that failure to meet the require- 
ments is due to (1)(a) operating losses on acquired 
assets; (b) capital losses sustained by (resulting 
institution) upon disposition of acquired assets; (c) 
acquired assets that are or become scheduled 
items; and (d) the assumption of (disappearing 
institution’s) _ liabilities, including averaged lia- 
bilities; or (2) (resulting institution’s) assumption of 
(disappearing institution(s’)) net worth defi- 
ciency(ies) as of the Effective Date(s). 


This forbearance generally will be granted where a 
request demonstrates that without such a for- 
bearance, the resulting institution in a 


186 


supervisory merger would be unable to meet, or 
only marginally meet, the scheduled items and net 
worth limitations and requirements of the Board’s 
Regulations. 


Liquidity Deficiencies 
Supervisory Mergers 
B-1. For a period of one year following the 
Effective Date(s), in determining whether a 
penalty shall be assessed against or paid by 
(resulting institution) pursuant to Section 
523.12 (Deficiencies and Penalties) of the 
Rules and Regulations for the Federal Home 
Loar Bank System (“Bank Regulations”), the 
liquidity requirements of Section 523.11 (Liq- 
uidity Requirements) of the Bank Regulations 
as applied to (resulting institution) shall be 
reduced by (1) the amount of (disappearing 
institution(s’) liquidity deficiencies existing at 
the Effective Date(s) and (2) any aggregate 
net withdrawals (excess of withdrawals over 
cash savings received) from (disappearing 
institution(s’)) offices after the Effective 
Date(s). 


Acquisitions by a Holding Company or Individual(s) 


B-2. For a period of one year following the 
Effective Date, in determining whether a 
penalty shall be assessed against or paid by 
(institution) pursuant to Section 523.12 (Defi- 
ciencies and Penalties) of the Rules and 
Regulations for the Federal Home Loan Bank 
System (“Bank Regulations”), the liquidity 
requirements of Section 523.11 (Liquidity 
Requirements) of the Bank Regulations 


187 


as applied to (institution) shall be reduced by (1) 
the amount of (acquired institution’s) liquidity 
deficiencies existing at the Effective Date and (2) 
any aggregate net withdrawals (excess of with- 
drawal over cash savings received) from (acquired 
institution’s) offices after the Effective Date. 


References to disappearing institution(s) in items C-D 
below, include state-chartered associations not pre- 
viously subject to Federal law, or Federally chartered 
institutions previously in violtion of Federal law. 


Limitation on Service Corporation Investment 


C. In determining (resulting institution’s) compliance 
with Section 545.74 (Investments in Service Corpo- 
rations) of the Federal Regulations, the value of 
any service corporation acquired by (resulting 
institution) or by a subsidiary of (resulting institu- 
tion) in connection with the merger shall not, for a 
period of five years following the Effective Date, be 
deemed to be an investment by (resulting institu- 
tion) in that subsidiary. 


This forbearance generally will be granted 
where a request demonstrates that without 
such a forbearance the resulting association, in 
a supervisory merger, would be unable to 
meet, or only marginally meet, the investment 
in service corporation limitations of FR 545.74. 
This waiver will be confined to situations 
where the disappearing institution(s) had in- 
vestments in service corporations in excess of 
that authorized for Federal institutions. 


188 189 
Phase-out of Operations Inconsistent with HOLA 


C. (Resulting institution) shall be given a reasonable 


Building Investment 
E. For a period of five years after the Effective 


period of time, but not to exceed ( ) (months/ 
years), to phase out, dispose of or discontinue in an 
orderly manner, any acquired investments, ac- 
tivities, or operations inconsistent with the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933 as amended (HOLA), 
provided that such action is taken at the earliest 
possible date without material loss to (resulting 
institution). 


This forbearance generally will be granted where a 
request from an acquiring Federal association 
demonstrates that the disappearing association(s) in 
a supervisory merger had investments and/or 
engaged in activities which are not authorized by 
the HOLA. 


Unauthorized Service Corporation Activities 


. (Resulting institution) shall not for a period not to 
exceed ( ) years, be deemed in violation of any of 
the provisions of Section 545.74 (Service Corpora- 
tions) of the Rules and Regulations for the Federal 
Savings and Loan System by reason that any 
activities of a service corporation acquired as part 
of the merger(s), at or before the effective date(s), 
are not approved or authorized by the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended. 


This forbearance geneally will be granted 
where a request from an acquiring Federal 
association demonstrates that the disappearing 
association(s) in a supervisory merger had a 
service corporation or subsidiary which 
engaged in activities not authorized by FR 
545.74 or by the HOLA. 


Date(s), for purposes of calculating (resulting 
institution’s) building investment under Section 
545.77 (Real Estate for Office and Related Facili- 
ties) of the Federal Regulations, all building 
investments in (disappearing institution(s)) may be 
excluded. 


This forbearance generz!!y will be granted where 
a request from an acquiring Federal association 
demonstrates that without such a forbearance, 
the resulting Federal association would be unable 
to meet, or only marginally meet, the investment 
limitations contained in FR 545.77. 


Holding Company Net Worth Requirements 
Supervisory Mergers 


F-1, For the purpose of calculating any holding 


company net worth maintenance requirements of 
(Holding Company) for (resulting institution), the 
Board will exclude, for a period of five years, the 
asset and liability balances of (disappearing 
institution(s)). 


This forbearance is applicable to cases where a 
holding company has a net worth maintenance 
requirement for a subsidiary institution which 
is merging with a supervisory case. This 
forebearance will be confined to supervisory 
mergers where the acquired association is a 
very serious supervisory problem. 


Acquisitions by a Holding Company or Individual(s) 
F-2. There is no standard forbearance language ex- 


empting acquiring holding companies or individ- 
uals from maintaining net worth. This is because 


190 


it is OES policy to mandate that new acquirers 
satisfy the regulatory net worth requiremeat 
with respect to insured subsidiaries. Only in the 
most unusual circumstanes will any modification 
of this requirement be considered. 


Divided Limitations 
Supervisory Mergers and 


Acquisitions by a Holding Company or Individual(s) 


G. The Board may eliminate the 50% of net income 


dividend limitation for (resulting or acquired insti- 
tution) which is controlled by (holding company). 
The limitation may be waived only where dividends 
are going to service holding company debt. 


This forbearance will rarely be granted, and 
when granted, will be confined to supervisory 
mergers or acquisitions where the acquired 
institution is a very serious supervisory problem. 
Any request for elimination of the 50% of net 
income dividend limitation must be supported by 
convincing evidence that the acquiring holding 
company is strongly capitalized and will agree to 
maintain the net worth of the subsidiary insured 
institution at the required regulatory level as 
stated in Section 563.13. 


(It should be noted that eligible dividends are 
calculated based on net income from the time that 
the holding company acquired stock of an institu- 
tion. “Acquired” means the date of the consumma- 
tion of the purchase of the association’s stock by the 
holding company. Preacquisition earnings may not 
be distributed.) 


191 
Preapproval of Debts 


H. The Board will allow for preapproval of debt in 


= 


Board, pursuant to 


(1) (Acquiring Company(ies) shall stipulate, in a form 


satisfactory to the supervising agent, that (a) no 
later than forty-five calendar days prior to the 
close of its fiscal year, (acquiring Company(ies)) 


(Acquiring Company(ies) and its (their)) subsidi- 
aries that are not insured institutions under § 408 
(ala) of the National Housing Act, prepared 


(Acquiring Company(ies) and its (their)) subsidi- 
aries that are not insured institutions under 


192 


§ 408(aX1a) of the National Housing Act will 
comply with all covenants in their debt instru- 
ments and agreements, and any default with 
regard to such convenants will be promptly cured 
within thirty days or will be reported to the 
supervisory agent; and 


(2) The supervisory agent may, within ten calendar 


days of receipt of the annual debt budget, request 
additional information for (Acquiring Com- 
pany(ies)). The annual debt budget shall be deemed 
complete when all additional information requested 
by the supervisory agent has been received, or, if 
no additional information is requested, on the date 
the annual debt budget is received. If the 
supervisory agent does not object in writing to the 
annual debt budget, or to any additional informa- 
tion submitted in connection therewith, within 
thirty calendar days following the date on which 
the annual debt budget is complete, the annual 
debt budget shall be deemed approved and 
(Acquiring Company(ies) and its (their)) subsidi- 
aries that are not insured institutions under 
§ 408(aX1)(a) of the National Housing Act shall 
have the right to issue, sell, renew, guarantee, or 
assume debt as set forth in the annual debt budget 
without any further filing or application with 
respect thereto; and 


(3) (Acquiring Company(ies)) shall, prior to the issu- 


ance, sale, renewal, guarante or assumption of debt 
in excess of the amounts set forth in the annual 
debt budget, file an application, in a form 
satisfactory to the supervisory agent, with copies 
to the Office of Examinations and Supervision, for 
authority to exceed their annual debt budgets. If 
the supervisory agent does not object in writing 


193 


within thirty calendar days following the date the 
application is complete, which date shall be 
Se nn aane manner oo ast Saath in the 
immediately preceding paragraph, the application 
shall be deemed approved; and ” 


(4) The FSLIC may terminate the approval given 


pursuant to § 408(g) of the NHA and § 584.6 of the 
Holding Company Regulations, or may amend the 
terms of such approval as set forth in this 
Resolution, for good and reasonable cause after 
providing (Acquiring Company(ies)) with notice 


and an opportunity for response. 


The request generally will be granted where the 
holding company is a financially strong regulated 
financial institution. Other types of holding 
companies will be considered for preapproval of 
debt on a case basis. 


Accounting 
Supervisory Mergers 


I-1. In connection with supervisory mergers, the 


resulting institution may request forbearances 
identified below as SM-1, SM-2, SM-3 or any 
combination of these forbearances or, as an 
alternative, request forbearance SM-4. Selection of 
alternative SM-4 requires the inclusions of SM-6 
in the forbearance letter. If forbearances 
SM-1, SM-2 and/or SM-3 are granted, item SM-5 
will also be included in the forbearance letter. The 
request for forbearances SM-1, SM-2 and/or SM-3 
will determine which of the subsections of SM-5 
are included. The overall matching is as follows: 


194 
Forbearrance Subsection of Forbearance SM-5 
No. or SM-6 
SM-1 (a) 
SM-2 (b) 
SM-3 (c) 
SM-4 SM-6 


An example of the application of the above would 
be where a request is made for forbearances SM-1 
and SM-3. In this case, subsections (a) and (c) 
would be added to the basic paragraph continued 
in SM-5. 


SM-1. It is the Corporation’s intention that the cash 
contribution to be made to (resulting institu- 
tion) pursuant to an assistance agreement to 
be entered into between the FSLIC and 
(resulting institution) is to be a credit to 
(resulting institution’s) regulatory net worth; 
therefore, for regulatory accounting purposes, 
(resulting institution) may book such contri- 
bution as a direct addition to its net worth. 


This forbearance generally will be granted 
upon the request of the resulting institution 
in a supervisory merger. 


195 


SM-2. For purposes of reporting to the Board, the 


SM-3. 


SM-4. 


value of any unidentifiable intangible assets 
resulting from accounting for the merger in 
accordance with the purchase method may be 
amortized by (resulting institution) over a 
period not to exceed ( ) years by the 
straight line method. 


This forbearrance generally will be granted 
upon the request of the resulting institution 
in a supervisory merger. 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, any 
discount, arising from the adjustment of 
(disappearing institution’s) mortgage portfolio 
to its fair value, shall be amortized to income 
by the level yield method assuming contrac- 
tually required payments will be received for 
( ) years, and the remaining balance will be 
repaid at the end of the (_ )th year or by the 
level yield method over the average remain- 
ing live of the acquired portfolio, with the 
discount adjusted annually t reflect the actual 
prepayment experience of the portfolio. 


This forbearance generally will be granted 
upon the request of the resulting institution 
in a supervisory merger. 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, 
(resulting institution’s) board of directors 
shall, by appropriate resolution adopted 
within ( ) days following the effective 
date(s) of the merger with (disappearing 
institution), elect to account for the merger, 
in accordance with the purchase method of 


SM-5. 


196 


accounting under generally accepted account- 
ing principles (GAAP), or, alternatively, to 
apply the purchase method, except that any 
FSLIC assistance received in connection with 
the merger may be credited directly to 
regulatory net worth and the value assigned 
to any unidentifiable intangible assets shall be 
amortized by the straight line method over a 
period not to exceed ( ) years. 


This forbearance generally will be 
granted upon the request of the resulting 
institution in a supervisory merger when 
the accounting for the merger has not 
been addressed in the negotiations. 


Not later than ( ) days following the 
effective date(s) of the merger, (resulting 
institution) shall submit to the Supervisory 
Agent an independent certified public ac- 
countant’s opinion that (resulting institution) 
has accounted for the merger in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles 
except that as herein provided by the Board, 
for purposes of reporting to the Board: (a) the 
cash contribution by the FSLIC to (rsulting 
institution) with respect to (disappearing 
institution(s)) pursuant to the Assistance 
Agreement shall be deemed a contribution to 
regulatory net worth, and may be booked as a 
direct credit to (resulting institution), (b) the 
value of any unidentifiable intangible assets 
resulting from their merger may be amor- 
tized by (resulting institution) over a period 
not to exceed ( ) years by the straight line 
method, and (c) any discount arising from 
adjusting the mortgage loan portfolio to its 


SM-6. 


197 


face value shall be amortized to income by 
the level yield method assuming contractual 
monthly payments for a( ) year period and 
repayment of the remaining balance at the 
end of the ( ) year or by the level yield 
method over the average remaining live of 
the acquired portfolio, with the discount 
adjusted annualy to reflect the actual prepay- 
ment experience of the portfolio. 


Not later than ( ) days following the 
Effective Date(s) of the merger, (resulting 
institution) shall submit to the Supervisory 
Agent an independent certified public ac- 
countant’s opinion that (resulting institution) 
has accounted for the merger in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles 
(“GAAP”) except that as herein provided by 
the Board, and pursuant to an election by 
(resulting institution’s) board of directors, for 
purposes of reporting to the Board: (a) the 
cash contribution by the FSLIC to (resulting 
institution) with respect to (disappearing 
institution(s)) pursuant to the Assistance 
Agreement shall be deemed a contribution to 
regulatory net worth and may be booked as a 
direct credit to (resulting institution), (b) the 
value of any unidentifiable intangible assets 
resulting from their merger may be amor- 
tized by (resulting institution) over a period 
not to exceed ( ) years by the straight line 
method, and (c) any discount arising from 
adjusting the mortgage loan portfolio to its 
face value shall be amortized to income by 
the level yield method assuiming contractual 
monthly payments for a( ) year period and 
repayment of the remaining balance at the 


198 


end of the ( )th year or by the level yield 
method over the average remaining live of 
the acquired portfolio, with the discount 
adjusted annually to reflect the actual pre- 
payment experience uf the portfolio. 


Acquisitions by a Holding Company or Individual(s) 
1-2 In connection with acquisitions by a_ holding 


company or individual(s), or any other entity, the 
use of push-down accounting will be permitted to 
the extent authorized by GES Memorandum R-55, 
dated January 17, 1983, or as may be subsequently 
amended. As stated in R-55, appropriate evidence 
must be supplied by an independent public 
accountant that both the establishment of a new 
basis of accounting at the time of the acquisition 
and the current use of push-down accounting are 
in conformity with GAAP. 


Where push-down accounting in authorized, the 
institution may request forbearances identified 
below as HC/I-1, HC/I-2, HC/I-3 and HC/I-4, or 
any combination of these forbearances. For- 
bearance HC/I-1 serves as a prerequisite to the 
granting of forbearances HC/I-2, HC/I-3, and HC/ 
1-4, and, therefore, of necessity, must be part of 
any request for accounting forbearances. 


The selection of any of these forbearances requires 
the addition of a subsection from HC/I-5. The 
matching is as follows: 


Forbearance No. Subsection of Forbearance HC/I-5 


HC/I-1 (a) 
HC/I1-2 (b) 
HC/1-3 (c) 


HC/I-4 (d) 


199 


An example of the application of the above would be 
where a request is made for forbearances HC/I-1 and 
HC/I-3. In this case, subsections (a) and (c) would be 
added to the basic paragraph continued in HC/I-5. 


HC/I-1. 


HC/I-2. 


HC/1-3. 


For the purposes of reporting to the Board, 
with respect to the books and records of 
(institution), push-down accounting shall be 
used to record the purchase of (institution’s) 
capital stock. 


It is the Corporation’s intention that the 
cash contribution to be made to (institution) 
pursuant to an Assistance Agreement to be 
entered into between the FSLIC and (ineti- 
tution) is to be a credit to (institution’s) 
regulatory net worth; therefore, for regula- 
tory accounting purposes, (institution) may 
book such contributions as a direct addition 
to its net worth. 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, the 
value of any intangible asset resulting from 
the application of push-down accounting in 
accounting for the purchase, may be amor- 
tized by (institution) over a period not to 
exceed ( ) years by the straight line 
method. 


HC/I-4. 


HC/I-5. 


200 


For purposes of reporting to the Board, any 
discount arising from the adjustment of the 
mortgage loan portfolio of (institution) to its 
fair value shall be amortized to income by 
the level yield method assuming contrac- 
tually required payments will be received 
for ( ) years; and the remaining balance 
will be repaid at the end of the (_ )th year 
or by the level yield method over the 
average remaining live of the acquired 
portfolio, with the discount adjusted an- 
nually to reflect the actual prepayment 
experiences of the portfolio. 


Not later than ( ) days following the 
Effective Date(s) of the acquisition, (institu- 
tion) shali submit to the Supervisory Agent 
an opinion of independent certified public 
accountants that (institution) has accounted 
for the transaction in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles 
(“GAAP”) except that as herein provided by 
the Board, for purposes of reporting to the 
Board: (a) “push-down” accounting shall be 
used to reflect the acquisition on (institu- 
tion’s) books; (b) the cash contribution by 
the FSLIC to (institution) pursuant to the 
Assistance Agreement shall be deemed a 
contribution to regulatory net worth, and 
may be booked as a direct credit to 
(institution); (c) the value of any resulting 
unidentifiable intangible asset may be amor- 
tized by (institution) over a period of ( ) 
years by the straight line method; and (d) 
any discount arising from adjusting the 
mortgage loan portfolio to its face value 
shall be amortized to income by the level 
yield method assuming contractual monthly 


201 


payments for a ( ) year period and repay- 
ment of the remaining balance at the end of 
the ( )th year or by the level yield method 
over the average remaining life of the 
acquired portfolio, with the discount ad- 
justed annually to reflect the actual prepay- 
ment experience of the portfolio. 


III. Forbearances that will not be granted in connec- 
tion with supervisory mergers or acquisitons by a 
holding company or individual(s): 


Transactions with Affiliates 


A. Preapproval of transactions -with affiliates 
under Section 408(d) (Prohibited Transactions) 
of the National Housing Act and Section 584.3 
(Transactions with Affiliates) of the Holding 
Company Regulations. 


Interlocks 


B. Requests for FHLBB guaranteed preapproval 
of any interlocks covered by Part 563f (Man- 
agement Official Interlocks) of the Insurance 


Regulations. 
[PAGE MISSING FROM ORIGINAL AND 
UNATTAINABLE] 
paragraphs ____ through ___.. Other than the actions 


to enforce the regulatory requirements waived in 
accordance with paragraphs ___ through ____ and the 
statutory provisions authorizing imposition of the 
waived requirements, insofar as such requirements are 
waived, the Board and the Federal Servings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation expressly reserve all of their 
statutory rights and powers with respect to (institu- 
tion) including, without limitation, those under Section 


202 


5 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act of 1933 and Sections 
406 and 407 of the National Housing Act. 


OTHER ASSETS (Cont’d) 


Deferred Net Losses (Gains) on: — Lines A520 and 
A530 


If gains exceed losses (resulting in a net credit), 
enclose the net amount in brackets [ ]. 


Line A520 — Loans Sold 


Record the net of all deferred losses and gains on 
the sale of loans as required by Regulation 
563¢.14. 


Line A530 - Other Assets Sold 


Record on this line the net of all deferred losses 
and gains on the sale of other assets as defined 
by Regulation 563c.14. This includes such items 
as: (1) redeemable ground rent leases; (2) 
mortgage-related securities; (3) preferred stock 
that at the time of issuance provides for 
redemption on a fixed date in a fixed dollar 
amount or for redemption pursuant to a fixed 
schedule of periodic payments and has a remain- 
ing term to maturity of at least five years; and 
(4) debt securities that do not qualify as liquid 
assets under Regulation 523.10(g) because of 
their maturities or that have remaining terms to 
maturity of at least five years. Do not report 
deferred profits on sale of real estate that should 
be reported on Line A580 (Other Assets). 


Intangible Assets:- Lines A542 and A544 


Line A542 — Purchased Loan Servicing 


Report on this line the unamortized cost of 
purchased loan servicing rights. The amortization 


203 


of purchased loan servicing rights is deducted 
from Line D090 (Loan Servicing Fees). 


Line A544 - Goodwill and Other 


Report on this line the total amount of unamor- 
tized goodwill and intangibles other than pur- 
chased loan servicing reportable on Line A542. 
Include goodwill and other identified intangibles 
that originated from the application of purchase 
or pushdown accounting. For pushdown account- 
ing, see Bank Board memorandum R-55a. The 
amortization of goodwill and other intangibles is 
reported on Line E110 (Amortization of Good- 
will). One-time writeoffs of goodwill are reported 
on E310 (Other Nonoperating Expense). 


REGULATORY CAPITAL EXCLUDING GEN- 
aa LOAN-LOSS RESERVES - Lines C012 thru 
115 


General Loan-Loss Reserves are discussed in the 
instructions for Line C115 (Retained Earnings). 


Preferred Stock: - Lines C012 and C014 


Include on the appropriate line, stock issued by 
the institution that is guaranteed priority over 
common stock in liquidation and in the payment 
of dividends by the institution’s corporate charter 
and that qualifies as regulatory capital as defined 
in Regulations 561.13 and 563.7-5. Exclude non- 
qualifying preferred stock and preferred stock 
issued by a finance subsidiary, reportable on Line 
B100 (Other Borrowings). 


204 


Line C012 — Perpetual 


Report here preferred stock that has no stated 
maturity and cannot be redeemed except at the 
option of the issuer. Perpetual preferred stock 
also includes preferred stock that is convertible 
into common stock. 


Line C014 - Other Qualifying 

Report on this line qualified nonpermanent 
preferred stock (e.g., preferred stock that has a 
stated maturity, a required redemption provision, 
or a redemption that is at the option of the 
holder). 


Line C020 -Permanent, Reserve, or Guaranty 
Stock 


Enter the par value of all outstanding perma- 
nent, reserve, or guaranty stock issued by the 
institution. Contributed capital in excess of par 
value net of the cost of issuing stock is to be 
reported on Line C030 (Contributed Capital). The 
par value of treasury stock (stock reacquired by 
the institution) must be deducted from this line 
to obtain the outstanding stock of the institution 
(that amount issued to others). 


Line C030 - Contributed Capital 

Report paid-in capital in excess of par value net 
of the cost of issuing stock. Generally, paid-in 
capital arises from the sale of capital stock for an 
amount in excess of par value. Deduct from this 
line the amount paid for stock reacquired by the 
institution (treasury stock) in excess of its par 
value. Also includable on this line are (1) capital 
contributions by the stockholders and/or holding 
company not related to the purchase of stock; and 


205 


(2) permanent capital contributions by the FSLIC 
not in the form of the capital instruments 
reportable on Lines C070 thru C090. 


Line C040 - Qualifying Mutual i 
98: Q ying Capital 
Report on this line all outstanding mutual capital 
certificates that quality as equity capital. Non- 
qualified mutual capital certificates must be 
included on Line B180 (Other Liabilities). Refer 
to Regulation 563.7-4. 


Line C050 - Qualifying Subordinated Debentures 
Enter debt claims represented by subordinated 
debentures issued by the institution that qualify 
for inclusion in regulatory capital in accordance 
with Regulation 561.13. Accrued interest payable 
is reportable on Line B110 (Accrued Interest 
Payable). Interest expense on subordinated de- 
bentures is reportable on Line E190 (INTEREST 
CHARGES ON: Subordinated Debentures). 


Lined C060 - Appraised Equity Capital 

Report on this line the excess of appraised value 
over (1) net book value of office land, buildings 
and improvements, and eligible leasehold im- 
provements, owned by the insured institution or 
any of its subsidiaries; and (2) the deferred profit 
from a sale with leaseback of formerly owned 
office properties. The amount entered on this line 
must equal the sum of Lines A430 and A500 
(Appraisal Increment). The appraised value is 
equal to the “one time only” appraisal permitted 
by the Principal Supervisory Agent as provided 
for in Regulation 563.13(c). The portion of 
appraised equity capital attributable to unamor- 
tized deferred profit includes only that allowable 


—— Eo 


206 


under Regulation 563.13(c) and must be adjusted 
to reflect the current level of unamortized 
deferred profits. The amount reported on this 
line must be reduced for sales, other dispositions, 
and the aforementioned amortization of deferred 
profits. 


Line C070 — Net Worth Certificates 


Include on this line Net Worth Certificates 
(NWCs) issued to the FSLIC. 


207 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 


PROPOSAL FOR THE ACQUISITION OF 


FIRST FEDERATED SAVINGS BANK, 
WEST PALM BEACH, FLORIDA 
FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, 
WATERLOO, IOWA 
PEOPLES FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION, WATERLOO, IOWA 
THE PERPETUAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION, WATERLOO, IOWA 


January 1988 


Submitted by the Management 
of 
The Statesman Group, Inc. 
1400 Des Moines Building 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309 
(515) 284-7500 


With the assistance of: 


Ferguson & Company 
600 E. Las Colinas Boulevard 
Suite 1700 
Irving, Texas 75039 
(214) 869-1177 


ee 


208 
ACQUISITION PROPOSAL 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. Introductory Statement 


Il. Description of The Statesman 
Group, Inc. 
III. Description of Acquiring Entity 
IV. Bid Proposal 
1. Subsidiaries of Association 
2. Capital Infusion by Acquirers 
3. Additional Contribution by 


Statesman 
4. FSLIC Assistance Required 
5. Regulatory Considerations and 
Forbearances 
6. Exclusion of Certain Leases 
7. Maintenance of Deposits 


V. Business Plan 
VI. Management and Directorate of 
Acquirer 
VII. Authority of Acquirers 
VIII. Accountants’ Statement 
IX. Tax Considerations and Benefits 
X. Other Considerations 


The Statesman Group, Inc. Organiza- 
tional Chart 


The Statesman Group, Inc. Officers and 
Directors 


American Life and Casualty Insurance 
Company Officers and Directors 


209 


Authorization of Acquirer - Letter of 
Counsel 


Accountants’ Statement 


210 
ACQUISITION PROPOSAL 


I. Introductory Statement 


The Statesman Group, Inc., (“Statesman”) head- 
quartered in Des Moines, Lowa, proposes to acquire 
substantially all of the assets and liabilities of First 
Federated Savings Bank, West Palm Beach, Florida; 
First Federal Savings Bank, Waterloo, Iowa; Peoples 
Federal Savings and Loan Association, Waterloo, 
Iowa, and The Perpetual Savings and Loan Associa- 
tion, Waterloo, Lowa, (collectively the ‘ Associations ) 
through a supervisory acquisition assisted by the 
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 


(“FSLIC”). 
Il. Description of The Statesman Group, Inc. 


Statesman is a financial services holding company 
which, through its subsidiaries, engages primarily in 
the business of life insurance and, to a lesser — 
in the businesses of investment banking and retal 
brokerage and property-casualty insurance. In a 
tion, in January, 1987, Statesman, through a 60%- 
owned subsidiary, Statesman Mortgage Holding =. 
pany, purchased all of the outstanding stock of a 
mortgage company, Statesman Mortgage ne a 
An organizational chart describing Statesman s sub- 
sidiary and affiliated companies is attached - 
Appendix A. Statesman was incorporated in 1959 ” 
its common stock is traded on a national over-the- 


counter market. 


III. Description of Acquiring Entity 


Statesman intends to establish and incorporate a 
unitary savings and loan holding company which, for 


211 


purpose of identification, shall be referred to herein 
as “Statesman Savings Holding Corp.” or “SSHC.” 
The initial capital infusion into SSHC shall be 
$21,000,000, of which 60% ($12,600,000) shall be 
represented by preferred stock issued by Statesman 
to SSHC in exchange for preferred stock issued by 
SSHC to Statesman. The other 40% ($8,400,000) shail 
be in the form of cash contributed by American Life 
and Casualty Insurance Company (“American Life”), 
a wholly-owned Statesman subsidiary, in exchange for 
voting common stock issued by SSHC to American 
Life. As a result, American Life will have voting 
control of SSHC. 

SSHC will in turn establish and incorporate a 
wholly-owned subsidiary federal savings bank, and for 
purposes of references herein shall be identified as 
“Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB” or “SBS.” SSHC 
will contribute all of the Statesman preferred stock 
and all of the cash acquired from American Life to 
SBS in exchange for SBS common stock, thereby 
capitalizing SBS in the amount of $21,000,000. Thus 
SBS would be the acquiring corporate entity of the 
assets and liabilities of the four associations which are 
the subject of the bid proposal. However, references 
in this bid proposal and the Business Plan may refer 
to Statesman as the acquirer, it being understood 
that Statesman is submitting this bid and intends that 
the acquisition occur in the manner set forth herein. 
It is further understood that FSLIC shall deliver said 


_ assets and liabilities on a “turnkey” basis, with 


FSLIC providing for the combining of the assets and 
liabilities of the Associations prior to the acquisition, 
establishment and incorporation of SSHC and SBS, 
transfer of assets and liabilities to SBS, and recording 
and filing all documents in accordance with various 
state and federal requirements, all at the cost of 
FSLIC. 


212 213 


IV. Bid Proposal amount, as of the date of acquisition, which is 
Statesman proposes to purchase the four associa- equal to the combined deficit of the Associations, 
ions identi in under the following terms and adjusted for: 

er a — . (i). Increase: Write-off of goodwill, other 


1. Subsidiaries of Associations. All subsidiary 
corporations of the four Associations and their 
assets, including mortgage servicing rights, shall 
be included as assets included in this transaction. 
The stock of such subsidiaries (or the assets and 
remaining liabilities in the event of dissolution 
prior to acquisition) shall be transferred to SBS. 
FSLIC will cause and ensure the transfer of all 
such mortgage servicing rights to SBS or a 
subsidiary of Statesman which is duly qualified to 
service such mortgages. It is a condition of this 
proposal that there be no material change (more 
than 15%) in the total dollar volume of the 
mortgage servicing portfolio between September 
30, 1987 and the date of acquisition. 

2. Capital Infusion by Acquirer. In the man- 
ner described in Section III above, Statesman 
will cause SBS to have a capital infusion of 
$21,000,000, consisting of 40% ($8,400,000) cash 
and 60% ($12,600,000) Statesman preferred stock. 

3. Additional Contribution by Statesman. As 
additional consideration for the acquisition of the 
Associations, SBS agrees to assume losses arising 
from disposition and/or maintaining assets other 
than Covered Assets, as defined below, acquired 
in the transaction, which are estimated to be 
approximately $26,000,000. 

4. FSLIC Assistance Required. FSLIC assist- 
ance is required in this transaction. The forms of 
assistance sought and required are as follows: 

a. Cash and Promissory Note. FSLIC will 
contribute cash and a note receivable in an 


intangibles, deferred losses and appraised equity 
capital; 

(ii) Decrease: All valuation allowances (ex- 
cluding allowances for one to four-family dwelling 
units, owned or mortgaged) adjusted for un- 
collectable accrued interest receivable; and 

(ili) Increase: Equity in the adjusted losses 
of Federated Financial Corporation, the wholly- 
owned mortgage banking subsidiary of First 
Federated Savings Bank. 

Thirty percent (30%) of this contribution shall 
be payable to SBS in the form of cash within five 
(5) days of the date of acquisition. Seventy 
percent (70%) of this amount shall be payable in 
the form of a promissory note executed and 
delivered within five (5) days of the date of 
acquisition. It is projected that the principal 
amount of this contribution as at December 31, 
1987 will exceed $115,000,000, and will increase 
between that date and the actual date of 
acquisition. The FSLIC note shall bear variable 
interest, adjusted quarterly, at a rate equal to 
the Eighth District cost of funds plus 200 basis 
points. The note will be amortized over five years 
and principal and interest payments shall be paid 
quarterly and may be prepayable without penalty 
at FSLIC’s option. : 

b. Losses on Covered Assets. FSLIC will pay 
to SBS quarterly cash payments equal to 93 
percent of losses incurred on the disposition of 
Covered Assets during the prior quarter for a 
period of five (5) years from the date of 


214 


acquisition. Covered Assets are defined as 
follows: 

(i) Real Estate Owned, Real Estate Held 
for Investment, and Real Estate in Judgment, 
excluding in all three categories one to four 
family dwelling units. 

(ii) The principal on all mortgage and non- 
mortgage loans which at the date of acquisition 
are classified or ninety days or more delinquent 
and the principal and accrued interest receivable 
on mortgage and non-mortgage loans which 
become classified or ninety days or more delin- 
quent within two years of the acquisition, 
excluding loans secured by first liens or first 
mortgages on one to four-family dwelling units 
and direct or participation loans with a total 
balance of $50,000 or less. (If a loan has an SBS 
participation under a $50,000 balance but the 
total balance exceeds $50,000, the loan will be a 
covered asset provided it is not on a one to four 
family dwelling unit secured by a SBS first 
mortgage.) 

(iii) Investments in and loans to subsidi- 
aries. Losses shall be the difference between the 
carrying (book) value of Covered Assets (plus 
accrued interest if applicable under subparagraph 
(ii) immediately above) before considering re- 
corded loss allowances, and the net sales pro- 
ceeds realized by SBS on the disposition of such 
assets. 

c. Yield Maintenance. FSLIC will provide 
cash payments on a quarterly basis for spread 
and yield maintenance on Covered Assets in an 
amount equal to the Eight District cost of funds 
plus 225 basis points. 

d. Indemnifications. FSLIC will indemnify 
Statesman, its subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, 


215 


directors and employees for a period of five (5) 
years for and against: 

(i) All undisclosed or unrecorded (not 
booked) liabilities of the Associations, their 
subsidiaries and affiliates, in their respective 
September 30, 1987 financial statements; 

(ii) All claims not reserved for and subse- 
quently asserted against the Associations, their 
subsidiaries or affiliates, or Statesman, its sub- 
sidiaries, officers and directors, as the Acquirer 
and successor of the Associations; 

(iii) Litigation brought to challenge or set 
aside the transaction on the basis of any alleged 
illegal action by the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board or FSLIC; and 

(iv) Any claims based on ERISA rights 
and any unfunded employment and/or severance 
benefit plans, policies, or contracts, other 
employee benefit contracts, employment con- 
tracts, and pension plans, with employees or ex- 
employees of the Associations or any of their 
subsidiaries, which exist at, or existed prior to 
the time of acquisition. 

5. Regulatory Considerations and For- 
bearances. As a part of the proposed acquisition, 
certain regulatory forbearances and considera- 
tions will be granted or procured by FSLIC as 
identified below: 

a. For regulatory purposes, with respect to 
the books and records of SBS, push-down 
accounting shall be used to record the purchase 
of SBS’s capital stock by SSHC. Twenty one 
million dollars of the cash contribution to be 
made to SBS pursuant to an assistance agree- 
ment to be entered into between the FSLIC and 
Statesman is to be a credit to SBS’s regulatory 


216 


capital; therefore, for regulatory accounting pur- 
poses, SBS will book such contribution as a direct 
addition to its net worth. Accordingly, imme- 
diately after the acquisition, the regulatory 
capital of SBS will be $42,000,000 which will 
consist of $21,000,000 in capital infused by SSHC, 
plus $21,000,000 in capital contributed by the 
FSLIC which will be treated as regulatory 
capital. Not later than 30 days following the 
acquisition, SBS shall submit to the Supervisory 
Agent an opinion of independent certified public 
accountants that SBS has accounted for the 
transaction in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles (“GAAP”) including the use 
of “push down” accounting, except that as 
provided by the Board, for purposes of reporting 
to the Board, twenty-one million dollars of the 
cash contribution by the FSLIC to SBS pursuant 
to the assistance agreement shall be deemed a 
contribution to regulatory net worth and will be 
booked as a direct credit to SBS. 

b. The FSLIC will permit Statesman and 
SSHC to enter into a capital maintenance 
agreement for SBS that is limited to: 

(i) an agreement to cause the regulatory 
capital of SBS to be maintained at a level 
consistent with that required by 12 C.F.R. 
563.13(b) as now or hereinafter in effect, and will 
infuse sufficient capital, in the same ratio and 
form as the initial contribution as set forth in 
Section IV, paragraph 2 above, to effect com- 
pliance with such requirement, provided that the 
aggregate amount of the combined obligation of 
Statesman, SSHC and American Life shall not 
exceed an amount equal to $4 million. 

(ii) an agreement that in the event SBS’s 
ratio of regulatory capital to total liabilities at 


217 


the end of any given calendar quarter falls below 
2 percent, and Statesman and SSHC are unwill- 
ing and/or unable to infuse sufficient additional 
equity capital to restore SBS’s ratio of regulatory 
capital to total liabilities to 2%, regardless of the 
amount of equity capital previously infused into 
SBS pursuant to the aforementioned agreement, 
the FSLIC will have the right to vote the 
securities acquired by Statesman and SSHC, 
remove SBS’s board of directors, and/or dispose 
of any or all of the voting securities of SBS 
owned by Statesman, American Life or SSHC. 

This proposed agreement is intended to satisfy 
two of Statesman’s concerns. First, as a diver- 
sified company, Statesman is concerned to ensure 
that its debt rating is not downgraded as a result 
of the company becoming subject to an unlimited 
contingent obligation. Second, as a matter of 
business judgment, Statesman is equally con- 
cerned by the prospect of becoming subject to an 
unlimited capital guarantee. This proposed capital 
agreement is based upon the agreements used in 
certain acquisitions of healthy thrifts by diver- 
sified aeyuirers, such as Ford, Fuqua, and 
Temple-Inland and is modified to reflect the fact 
that this is a supervisory transaction. 

(ce) The FSLIC will give permanent and contin- 
uing approval to the issuance of debt by 
Statesman and its affiliates (or waive the debt 
requirement under section 408(m) of the National 
Housing Act), so long as the regulatory capital of 
SBS meets the amount required at the time the 
debt is issued. At the time Statesman (with 
approximately one billion dollars in assets), 
acquires SBS (with approximately $700 million in 
assets), it is anticipated that Statesman will 


218 


qualify as a diversified savings and loan holding 
company and will not be subject to the debt 
limitations of 12 U.S.C. 1730a or 12 C.F.R. 584. 
However, as demonstrates « the Business Plan, 
Statesman plans to transform SBS into a profita- 
ble and growing institution. The successful opera- 
tion and growth of SBS could cause Statesman to 
become a nondiversified institution subject to the 
debt restrictions. Due to the peculiarities of the 
insurance industry and the wide diversification of 
Statesman’s financial service activities, States- 
man’s debt requirements are highly unpredictable 
and variable, and the standard prior-approval 
procedure would therefore pose a significant 
hardship. 

A waiver or prior approval for Statesman’s 
debt would not compromise the regulatory objec- 
tives of the National Housing Act or the FSLIC. 
The purpose of the debt limitation is to ensure 
that savings and loan holding companies do not 
become over leveraged and seek to drain assets 
from a subsidiary insured institution. Since as 
part of this acquisition Statesman will agree to 
maintain the capital of the acquired institution at 
certain levels, and Statesman has not requested a 
forbearance from the standard limitation of 
dividends to 50% of net earnings, the FSLIC will 
have no need to rely upon the cumbersome pro- 
cedures for debt approval in order to protect the 
capital of SBS. Furthermore, Statesman operates 
in the highly regulated and conservative insur- 
ance industry where regulators impose capital 
requirements on its subsidiaries. (Statesman’s 
broker-dealer subsidiary is likewise subject to 
capital requirements). Consequently, there is no 
regulatory purpose to be served by requiring 
such prior approval for debt. 


219 


d. The FSLIC will authorize the acquisition 
under section 408(m) of the National Housing 
Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730a, will determine under such 
authority that Statesman and its affiliates are 
exempt from the operation of section 408(p) of 
the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730(p), with 
respect to the cross-marketing of products or 
services between SBS and Statesman, its subsidi- 
aries or its affiliates, and will confirm that such 
sales, as described herein, are consistent with 
section 408(d) of the National- Housing Act. 

Statesman is a leading provider of life and 
property and casualty insurance products and 
services, and currently markets more annuities 
and other insurance products and services 
through savings and loan associations than 
through any other form of retail outlet. As 
described in the Business Plan, Statesman would 
intend to sell such insurance products and 
services through the facilities of SBS. Under this 
arrangement, insurance products and services 
would be sold on the premises and by the 
employees of SBS, and for these marketing 
efforts the institution and/or its employees would 
receive payments from the Statesman insurance 
affiliates at some contractually determined rate. 

Under the arrangement outlined above, mar- 
keting services would be provided by SBS and its 
employees on behalf of Statesman. Such market- 
ing arrangements would not violate the affiliate- 
transaction provisions of section 408(d) of the 
National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730(d), and 
regulations thereunder, nor violate the affiliated- 
party regulations found in subchapter D of the 
Board’s regulations because Statesman and its 
insurance affiliates would provide no services to, 


220 


and receive no payments for services to, SBS. 
Likewise, while Statesman and its subsidiaries 
would intend to deposit funds in SBS, such 
deposits cannot violate the prohibitions against 
maintaining compensating balances because the 
deposits will be made in, rather than by, SBS. 
Statesman requests formal confirmation of these 
conclusions. 

In addition, section 408(p) of the National 
Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730(p), as recently added 
by the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 
1987, generally forbids an insured institution 
which is a subsidiary of a diversified savings and 
loan holding company from offering or marketing 
products or services of an affiliate that are not 
permissible for bank holding companies to pro- 
vide under section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding 
Company Act, or from offering or marketing its 
own such products or services through an 
affiliate. Under the recently re-enacted section 
408(m) of the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 
1730a(m), the FSLIC with certain exceptions is 
permitted to authorize a supervisory acquisition 
“notwithstanding any provisions of the laws or 
constitution of any State or any provision of 
Federal law.” The exceptions do not include the 
cross-marketing prohibitions of section 408(p). 
Consequently the FSLIC is authorized under 
section 408(m) to provide relief from the section 
408(p) prohibitions. 

e. The acquisitions will occur pursuant to 
FSLIC authorization under section 408(m) of the 
National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730a, and the 
FSLIC will affirmatively find that such authori- 
zation pre-empts the laws of any state that would 
limit or preclude the affiliation of SBS and 


221 


Statesman or any of its insurance affiliates or 
would, by reason of such affiliation, prohibit the 
sale of insurance by Statesman, its insurance 
affiliates or agents. 

Statesman’s principal business is insurance 
which is provided by companies organized in 
several jurisdictions and sold by agents located in 
some 47 states. Various states prohibit the 
affiliation of insurance companies and depository 
institutions or prohibit the sale of insurance by 
agents of companies with such affiliations. The 
federal pre-emption of such states limits is a 
necessary prerequisite to Statesman’s ability to 
continue to conduct its insurance business. The 
FSLIC’s authority in this regard under section 
408(m) was recently clarified by Congress. See 
H.R. Rep. No. 261, 100th Cong., Ist Sess. 140. 

f. The acquisition will occur pursuant to au- 
thorization under section 408(m) of the National 
Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1730a, and that the 
FSLIC will find that the affiliation of SBS and 
Statesman’s broker/dealer subsidiary, R.G. 
Dickinson & Co. is not prohibited by section 
408(r) of the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 
1730a(r). In this connection, subsection 
408(r(2D) provides an exception from the 
prohibition for an affiliation that results from an 
acquisition under section 408(m) of an institution 
(such as SBS) with total assets of $500 million or 
more at the time of the acquisition. FSLIC will 
assure Statesman that it can continue to simul- 
taneously own SBS and R.G. Dickinson & Co. 

g. The FSLIC will require that the acquisition 
of the shares of the newly converted institution, 
SBS (and therefore the acquisition of the shares 
of its parent companies, SSHC and Statesman), 


222 


be subject to the limitations found in section 
563b.3(i)(3) of the FSLIC’s conversion regula- 
tions, 12 C.F.R. 563b.3(i(3), for at least 18 
months. 

The FSLIC’s conversion regulations specifi- 
cally provide that the restriction of section 
563b.3(i(3) on the shares of a converted thrift 
will be applied to the stock of a thrift organized 
to acquire an insolvent thy in a voluntary 
supervisory conversion. 12 C.F.R. 563b.10(c)(2). 
The Board has indicated that restrictions would 
likewise be applicable to the parent of the 
resulting thrift. See 51 Fed. Reg. 40137 (1986). 
The regulation provides that section 563b.3(i)(3) 
shall be applicable for eighteen months in the 
case of the acquisition of an insolvent institution 
with assets of between $500 and $750 million, 
such as SBS. In the case of the involuntary 
conversion of an insolvent institution under 
section 408(m) of the National Housing Act, the 
FSLIC may require, as a condition of its 
authorization, that similar limits be imposed on 
the shares of SBS, and thereby SSHC and 
Statesman. 

h. For regulatory purposes, currently or subse- 
quently scheduled items or classified assets will 
be excluded in the calculation of capital or ratio 
requirements of SBS for a period of five years. 

i. FSLIC shall make available a line of credit 
for a period of two years for liquidity protection 
for SBS. 

j. For a period of two years following the 
acquisition date, in determining whether a 
penalty shall be assessed against or paid by SBS 
pursuant to Section 523.12 (Deficiencies and 
Penalties) of the Rules and Regulations for the 


223 


Federal Home Loan Bank System (“Bank Reg- 
ulations”), the liquidity requirements of Section 
523.11 (Liquidity Requirements) of the Bank 
Regulations as applied to SBS shall be reduced 
by (1) the amount of SBS’s liquidity deficiencies 
existing at the acquisition date and (2) any 
aggregate net withdrawals (excess of with- 
drawals over cash savings received) from SBS’s 
offices after the acquisition date. 

k. SBS will be entitled to establish additional 
branches in Florida and Iowa, including, but not 
limited to, Des Moines, Iowa, and to establish a 
consolidated headquarters office of SBS in Des 
Moines, Iowa. 

l. In prior discussions with FSLIC concerning 
a bid proposal, it was Statesman’s management’s 
understanding that the establishment of branches 
in one additional state would be favorably 
considered by FSLIC. Statesman requests and 
requires as part of this bid proposal the right to 
establish branches of SBS in the State of 
Missouri. 

m. Recognition by FSLIC that the preferred 
stock of Statesman owned by SBS will be a 
qualifying direct investment. 

n. SBS shall be given 3 years, to phase out, 
dispose of or discontinue in an orderly manner, 
any acquired investments, activities, or opera- 
tions inconsistent with the Home Owners’ Loan 
Act of 1933 as amended (HOLA), provided that 
such action is taken at the earliest possible date 
without material loss to SBS. 

o. SBS shall not for a period of 3 years, be 
deemed in violation of any of the provisions of 
Section 545.74 (Service Corporations) of the 
Rules and Regulations for the FSLIC by reason 


224 


that any activities of a service corporation 
acquired as part of the merger(s), at or before 
the effective date(s), are not approved or author- 
ized by the Home Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as 
amended. 

p. For a period of five years after the 
acquisition, for purposes of calculating SBS’s 
building investment under Section 545.77 (Real 
Estate for Office and Related Facilities) of the 
Federal Regulations, all building investments in 
the acquired associations may be excluded. 

q. The Board will provide the certification that 
the grounds set forth in section 1464(d)(b)(A)- 
(iii), or (iii) of Title 12, United States Code, 
exist with respect to the Associations, or will 
exist in the near future in the absence of action 
by the Board. 

6. Exclusion of Certain Leases. With the 
exception of a start-up period of not more than 
three months from the date of acquisition, 
Statesman will not assume or be responsible for 
the executive office lease of First Federated 
Savings Bank in Florida or of the office lease of 
Federated Financial Corporation in Atlanta, 
Georgia. 

7. Maintenance of Deposits. This bid proposal 
is submitted on the assumption that there are 
approximately $631 million of deposits in the 
combined associations. In the event that the 
combined deposits should decrease by more than 
10% by the actual data of acquisition, Statesman 
reserves the right to renegotiate its participation 
in the assumption of losses. 


V. Business Plan. 


Submitted herewith and incorporated by reference 
as part of the acquisition proposal is the Business 


225 


Plan of the SBS. This Business Plan provides a 
description of the proposed acquisition and is sup- 
ported by financial data of the combined associations, 
including three-year forecasts of quarterly volumes, 
rate/yield analysis, interest income/expense report, 
profit-loss report, ratio report, cashflow forecast, and 
a pro forma combined statement of condition as of 
December 31, 1987 of the four associations, as well as 
individual pro forma statements of condition of each 
association. This Business Plan, including the financial 
information submitted therein, forms the basis upon 
which the acquisition proposal is being made. 


VI. Management and Directorate of Acquirer. 


Attached hereto as Appendix B is a listing of the 
officers and directors of Statesman. Attached hereto 
as Appendix C is a listing of the officers and directors 
of American Life. No selection has yet been made of 
prospective directors for SBS. However, it is antici- 
pated that one or more of the directors of Statesman 
and American Life would serve as directors of SBS 
and its holding company, and other directors would be 
selected on the basis of their experience and 
expertise regarding savings institutions, as well as 
their general proven business capabilities. 


VII. Authority of Acquirer. 


At a meeting of the Board of Directors of 
Statesman * id on November 11, 1987, D. J. Noble 
was auth sized on behalf of Statesman to enter into 
discussions and negotiations with FSLIC for the 
possible acquisition of federally-chartered savings 
institutions. Attached hereto as Appendix D is a 
letter dated December 4, 1987 from Whitfied, Mus- 
grave, Selvy, Kelly & Eddy, counsel for Statesman, to 


226 


the Regional Director and Deputy Director of FSLIC 
setting forth this authority. 


VIII. Accountants’ Statement. 


Submitted herewith as Appendix E is the requested 
statement from Ernst & Whinney, the independent ac- 
countants for Statesman, regarding the application of 
generally accepted accounting principles to the pro- 
posed transaction (purchase vs. pooling of interests), 
the estimated amount of unidentified intangible assets 
resulting therefrom, and the estimated amortization 
periods of such intangibles as presented in the 
accompanying Business Plan. 


IX. Tax Considerations and Benefits. 


Based upon the method of taxation of insurance 
organizations limiting utilization of non-life insurance 
operating losses, and the present loss carryforward 
position of the non-life insurance entities reflected in 
the consolidated Statesman tax return, loss car- 
ryovers of the acquired (non-life) associations may 
provide no tax benefits to Statesman. However, it is 
agreed that Statesman will cause an annual review of 
its tax position to be made through a with/without 
computation, and to the extent any tax benefits are 
actually realized in cash by Statesman directly from 
inclusion of the associations in the consolidated 
Statesman tax return, Statesman agrees to share 50% 
of those tax recoveries or payment reductions with 
FSLIC. 


X. Other Considerations. 


Statesman is the 60% owner of the holding company 
of Statesman Mortgage Company, which is located in 


227 


Des Moines, Iowa. It is anticipated that the mortgage 
business activities now being conducted by Federated 
Financial Corporation, the subsidiary of First Fede- 
rated Savings Bank, will be transferred to Statesman 
Mortgage Company. Therefore, the financial projec- 
tions contained in the Business Plan do not include 
future income and expense factors related to the 
business of Federated Financial Corporation. 

The foregoing Acquisition Proposal and accompany- 
ing Business Plan is submitted by The Statesman 
Group, Inc. this 8th day of January, 1988. 


The Statesman Group, Inc. 


By 


D.J. Noble 
Chairman of the Board 
and President 


228 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 


BUSINESS PLAN 


FIRST FEDERATED SAVINGS BANK, 
WEST PALM BEACH, FLORIDA 
FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, 
WATERLOO, IOWA 
PEOPLES FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION, WATERLOO, IOWA 
THE PERPETUAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION, WATERLOO, IOWA 


January 1988 


Submitted by the Management 
of 
The Statesman Group, Inc. 
1400 Des Moines Building 
Des Moines, lowa 50309 
(515) 284-7500 


With the assistance of: 


Ferguson & Company 
600 E. Las Colinas Boulevard 
. Suite 1700 
Irving, Texas 75039 
(214) 689-1177 


229 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 


CONTENTS 


Assumptions and Operating Scenario: 
Introduction 
Description of Acquirer 
Capital Infusion by Acquirer 
FSLIC Assistance 
Economie Environment 
Promotion of Home Financing 
Office Quarters 
Personnel 
Continuity of Management and Directorate 
Lending and Investment 
Acquisition of Capital 
Interest Rate Risk Management 
Direct Investments 
Capital 
Records, Systems and Controls 
Corporate Opportunity, Transactions with 
Affiliates and Management Official Inter- 
locks 
Monitoring of the Business Plan 
Revision of the Business Plan 
Method of Accounting 
Regulatory Considerations 
Projected Financial Statements: 
Projected Statements of Condition 
Projected Statements of Operations 
Projected Statements of Sources and Use 
of Funds 
Notes to Projected Financial Statements 
Supplementary Financial Information: 
Projected and Pro Forma Statements of 
Condition: 
First Federated Savings Bank West 
Palm Beach, Florida 


= 
AAW OE OOOO CO DO ee 


NIAAA 


< oOo 


10 
11 


12 


230 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 
(Continued) 


CONTENTS 


Supplementary Financial Information 
(Continued): 
Projected and Pro Forma Statements of 

Condition (Continued): 

Federated Financial Corporation, a 
wholly owned subsidiary of First Fede- 
rated Savings Bank 

First Federal Savings Bank Waterloo, 
lowa 

Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Asso- 
ciation Waterloo, Iowa 

The Perpetual Savings and Loan Asso- 
ciation, Waterloo, lowa 

All Associations Combined 

Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB 

Summary of Adjustments 

Projected Interest Rates, Net Interest In- 
come Analysis, Spread Analysis and Key 

Ratios 

Significant Projection Assumptions—Assets 

Significant Projection Assumptions— 
Liabilities 

Projected Regulatory Capital Requirement 

Projected Memo Items 

Projected Lending and Leasing Activity 


Tab 


RSS 


231 
[Tab 1] 


INTRODUCTION 


The Statesman Group, Inc. (“Statesman” or “Ac- 
quirer”) is submitting this Business Plan (“Plan”) in 
connection with its proposal to the Federal Home 
Loan Bank Board (“Board”), the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation (“FSLIC”), the Federal 
Home Loan Bank of Des Moines and the Federal 
Home Loan Bank of Atlanta for the acquisition of 
First Federated Savings Bank, West Palm Beach, 
Florida; First Federal Savings Bank, Waterloo, Iowa; 
Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Association, 
Waterloo, Iowa; and The Perpetual Savings and Loan 
Association, Waterloo, Iowa. 

The Plan assumes the acquisition is consummated 
on December 31, 1987 and that Statesman will acquire 
a unitary savings and loan holding company which 
will own a federally chartered savings bank, into 
which the assets and liabilities of the four associations 
are placed. The Plan and financial projections are 
presented for the resulting savings bank, hereinafter 
also referred to as “Statesman Bank for Savings, 
FSB” or “SBS”. 

The Plan projects a capital infusion in cash and 
preferred stock by Statesman, and/or its existing 
subsidiaries, initial financial assistance from FSLIC in 
the form of cash and an amortizing note receivable 
and continuing financial assistance in the form of cash 
from FSLIC. This assistance consists of spread and 
yield maintenance and guarantees of recovery by 
FSLIC of losses on certain assets (“Covered Assets”). 
The plan assumes that losses on other assets 
(“Uncovered Assets”) will be assumed by SBS. 


232 


The Plan also assumes the acquisition will be 
accounted for using the purchase method of account- 
ing, applied by the “push down” method, as of 
December 31, 1987. Purchase accounting is the 
method of recording a business acquisition by adjust- 
ing assets and liabilities to fair market value and 
setting net worth equal to the purchase price. “Push 
down” refers to recording the adjustments on the 
books of the acquired company. 

In connection with the preparation of the Plan, 
Statesman engaged Ferguson & Company, consult- 
ants to the savings and loan industry, to assist in the 
preparation of the Plan and to identify improvement 
opportunities and make recommendations for further 
action. The findings and recommendations of Fer- 
guson & Company are incorporated into the Plan, and 
such findings and recommendations have been re- 
viewed and approved by Statesman. 


DESCRIPTION OF THE ACQUIRER 


Statesman is a financial services holding company 
which, through its subsidiaries, engages primarily in 
the business of life insurance, including annuities, and 
to a lesser extent, in the business of investment 
banking and retail brokerage and property-casualty 
insurance. 

Although Statesman markets products in 47 states, 
the majority of its insurance business is conducted in 
the Midwest, California and the Southeast. Other 
financial services are provided primarily in the 
Midwest, Southwest and Western states through a 
regional investment banking and retail brokerage 
subsidiary. Statesman also has a mortgage banking 
subsidiary. Following is Statesman’s condensed his- 
torical financial information for the periods indicated 
(dollars in thousands): 


233 
December 31, Sept. 30, 
1985(1) 1986(1) 1987(2) 
Total assets $555,117 $843,784 $1,192,085 
Total liabilities 505,079 785,972 1,131,240 
Stockholders’ equity 49,308 57,057 60,468 
Revenues 247,266 396,598 414,368 
Benefits, losses and 
expenses 247,236 394,402 413,905 
Net income 5,038 7,659 1,303 


(1) Compiled from year-end audited financial state- 
ments. 

(2) Compiled from Form 10-Q filed with the Se- 
curities and Exchange Commission (as of and for the 
nine months ended September 30, 1987). 


CAPITAL INFUSION BY ACQUIRER 


Statesman intends to capitalize SBS through a 
transfer of assets from the savings and loan holding 
company of $8.4 million in cash and $12.6 million of 
preferred stock of Statesman, the combined total 
being approximately 3% of projected total liabilities 
of the combined associations at December 31, 1987. 
The Plan also projects that Statesman will incur 
approximately $26 million in goodwill and other 
intangibles in the transaction. 


FSLIC ASSISTANCE 


The acquisition of the associations will require 
FSLIC assistance. At September 30, 1987, the 
associations reported a combined deficit in excess of 
$82 million. 


234 


The Plan projects FSLIC will initially contribute 
cash and a note receivable bearing interest at the 
Eighth District cost of funds plus 200 basis points and 
equal to the combined deficit, adjusted for (1) the 
write-off of recorded goodwill, other intangibles, 
deferred losses and appraised equity capital; (2) 
commercial real estate valuation allowances (exclud- 
ing valuation allowances on single-family residential 
property or loans) adjusted for uncollectable accrued 
interest receivable; and (3) equity in the losses of 
Federated Financial Corporation, the wholly owned 
mortgage banking subsidiary of First Federated 
Savings Bank. The total initial FSLIC contribution is 
projected to be in excess of $115 million at December 
31, 1987, of which thirty percent shall be paid in cash 
and seventy percent in the form of a note amortized 
over a period of five years. 

The Pian also projects continuing FSLIC assistance 
in the form of quarterly cash payments equal to 93% 
of the losses on Covered Assets, which is assumed to 
be forty million dollars of the asset values for the 
Plan, plus spread and yield maintenance on Covered 
Assets equal to the Eighth District cost of funds plus 
225 basis points. Covered Assets include all real 
estate owned, all investment real estate, all invest- 
ments in and loans to subsidiaries and all nonperform- 
ing loans, each excluding first lien positions in one to 
four family residential dwelling units or loans, all as 
more fully set out in the proposal. For purposes of 
the Plan, Covered Assets are projected to be 
liquidated ratably over five years. 


[Tab 7] 


MONITORING OF THE BUSINESS PLAN 


Statesman will prepare comprehensive operating 
budgets based upon the Plan and such budgets will be 
reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors. 
The actual operating results will be compared with 
the budgets and such reports will be reviewed by the 
Directors on a quarterly basis. This procedure will 
allow the Board to take corrective action pertaining 
to variances between budgeted and actual items and 
make necessary revisions to operating strategies to 
insure compliance with the Plan. 

Monitoring of the Plan in its entirety will be 
evidenced in the minutes of the Board of Directors. A 
report of such review, together with an explanation of 
and justification for any proposed or material 
changes, will be submitted to the appropriate regula- 
tory authority. 


REVISION OF THE BUSINESS PLAN 


Variances between planned and actual results may 
be temporary or permanent. Temporary variances 
may arise from the inexact process of measuring 
expectations of the future timing of transactions. 
These differences are not expected to require a 
revision of the Plan. 

Permanent differences may arise from situations in 
which SBS has some control. During the process of 
the Board’s review of the Plan and its comparison to 
actual operating results, the underlying assumptions 
used in the projections will be reviewed for validity 


236 


with current economic conditions, strategies and 
market expectations. Should revisions be required, 
the Board will authorize appropriate changes to the 
Plan. Any material or significant changes authorized 
by the Board will be reviewed with and approved by 
the Supervisory Agent. 


METHOD OF ACCOUNTING 


The projected financial statements have been 
prepared with purchase accounting being applied by 
use of the “Push Down” method. Inasmuch as the 
acquisition does not give rise to continuity of 
ownership, Statesman believes that application of the 
purchase method is appropriate and is in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles. 

After the application of purchase accounting, the 
projected financial statements have been prepared as 
though the acquisition occurred on December 31, 
1987. 


REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS 


The Plan is based upon the assumption that certain 
regulatory forbearances and considerations will be 
granted. These are requested by Statesman as a 
result of dispensations necessary to consummate the 
transaction, along with the current financial condition 
of the associations. The Plan is based on the granting 
of the requested forbearances and considerations as 
itemized in or incorporated by reference in the bid 
proposal. 

The financial data and projections submitted here- 
with form the economic basis upon which the proposal 
and the Business Plan were formulated. 


237 


(Tab 11] 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 
NOTES TO PROJECTED FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS 


(1) Significant accounting policies 


The accounting and reporting policies of Statesman 
Bank for Savings, FSB (“Bank”) conform to generally 
accepted accounting principles and to general prac- 
tices within the savings and loan industry. 


(2) Assumptions and estimates 


The projected financial statements are based on 
assumptions and estimates concerning future events 
and circumstances which were determined by the 
proposed purchaser. 

The assumptions disclosed herein are those be- 
lieved to be significant to the projections and/or are 
key factors upon which the financial results of the 
Bank depend and, unless otherwise indicated, are 
based on the circumstances and conditions that 
existed at the time the projections were prepared. 
Some assumptions will not materialize and unantici- 
pated events and circumstances may occur subse- 
quent to December 31, 1987, the date of this 
projection. Therefore, the actual results achieved 
during the periods covered by the projections will 
vary from the projections and such variations may be 
material. There are significant inherent risks in using 
outdated projections because events subsequent to 
their issuance may invalidate some or all of the 


238 


underlying assumptions and estimates. The assump- 
tions used are listed in “Significant Projection 
Assumptions” included elsewhere in this Plan. 


Cash and investments: 

The projected cash and investment balances at the 
end of each projected period are the residual balances 
that result, in part, from application of the following 
assumptions and estimates and, in part, from ex- 
pected efficiencies resulting from applications of 
improved cash management procedures. 


Loans receivable: 

Assumptions regarding mortgage loans and non- 
mortgage loans are listed in “Significant Projection 
Assumptions.” This projected other data provides a 


listing of projected originations, origination rates and 


renewal rates, if applicable, for each respective loan 
classification. Interest income on loans receivable is 
calculated by the projection model with respect to the 
activity and rates listed in “Significant Projection 
Assumptions.” 


Federal Home Loan Bank stock: 

FHLB stock is maintained in accordance with 
regulatory requirements over the projected period. 
The assumed dividend rate of FHLB stock during the 
three annual projection periods is listed in “Signifi- 
cant Projection Assumptions.” 


Property and equipment: 

Depreciation expense has been projected based 
upon acquired amounts, adjusted to include the 
projected equipment purchases. Depreciation has 
been calculated on the straight-line method over the 
estimated useful lives of the assets. 


239 


Savings deposits: 

All assumptions regarding transaction accounts, 
short term certificates of deposit, intermediate term 
certificates of deposit (over 6 months through 18 
months), long term certificates of deposit (more than 
18 months) and jumbo accounts are listed in “Signifi- 
cant Projection Assumptions.” This projected other 
data provides a listing of the projected changes and 
average cost of each respective savings deposit 
classification. Interest expense on savings deposits is 
calculated by the projection model with respect to the 
activity and rates as summarized in “Significant 
Projection Assumptions.” 


Loan origination fees: 

Loan origination fees are projected as a function of 
loan volume as outlined in “Significant Projection 
Assumptions.” All fees are calculated, as appropriate, 
by the projection model at 1% and deferred and 
amortized by the level yield mentod over the loan life. 


Other income and expense: 

All other items of income and expense were 
projected from analyses of the actual respective 
amounts (per books) for 1987 with increases or 
decreases appropriate to the Plan. 


Federal income taxes: 

Federal income taxes have not been provided since 
permanent differences, primarily nontaxable FSLIC 
assistance, offset pretax accounting income. 


Interest rate scenario: 

The interest rate scenario included in the Plan is 
based upon the September 1987 Savings and Loan 
Industry Assumptions prepared by the Federal Home 


240 


Loan Bank Board, adjusted for local economic 
conditions. The interest rates are listed in “Projected 
Interest Rates, Net Interest Income Analysis and 
Spread Analysis” presented elsewhere in this Plan. 


(3) Accounting for the acquisition 


The accompanying projected financial statements 
have been prepared assuming purchase accounting is 
applied to record the acquisition of the Bank and that 
purchase accounting is applied by the “push down” 
method as of December 31, 1987. Purchase accounting 
is the method of recording a business acquisition by 
adjusting assets and liabilities to market value and 
eliminating net worth. “Push down” refers to record- 
ing the adjustments on the books of the acquired 
company. 

Goodwill of approximately $25.8 million arising 
from the acquisition is being amortized over 12 years 
on the level yield method. 


241 


OMB No. 3068-0037 
EXPIRES 4/30/88 


Docket No. 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE 
CORPORATION 
Washington, D.C. 20552 


APPLICATION H-(e)1 


Application Pursuant to Section 408(e)(1)(B) of the 
National Housing Act and Section 584.4(b) of the 
Regulations for Savings and Loan Holding Companies 
for Approval of Acquisition of One Insured Institu- 
tion, Directly or Indirectly, by a Company Other 
Than a Savings and Loan Holding Company. 


American Life and Casualty Insurance Company 
The Statesman Group, Inc. 


Legal name of Applicant 


1400 Des Moines Building, Des Moines, lowa 50309 
Address of principal executive office Zip Code 


First Federated Savings Bank 
First Federal Savings Bank 
Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Association 
The Perpetual Savings and Loan Association | 
Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB 


Legal name of insured institution being acquired 
directly or indirectly (hereinafter called the Associa- 
tions and Institution) 


242 


Statesman Savings Holding Corp. 


Legal name of any savings and loan holding company 
being acquired (hereinafter called the Holding 
Company) 


William J. Sweet, Jr., Esq. 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom 
1440 New York Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20005-2107 


Name and address of persons to whom communica- 
tions are to be sent 


H-(e)1 
REV. JULY 1981 


' 243 
Il. INFORMATION REQUIRED BY ITEMS 
A. GENERAL BACKGROUND 
Item 1. Summary of Proposed Acquisition 


The proposed acquisition and any related transac- 
tions should be briefly summarized in a form that 
makes the acquisition and transactions readily 
understandable. 

The Statesman Group, Inc., (“Applicant”) headquar- 
tered in Des Moines, Iowa, proposes to acquire (the 
“Acquisition”), through a supervisory acquisition 
assisted by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation (“FSLIC”), substantially all of the assets 
and liabilities of First Federated Savings Bank, West 
Palm Beach, Florida; First Federal Savings Bank, 
Waterloo, lowa; Peoples Federal Savings and Loan 
Association, Waterloo, Iowa; and The Perpetual 
Savings and Loan Association, Waterloo, Iowa. (The 
four institutions are collectively referred to herein as 
the “Associations.”) A copy of the acquisition proposal 
submitted to the FSLIC (the “Acquisition Proposal”) 
is attached as Exhibit A. The Acquisition Proposal, a 
proposed assistance agreement, and other matters are 
now under negotiation. 

As the first step in the Acquisition, Applicant 
intends to establish and incorporate Statesman Sav- 
ings Holding Corp., a unitary savings and loan 
holding company (the “Holding Company”). The 
initial capital infusion into the Holding Company will 
be $21 million, of which 60% ($12.6 million) will be 
represented by preferred stock issued by Applicant to 
the Holding Company in exchange for preferred stock 
issued by the Holding Company to Applicant. The 
other 40% ($8.4 million) will be in the form of cash 
contributed by American Life and Casualty Insurance 


244 


Company (the “Insurance Company”), a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of Applicant, in exchange for voting 
common stock issued by the Holding Company to the 
Insurance Company. As a result, the Insurance 
Company will have voting control of the Holding 
Company. 

As the second step in the Acquisition, the Holding 
Company will establish and incorporate Statesman 
Bank for Savings, FSB, a wholly-owned subsidiary 
federal savings bank (the “Institution”). The Holding 
Company will contribute all of the preferred stock 
issued by Applicant and all of the cash acquired from 
the Insurance Company to the Institution in exchange 
for all of the common stock of the Institution, thereby 
capitalizing the Institution in the amount of $21 
million. 

The third step of the Acquisition will be the 
purchase and assumption by the Institution of 
substantially all of the assets and liabilities of First 
Federated Savings Bank. The fourth step will be the 
conversion of each of the remaining three Associa- 
tions and its merger into the Institution. 

The Acquisition will be effected on a “turnkey” 
basis, with the FSLIC providing at its own cost for 
the establishment and incorporation of the Institution, 
transfer of assets and liabilities to the Institution, 
conversion and merger of the remaining Associations 
into the Institution, and recording and filing of all 
documents in accordance with various state and 
federal requirements. 

Applicant has submitted a business plan (the 
“Business Plan”), enclosed separately as Exhibit B, in 
connection with the Acquisition Proposal. The Busi- 
ness Plan assumes the acquisition is consummated on 
December 31, 1987, and presents financial projections 
for the Institution. The Business Plan projects a 


245 


capital infusion in cash and preferred stock by 
Applicant and/or its existing subsidiaries, initial 
financial assistance from FSLIC in the form of cash 
and an amortizing note receivable, and continuing 
financial assistance in the form of cash from FSLIC. 
This assistance consists of spread and yield mainte- 
nance and guarantees of recovery by FSLIC of losses 
on certain assets. The Business Plan assumes that 
losses on other assets will be assumed by the 
Institution. 

The Acquisition Proposal is subject to a number of 
specific terms and conditions, among which are 
certain regulatory forbearances and considerations to 
be granted or obtained by the FSLIC. These 
forbearances and considerations are listed at pages 
7-16 of the Acquisition Proposal which is attached as 
Exhibit A, and are hereby incorporated by reference 
into this Application. Applicant wishes to emphasize 
the importance of the requested forbearances and 
considerations to the completion of the Acquisition, 
and the consequent need for the appropriate offices 
within the FSLIC to review the relevant issues at an 
early stage. Without in any way affecting the 
requested forbearances and considerations as set 
forth in the Acquisition Proposal and incorporated by 
reference herein, a summary of the forbearances and 
considerations requested is given below: 

(a) For regulatory purposes with respect to the 
books and records of the Institution, push-down 
accounting shall be used to record the purchase of the 
Institution’s capital stock by the Holding Company. 
Twenty one million dollars of the cash contribution to 
be made to the Institution pursuant to an assistance 
agreement to be entered into between the FSLIC and 
Applicant is to be a credit to the Institution’s 


—_— al 


246 


regulatory capital; therefore, for regulatory account- 
ing purposes, the Institution will book such contribu- 
tion as a direct addition to its net worth. 

(b) The FSLIC will permit Applicant and the 
Holding Company to enter into a capital maintenance 
agreement for the Institution that is limited to: (i) an 
agreement to infuse capital in order to maintain the 
regulatory capital of the Institution at a level 
consistent with that required by 12 C.F.R. § 563.13(b) 
as now or hereinafter in effect, provided that the 
aggregate amount of this obligation shall not exceed 
$4 million; and (ii) an agreement that in the event the 
Institution’s tatio of regulatory capital to total 
liabilities at the end of any given calendar quarter 
falls below 2 percent, without prompt remedy, the 
FSLIC will have the right to vote the securities 
acquired by Applicant and the Holding Company, 
remove the Institution’s board of directors, and/or 
dispose of any or all of the voting securities of the 
Institution. 

(c) The FSLIC will give permanent and continuing 
approval to the issuance of debt by Applicant and its 
affiliates (or waive the debt requirement under 
section 408(m) of the National Housing Act), so long 
as the regulatory capital of the Institution meets the 
amount required at the time the debt is issued. 

(d) The FSLIC will authorize the acquisition under 
section 408(m) of the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1730a, will determine under such authority that 
Applicant and its affiliates are exempt from the 
operation of section 408(p) of the National Housing 
Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1730(p), with respect to the cross- 
marketing of products or services between the 
Institution and Applicant, its subsidiaries or its 
affiliates, and will confirm that such sales, as 
described herein, are consistent with section 408(d) of 
the National Housing Act. 


247 


(e) The acquisition will occur pursuant to FSLIC 
authorization under section 408(m) of the National 
Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1730a, and the FSLIC will 
affirmatively find that such authorization preempts 
the laws of any state that would limit or preclude the 
affiliation of the Institution and Applicant or any of 
its insurance affiliates or would, by reason of such 
affiliation, prohibit the sale of insurance by Applicant, 
its insurance affiliates or agents. 

(f) The acquisition will occur pursuant to authoriza- 
tion under section 408(m) of the National Housing 
Act. 


TO: 


248 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 


907 Walnut Street 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309 


OFFICE OF SUPERVISORY AGENT— 


EIGHTH DISTRICT 
MEMORANDUM 


DATE: FEBRUARY 26, 1988 


Linda Plye, Director of Corporative 
Activities 


FROM: Daniel T. McKee 


RE: 


Supervisory Agent 


John A. Pringle 
Supervisory Agent 


S-Memorandum—Proposed 
FSLIC-Assisted Acquisition 


of 


First Federal 
Savings Bank 
Waterloo, lowa 


FHLBB Docket No. 


2321 


Peoples Federal 
Savings and 

Loan Association 
Waterloo, lowa 


FHLBB Docket No. 


5965 


TL $196.8 Million 


TA $152.4 Million 
NW ($44.4) Million 
NW/TL (22.6%) 
NW/TA (29.1%) 
Data as of 12/31/87 


and 
TL $154.8 Million 


TA $152.4 Million 
NW ($2.4) Million 
NW/TL (1.6%) 
NW/TA (1.6%) 
Data as of 12/31/87 


249 


The Perpetual 
Savings and Loan 
Association 

Waterloo, Iowa 


FHLBB Docket No. 


4477 


Statesman Group, 
Inc. 

Des Moines, Iowa 
Private Investor 


and 
TL $123.6 Million 
TA $118.9 Million 


NW ($4.7) Million 

NW/TL (3.8%) 

NW/TA (3.9%) 

Data as of 12/31/87 
by 

TL $1,131.2 Million 


TA $1,192.1 Million 
NW $60.9 Million 
NW/TL 5.4% 
NW/TA 5.1% 

Data as of 9/30/87 


250 251 


MEMORANDUM February 26, 1988 
Re: First—Peoples—Perpetual Page Two 


I. GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 


institutions’ financial condition and the acceptable 
acquisition proposal from Statesman, an FSLIC- 
assisted acquisition at this time will minimize the 


First Federal Savings Bank (“First Federal”) and 
Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Association 
(“Peoples”) are FSLIC-insured, federally chartered 
mutual institutions with home offices in Waterloo, 
lowa. The Perpetual Savings and Loan Association 
(“Perpetual”) is an FSLIC-insured, state chartered 
mutual institution with its home office also in 
Waterloo, Iowa. First Federal has one branch each 
in Oelwein, LaPorte City, Dubuque and Waterloo, 
and two branches in Cedar Falls. Peoples has one 
branch each in Manchester, New Hampton, 
Sumner, Traer, Union, Waterloo and Elkader, and 
two branches in Cedar Falls. Perpetual has one 
branch each in Parkersburg, Waterloo and Jesup, 
and two branches in Waverly. 


On December 11, 1987, these three institutions 
were bid nationwide on an assisted basis along 
with First Federated Savings Bank, North Palm 
Beach, Florida. One bid was received by the 
January 20, 1988, deadline, from the Statesman 
Group, Inc. (“Statesman”), Des Moines, Iowa. Their 
bid is less than the cost of liquidation of the three 
Waterloo institutions along with the North Palm 
Beach institution. | 


As reflected in current financial data of the three 
individual Waterloo institutions, each has a nega- 
tive net worth. First Federal has a continuing 
trend of monthly operating losses. Peoples and 
Perpetual have generated nominal monthly operat- 
ing income, resulting in an annualized return on 
assets of 0.1% for both institutions. Given the three 


eventual cost of resolution to the FSLIC. Accord- 
ingly, we recommend that the FHLBB approve the 
proposed F'S|.IC-assisted acquisition of First Fed- 
eral, Peoples and Perpetual by Statesman. 


The proposed transaction is expected to be accom- 
plished as follows: 


The Bank Board would allow a supervisory 
merger of the four institutions; approve the 
establishment and incorporation of Statesman 
Savings Holding Corp. and Statesman Bank of 
Savings, FSB; transfer the assets and lia- 
bilities of the combined institutions to States- 
man Bank of Savings, FSB; and permit 
Statesman Bank of Savings, FSB, to establish 
branches in the State of Missouri in addition to 
the branching rights associated with the 
acquisition of the Iowa and Florida institu- 
tions. The FSLIC would provide cash (30%) 
and promissory note (70%) contribution total- 
ing approximately $115,000,000; pay 93% of 
losses on covered assets for five years from 
the date of acquisition; provide yield mainte- 
nance on covered assets; indemnify Statesman, 
its subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, directors 
and employees for five yeas; and grant certain 
regulatory forbearances and considerations. 


Il. FINANCIAL STATUS OF PROBLEM 
INSTITUTIONS 


A. First Federal 


The institution’s most recent quarterly re- 
port dated December 31, 1987, indicated 


252 


average monthly net operating deficits of 
$666,667. Total regulatory net worth was a 
negative $44.4 million. 


As of December 31, 1987, it is estimated that 
the institution has unbooked losses of $11.3 
million. The majority of these losses, approx- 
imately $9.3 million, are the result of the 
institution’s investments in large commercial 
real estate loans. 


During late 1982, the prior Board and Presi- 
dent decided to have the institution “outgrow” 
the problem of its old, underwater loan 
portfolio. The institution failed to operate 
profitably while growing over 90% in 20 
months. The institution invested its proceeds 
from growth into commercial real estate loans 
on -a nationwide basis. These consisted pri- 
marily of construction and AD&C loans. Be- 
cause of the Board’s and President’s unsafe 
and unsound practices, they were replaced on 
November 5, 1987. 


Since the August 31, 1987, supervisory ex- 
amination, First Federal has been virtually 
unsuccessful in working out its problem assets. 
The new Board and President provide the 
institution with a good personnel base to 
successfully work out some of the problem 
loans and real estate owned. 


The following summarizes First Federal’s 
relevant financial history: 


253 
Annual Periods Ended 
(in thousands) 
12-31-87 12-31-86 12-31-85 
Assets $152,402 $191,957 $236,719 
Net Worth ($44,389) ($31,864) ($7,007) 
Net Worth/Assets (29.13%) (16.60%) (2.96%) 
Interest-Earning Assets/Interest- 
Bearing Liab. 61.22% 69.44% 84.44% 
Net Interest Margin on Average 
Earning Assets (2.80%) (2.49%) (0.56%) 
Net Income ($12,527) ($24,884) ($9,031) 
Operating Expense/Average Assets 2.42% 2.05% 1.91% 
1 Year Hedged GAP (50.09%) (34.85%) (25.09%) 
Scheduled Items/Assets 35.77% 23.54% 14.74% 
Liquid Assets/Savings Deposits 6.35% 10.10% 6.16% 


B. Peoples 


The institution’s December 31, 1987, quarterly report 
indicated a deficit regulatory capital of $2.4 million. 
Although the institution reported nominal income of 
$96,000 for the three month period ended December 
31, 1987, losses, excluding a $4.3 million loan loss 
reserve in June 1987, have average $20,000 a month 
for the 12-month period ended December 31, 1987. An 
estimated 20 percent of assets are in delinquent local 
1-4 family mortgage loans, and local 1-4 family REO 
and REJ. Combining these assets with the continued 
poor condition of the local economy will preclude this 
institution from sustaining periods of profitability or 
returning to solvency in the near future. 


In addition, due to the continuing poor condition of 
the local economy, this institution may have unre- 
served losses on loans in excess of $2.5 million. 


The following summarizes First Federal’s relevant 
financial history: 


254 
Annual Periods Ended 
(in thousands) 
12-31-87 12-31-86 12-31-85 
Assets $152,444 $165,225 $166,315 
Net Worth ($2,413) $1,977 $2,693 
Net Worth/Assets (1.58%) 1.20% 1.62% 
Interest-Earning Assets/Interest- 
Bearing Liab. 90% 90% 91% 
Net Interest Margin on Average 
Earning Assets 1.62% 1.45% 1.12% 
Net Income ($4,392) ($715) ($343) 
Operating Expense/Average Assets 1.60% 1.50% 1.50% 
i Year Hedged GAP (29.57%) (27.10%) (30.78%) 
Scheduled Items/Assets 20.86% 20.05% 13.66% 
Liquid Assets/Savings Deposits 5.30% 7.60% 3.90% 


Cc. Perpetual 


The institution’s most recent quarterly report dated 
December 31, 1987, indicated a deficit regulatory net 
worth of $4.7 million. Net oyerating income which has 
averaged $12,917 per month during 1987, is insuffi- 
cient to cover losses on the sale of real estate owned 
and provisions for losses on loans. 


As of December 3) 1987, the institution had 
unbooked losses of approximately $595,000, which 
were identified at the November 16, 1987, examina- 
tion. The majority of the losses suffered by the 
institution are attributable to the depressed local 
economy and to second mortgage loans purchased 
from First American Mortgage Company. 


The following summarizes Perpetual’s relevant finan- 
cial history: 


Annual Periods Ended 


(in thousands) 
12-31-87 12-31-86 12-31-85 
Assets $118,931 $139,202 $143,916 
Net Worth ($4,681) $428 $1,819 
Net Worth/Assets (3.94%) 0.31% 1.26% 
Interest-Earning Assets/Interest- 
Bearing Liab. 83.75% 83.72% 85.89% 
Net Interest Margin on Average 
Earning Assets 1.91% 1.88% 1.88% 
Net Income ($4,255) ($2,247) ($54) 
Operating Expense/Average Assets 1.81% 1.75% 1.58% 
1 Year Hedged GAP (24.50%) (23.34%) (20.82%) 
Scheduled Items/Assets 13.73% 13.93% 7.22% 
Liquid Assets/Savings Deposits 7.58% 6.93% 8.31% 


D. Condition of Industry in Des Moines Bank 
District 

There are 188 insured institutions in the Eighth 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board (“FHLBB”) District. 


Assets of these insured institutions totaled $54.7 
billion as of December 31, 1987. 


As of December 31, 1987, it is projected that twenty 
(20) Eighth District insured institutions, representing 
assets of $4.1 billion or 7.5 percent of total Eighth 
District insured assets, will be insolvent within the 
next 12 months. 


Out of the 50 member institutions in Iowa, eight (8) 
are currently insolvent with $1.1 billion in assets, 
comprising 12.1 percent of total lowa member assets. 
The average net worth of Iowa institutions equaled 
1.8 percent of assets as of December 31, 1987. In 
addition, 30 Iowa member institutions reported net 
worth levels in excess of 3 percent as of December 31, 
1987. 


256 


Ill. SUPERVISORY HISTORY 
A. First Federal 


First Federal was incorporated in 1878 as a 
state chartered savings and loan association, 
became a bank member in 1934, converted to 
a federally chartered savings and loan associ- 
tion and received insurance of accounts in 
1953, and converted to a federally chartered 
savings bank in 1983. 


In 1981 and 1982 First Federal had operating 
losses of $1,654,002 and $3,108,302, respec- 
tively. The institution’s mismatch of asset and 
liability maturities during this rising interest 
rate period caused the bulk of these losses. 
Also, during this same time period, First 
Federal’s lending area became generally de- 
pressed with little sign of improvement. In 
order to reverse these operating losses and 
counteract the Waterloo economy, First Fed- 
eral undertook a total reorganization in 
September of 1982. The institution planned to 
grow from $140 million to $500 million in 
assets by December 31, 1987. The proposed 
growth strategy was to be achieved by 
incresing business thrust (e.g., financial inter- 
mediary, mortgage banking—multi-locations, 
real estate development, and expanding other 
services); diminishing the negative effect of 
old assets by acquiring new assets at a 
positive spread; buying mortgage banking 
servicing income streams; discounting GNMA 
or other favorable accounting strategies; 
using purchase method accounting where 
applicable as mergers occur; and buying out- 
of-state loans. 


257 


From September 1982 to June 1984 First 
Federal’s assets increased from $140 million 
to $238 million. A large percentage of this 
increase was initially funded through bor- 
rowed money and brokered deposits and 
invested in large loans purchased in the 
secondary market. The institution increased 
their senior management staff by one person 
in December of 1982 to accommodate this 
growth. The new senior manager specialized 
in large real estate loans. His goal, at the 
direction of his superiors, was to raise $1.4 
million in loan fees during 1983. 


On January 6, 1984. First Federal consum- 
mated an unassisted supervisory merger with 
Oelwein Federal Savings and Loan Associa- 
tion (“Oelwein Federal”), Oelwein, Lowa. This 
merger was approved by the FHLBB and the 
Supervisory Agent (“SA”). Oelwein Federal 
had $13 million in assets and approximately 
$100,000 in net worth as of the merger date. 
First Federal was the surviving institution. 


The December 9, 1983, supervisory examina- 
tion revealed a continued mismatch in asset/ 
liability maturities; but, more importantly, a 
lack of proper underwriting procedures (in- 
cluding inadequate appraisals) on loans pur- 
chased in the secondary market, and minimal 
analysis of loans and participations purchased. 
In addition, scheduled items increased signifi- 
cantly and it appeared that the Waterloo 
economy was worsening. 


The SA met with First Federal’s board of 
directors on March 2, 1984, to discuss the 
December 9, 1983, examination. It was noted 


258 


during the meeting that a follow up to this exam 
would begin during the coming weeks to 
determine if the institution has taken corrective 
actions regarding deficient lending practices. 


The March 14, 1984, supervisory examination 
noted that during the 14 months ended Febru- 
ary 29, 1984, $79 million of loans and participa- 
tions were purchased. This activity provided 
management with the loan fee income needed to 
meet its $1.4 million goal. During this time 
period, the institution had inadequate resources 
to devote to this lending activity. On June 18, 
1984, First Federal executed a Supervisory 
Agreement regarding loan underwriting at the 
request of the SA. 


On November 1, 1984, the SA met with First 
Federal’s board of directors to discuss the 
September 14, 1984, supervisory examination 
report. The SA was concerned with the institu- 
tion’s rapid growth and investments in commer- 
cial real estate, combined with a decreasing net 
worth ratio. The SA requested that the institu- 
tion revise its business plan to disallow the 
granting of any additional AD&C loans or other 
types of new commercial real estate construction 
loans. The SA also requested that the institution 
submit for his review a written detailed quar- 
terly status report for each loan cited in the 
examination report. Finally, the board of direc- 
tors were reminded of their fiduciary responsi- 
bilities. 


The high degree of risk First Federal assumed 
in the loans and participations purchased during 
1983 and 1984 took their toll on the institution’s 


259 


net worth following the March 2, 1985, super- 
visory examination. Continued severe operating 
deficiencies caused by excessive nonperforming 
assets and nearly $3.6 million in indicated loan 
losses more than depleted the $1.9 million net 
worth as of February 28, 1985. 


As a result of the March 2, 1985, examination 
report findings, the SA held a meeting with the 
institution’s board of directors on April 30, 1985. 
At that meeting the SA requested that the 
board execute a Consent Resolution. The board 
signed the Consent Resolution on May 22, 1985. 


First Federal was shopped in accordance with 
standard Federal Home Loan Bank Board pro- 
cedures in June of 1985. No institutions or 
investor groups were interested on an unassisted 
basis. A bid packet was sent to interested 
parties on September 13, 1985, requesting bid 
proposals to be submitted by October 7, 1985. A 
bid was submitted by First Financial Savings 
Bank (“First Financial”), Des Moines, lowa, and 
Midland Financial Savings and Loan Association 
(“Midland”), Des Moines, Iowa. Midland’s bid 
was unacceptable upon receipt and First Finan- 
cial’s bid was deemed unacceptable by FSLIC 
during June of 1986. Also, on June 17, 1986, First 
Financial withdrew its merger applications to 
acquire First Federal on an assisted basis. 


The February 3, 1986, supervisory examination 
indicated an asset portfolio heavily weighted 
with loans secured by major commercial real 
estate projects. These loans were secured by 
properties in Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado, Flor- 
ida, Nevada, Washington, Hawaii, Minnesota, 


260 


and lowa. On many of the participations, First 
Federal is a minor participant in the loan and, 
thus, has virtually no control over the asset. 
Possible losses on these major projects totaled 
$15 million. Sixty-eight percent of the $105.5 
million in large commercial real estate loans 
purchased or originated by First Federal were 
subject to adverse comment at this exam. In 
addition, the institution’s operating losses 
reached $1.0 million per month in 1986. The SA 
met with the institution’s board of directors on 
June 18, 1986, to discuss the February 3, 1986, 
examination. 


The SA met with the institution’s board of 
directors on May 1, 1987, to discuss its current 
financial condition. 


During the early part of 1987 the SA began 
interviewing individuals to replace the current 
board of directors and President at First 
Federal. On May 21, 1987, FSLIC indemnifica- 
tion was requested for five prospective directors 
and a prospective President to replace the 
current board and President at First Federal. 
An indemnification agreement was obtained from 
the FSLIC on September 21, 1987. The SA met 
with First Federal’s board of directors on 
November 5, 1987, and discussed with them the 
need to bring on new personnel as board 
members and President of the institution. During 
that meeting, all members of the board and the 
President resigned. The new board and Presi- 
dent were appointed at the same meeting. 


At the second meeting of the new board, 
November 19, 1987, the SA met with the 


261 


members to discuss the June 16, 1987, super- 
visory examination report. The new board was 
also presented with a new Consent Agreement 
for their review and execution. The new board 
signed the new Consent Agreement on January 
21, 1988. 


The following table provides a listing of First 
Federal’s recent examination reports and 
ratings: 


Composite CRA 


Date Exam Type Evaluation Evaluation 


12-03-81 Supervisory 
11-21-80 Supervisory 
08-03-79 Supervisory 


06-16-87 Supervisory 5 3 
04-02-87 Special 5 3 
02-25-87 Special 5 3 
01-28-87 Special _— _ 
02-03-86 Supervisory 5 3 
03-02-85 Supervisory 5 5 
09-14-84 Supervisory 5 3 
08-22-84 Supervisory 4 3 
03-14-84 Supervisory 4 3 
12-09-83 pervisory 4 3 
04-13-83 Special 3 3 
09-27-82 Supervisory 3 3 
06-01-82 Special 4 - 
4 2 
2 3 
2 2 


B. Peoples 


Peoples was incorporated as a state chartered 
mutual savings and loan association on January 
25, 1879. The institution became a member of the 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines on 
March 1, 1956, and received insurance of accounts 


262 


on February 28, 1956. Peoples was a state 
chartered institution (Peoples Mutual Savings 
and Loan Association) until it merged with 
Peoples Federal Savings and Loan Associetion, 
Cedar Falls, lowa, and became a federal charter 
at that time. 


This institution received composite ratings of “2” 
and “3” up until the annual examination of 
December 1, 1984, at which time the institution 
received composite ratings of “4” and “3.” Prior 
to this, although ratings were not particularly 
adverse, examinations did note significant losses, 
resulting from inadequate net interest margins. 
Peoples suffered the normal post deregulatory 
spread problems, the result of fixed rate loans 
yielding well below the institution’s increasing 
cost of funds. In addition, this institution’s 
normal lending territory was increasingly becom- 
ing depressed due to agricultural difficulties, the 
result of which was an increasing amount of non- 
earning assets. All of these factors led up to a 
somewhat weak capital position, prior to Peoples’ 
more serious supervisory concerns. 


Peoples’ December 1, 1984, examination disclosed 
a composite rating of “4.” This rating was due 
primarily to a capital position which had been 
reduced to $1.7 million, losses of $967,000 for the 
period, and scheduled items which were noted to 
be $13.6 million or 8.1% of assets. The losses 
were due primarily to reserves for uncollected 
interest and appraised losses on nonearning 
assets. As a result of these findings, the SA 
requested to meet with this board to discuss 
methods of alleviating the above concerns. Items 
discussed by the SA were merger proposals, 


263 


possible capital infusion and branch sales. Cor- 
rective measures were properly addressed in 
response to the SA. 


Another meeting was held with the board of this 
institution on November 21, 1985. High sched- 
uled items, further losses, and inadequate 
spreads were discussed. The SA requested a net 
worth action plan at this meeting so as to 
document this institution’s plan for a return to 


capital adequacy. 


The December 31, 1985 examination disclosed 
continuing problems created by the weak econ- 
omy in the Waterloo area. Scheduled items had 
increased to 15.2% of assets and were comprised 
entirely of loans on 1-4 family type properties. 
Although net worth had increased slightly, it 
was due primarily to nominal profits which 
occurred due to softening interest rates. As a 
result of these findings, the SA advised the 
institution that a return to sustained periods of 
profitability and adequate net worth were not 
likely and the institution should immediately 
seek a merger partner or some sort of capital 
stock conversion to alleviate these concerns. This 
letter also discussed the institution’s net worth 
action plan requested earlier. The SA notified 
the institution that the plan was not adequate in 
that it did not display a return to capital 
adequacy. The board was instructed to continue 
working on the action plan and explore new 
areas of restructuring. 


The SA again requested to meet with this board 
in December of 1985. The meeting, held January 
27, 1986, checked the progress of the institution 


264 


in terms of net worth action plans, stock 
conversions, decreasing size, and branch sales. 
Many of these items did not occur because the 
institution was unable to effectuate any of the 
events in a proper manner. Although a net worth 
action plan was in place, little progress was 
noted toward capital improvement as the econ- 
omy was far too weak for improvement. 


The next course of supervisory action at this 
institution was a Supervisory Agreement, which 
was obtained on August 20, 1986, and was the 
result of continued losses and a_ projected 
insolvency of less than one year. The Agreement 
was standard and covered such items as lending, 
investment and other operating criteria. The 
institution has complied with this Agreement. 


In March of 1987, the SA met again with this 
board to discuss the institution’s business plan 
and progress thereto. We notified the board that 
the upcoming examination would likely result in 
the depletion of all of the institution’s net worth 
due to asset classifications. Previous to this, the 
institution had not been subject to classification. 
In addition, continued operating losses were 
being caused by a high level of nonearning 
assets. We also discussed a proposed merger and 
capital conversion plan organized by Peoples and 
Perpetual. A proposed investor was to inject 
several million dollars into the combined institu- 
tion as well as obtain several million dollars in 
FSLIC assistance. The Agreement did not occur 
as the feasibility of the combined institution was 
questionable. 


265 


The next item of supervisory concern at this 
institution was dated April 25, 1987, and con- 
cerned a memo from the examiners to the 
Principal Supervisory Agent. An examination 
which commenced March 23, 1987, would require 
Doubtful and Loss classifications of $8 million 
and, in turn, loss reserves of $4.2 million. This 
exhausted all of Peoples’ net worth. Total 
classified assets amounted to $30 million or 18.2 
percent of assets. The institution at this time 
was given a “5” rating. The exam noted that the 
institution’s primary problems were due to 
severe economic conditions and that management 
had failed to take aggressive steps to reduce the 
level of REO and problem assets. The exam also 
noted concerns with the institution’s level of 
interest rate risk, business plan, and a year end 
operating loss of $711,000. 


A supervisory letter sent May 28, 1987, re- 
quested corrective action with regard to all 
concerns as well as a loss reserve of $4.2 million. 
The reserve rendered the institution insolvent 
and, thus, a Consent Agreement dated June 17, 
1987, was obtained. The Consent Agreement 
prohibits the institution from any lending, except 
certain residential mortgage and consumer loans, 
and other operational matters without prior 
written approval of this office. 


The final supervisory matter concerning this 
institution was a special limited examination 
completed October 19, 1987. The examination 
was conducted to determine compliance with the 
Consent Agreement. It was reported that in 
several instances the institution was not in 
compliance with the Agreement; however, Su- 
pervision determined that the violations were 


266 


inadvertent and have not occurred subsequent to 
the examination. 


On December 23, 1987, Peoples submitted a 
capital forbearance application which will be 
denied due to the lack of sufficient earnings to 
restore capital to the minimums required by 
Section 563.13 within a reasonable period of 
time. In conjunction with the forbearance ap- 
plication, a proposed merger plan between 
Peoples and Perpetual was also submitted. The 
proposed merger would combine the two insol- 
vent institutions with the intention of achieving 
operating economies of scale. The proposal would 
not result in the resolution of the two FSLIC 
cases as does Statesman’s acquisition proposal. 


The following table provides information regard- 
ing Peoples’ examination report findings. 


267 


March 10, 1938, and received insurance of 
accounts on December 26, 1950. 


Perpetual received composite ratings of “2” and 
CRA ratings of “3” prior to 1982. The institution 
operated free of any significant supervisory 
concerns; however, in 1981, operating losses due 
to a rapid increase in the cost of savings began 
to adversely impact the institution’s capital 
position. 

In October 1982, the institution decided to 
refinance a large amount of Federal Home Loan 
Bank advances, incurring prepayment penalties 
of approximately $2 million. The institution had 
incorrectly believed that such losses could be 
deferred and amortized over time. The subse- 
quent examination, as of December 27, 1982, 
disclosed concern over the impact of the con- 
tinued operating losses and prepayment penal- 


Composite CRA ties on the institution’s net worth position. The 
Date Exam Type Evaluation Evaluation institution was assigned a composite rating of 
10-19-87 Special 5 3 = 
ang ei at : : A meeting with the board of directors was held 
12-01-84 venice 4 8 on January 24, 1983, to discuss the examination 
09-09-83 sect 2C 2 results and deteriorating net worth. Another 
08-14-82 Seles Supervisory 20 3 meeting with the board was held November 27, 
06-19-81 Joint eteen 2B 3 1984, to again discuss the institution’s net worth 
02-29-80 Joint Supervisory 1B 3 position. 


Off-site monitoring in September 1984 revealed 


C. Perpetual deterioration in asset quality with significant 


Perpetual was incorporated as a state chartered 
mutual savings and loan association on April 1, 
1890. The institution became a member of the 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines on 


increases in real estate owned and past due 
loans. As a result, an examination commenced 


October 27, 1984. Operating lossed continued to 
drain the institution’s net worth which, as of 


268 


September 20, 1984, represented 1.1 percent of 
total assets. Also of concern was the increasing 
level of scheduled items (3.9 percent of total 
assets) and a high level of interest rate risk. 
During the examination, the examiners dis- 
covered that the institution had funded a $1 
million purchase of second mortgage loans from 
First American Mortgage Company, Inc. 
(“FAM”), and issued a commitment to purchase 
an additional $9 million of this type of loan which 
was to be funded in November 1984. The 
underlying loans were not available for review at 
this examination; however, the review of a 
sample loan revealed a high degree of risk, with 
borrowers having poor credit histories and 
questionable repayment ability. The borrowers 
were charged annual percentage rates of up to 
30 percent. The loans were allegedly 100 percent 
insured against default by Rockwood Insurance 
Company, and the institution’s investment was 
dependent on the insurance rather than the 
individual borrowers. The institution’s composite 
rating at this examination was lowered to a “4.” 


On January 9, 1985, a meeting with the board of 
directors was held to discuss the results of the 
October 1984 examination and the quality of the 
FAM loans. 


An examination was performed on March 20, 
1985, to review the status of the FAM loans. It 
was determined that, as underwritten, the $10 
million in FAM loans represented a commercial 
loan, and an excessive concentration of credit to 
one borrower. The institution was requested to 
divest itself of the investment to within the level 
provided by the commercial loans-to-one- 


269 


borrower regulation. The composite rating re- 
mained a “4.” 


A meeting was held with representatives of 
FAM on June 11, 1985, to discuss the operations 
of FAM and the problems that the regulators 
had with the FAM loans. The lack of adequate 
documentation and the failure of the institution 
to include this type of loan in their underwriting 
guidelines were the two primary items of con- 
cern which led to the examiners’ classification of 
these loans as commercial loans to FAM. How- 
ever, the institution was notified on September 
10, 1985, that the loans could be considered real 
estate loans if the two criteria, previously 
mentioned, were met. Correspondence from the 
institution on September 13, 1985, advised this 
office that the board adopted a resolution to 
include this type of loan in its underwriting 
standards and they would pursue FAM to obtain 
needed documentation and delinquency reports. 


At the November 7, 1985, examination, the 
viability of the institution was questioned due to 
the low level of net worth and problems 
associated with the FAM loans. A law suit was 
filed against FAM by E.F. Hutton, a loan 
purchaser, alleging fraud and breach of contract 
in FAM’s loan servicing and misappropriation of 
funds by FAM and its chairman. Also-_of concern, 
regarding the collectibility of these loans, was 
the failure of the institution to have the 
individual mortgages and loss payee provisions 
of the surety bond assigned to them. A new 
servicer was hired and began reviewing the files 
to determine the delinquency status of the 
individual loans. Scheduled items, which con- 
tinued to increase due to the depressed local 


270 


economy of Waterloo, Iowa, represented 6 
percent of total assets at this review. 


A meeting with the board of directors was held 
on January 15, 1986, at the request of the 
institution, to discuss director liability and other 
issues of concern, which included the FAM loans 
and the November 1985 examination report. 
Lawsuits had been filed against FAM by 
individual borrowers in two states seeking relief 
due to unconscionable interest and points. The 
institution’s eligibility for a supervisory conver- 
sion to stock was also discussed. 


The May 13, 1986, examination report disclosed 
further deterioration in the condition of the 
institution. The delinquency report on the FAM 
loans showed 47 percent of the loans were past 
due 90 days or more, and a loss of 
$875,000-$1,283,000 was estimated by the new 
servicer. Litigation against FAM continued in 
Alabama and South Carolina with potential 
losses on loans in these states of 100 percent and 
40 percent, respectively. The institution’s com- 
posite rating was lowered to “5” at this 
examination. 


The board of directors signed a Consent Agree- 
ment on July 16, 1986, due to the anticipated 
insolvency of the institution. 


A proposal for a merger between Perpetual and 
Peoples was submitted to this office for review 
in October 1986. The proposal stated that an 
investor would infuse up to $9 million of fresh 
capital, if the FSLIC would infuse $13 million. 
The proposal was rejected because 1) it repre- 
sented the merger of two weak institutions 


271 


which was against FSLIC policy, 2) the investor 
never committed the funds, and 3) an extensive 
shopping procedure would have to precede such 
a plan. 


An examination performed as of October 20, 
1986, disclosed an insolvent institution with 
serious earnings problems and a high level of 
scheduled items (11.9 percent of total assets). 
The institution incurred a net loss of $2,281,000 
for fiscal year end September 1986. The majority 
of the loss, $1,594,000, was due to specific loss 
reserves established for FAM loans. Concern 
over management and the board’s willingness 
and ability to comply with the Consent Agree- 
ment was also noted, as several deficiencies were 
disclosed during the examination. The institu- 
tion’s composite rating remained a “5.” 


The case was transferred to the FSLIC on 
February 26, 1987. 


A meeting with the board of directors was held 
on March 18, 1987, to discuss the October 1986 
examination and the status of the FAM loans. 
The institution had in excess of $7.8 million of 
FAM loans outstanding, with loss reserves of 
$1.5 million recorded and additional reserves of 
$1.2 million to be made. 


On December 23, 1987, Perpetual submitted a 
capital forbearance application which was subse- 
quently denied due to the lack of sufficient 
earnings to restore capital to the minimum level 
required by Section 563.13 within a reasonable 
period of time. In conjunction with the for- 
bearance application, a proposed merger plan 


272 273 


between Perpetual and Peoples was also submit- Date Exam Type Evaluation Evaluation 


ted. The proposed merger would combine the 11-16-87 Joint Supervisory 5 3 
two insolvent institutions with the intention of 10-20-86 Joint Supervisory 5 3 
achieving operating economies of scale. The 05-13-86 Joint Special 5 3 
proposal would not result in the resolution of the 11-07-85 Joint Supervisory 4 3 
two FSLIC cases as does Statesman’s acquisition 03-20-85 Joint Supervisory 4 3 
proposal. | 10-27-84 Joint Supervisory 4 3 

09-17-83 Joint Supervisory 2 3 
An examination was performed as of November 12-27-82 Joint Supervisory 3 3 
16, 1987, and disclosed no improvement in the 10-31-81 Joint Supervisory 2 3 


condition of the institution. Management has 
been unsuccessful in reducing the level of IV. PLEDGED ACCOUNTS 

problem assets and limiting the institution’s level 

of losses. Unreserved losses identified at this There are no pledged accounts at First Federal, 
examination totaled $595,000. The institution Peoples, or Perpetual. 

reported a net loss of $3.8 million for its fiscal 

year ending September 30, 1987, which repre- V. PERSONNEL ISSUES 


sents a return on average assets of the negative 
2.9%. The net loss, which is primarily due to 
losses on the sale of real estate owned and 
provision for losses on assets, had reduced the 
institution’s regulatory net worth position to 
negative $4.2 million, or 3.4% of total assets as of 
September 30, 1987. The examination report 
indicated that the level of problem assets 
remains high, representing 13% of total assets. A 
meeting with the institution’s board of directors 
has been requested to discuss the results of this 
examination. 


The following table provides information regard- 
ing Perpetual’s examination report ratings: 


There are no significant personnel issues at Peoples 
or Perpetual. 


The new President of First Federal has a contract 
with the institution. This contract is attached as 
Exhibit S-9. The contract may be terminated by 
either party at any time and for any reason by 
giving thirty (30 days written notice to the other 
party, but any termination by the board of 
directors of First Federal other than termination 
for cause, shall not prejudice the Manager’s right 
to compensation or other benefits under the 
contract. 


VI. ACCOUNTING ISSUES 


The proposed transaction will be accounted for 
according to Generally Accepted Accounting Prin- 
ciples (GAAP). 


VIII. 


VILL. 


274 
SERVICE CORPORATION ISSUES 


There are no significant service corporation 
issues at Peoples related to this transaction. 


One of First Federal’s second tier service 
corporation, Combined Mortgage, Phoenix, Ari- 
zona, is jointly owned with Occidental/Nebraska 
Federal Savings Bank, Omaha, Nebraska. There 
are no other significant service corporation 
issues at First Federal related to this transac- 
tion. One of Perpetual’s three services corpora- 
tions, Perpetual Services Corporation, engages 
in real estate sales. This activity, which is 
permitted under the Iowa regulations governing 
states chartered institutions, is not permitted 
under Federal Regulations (Section 545.74). If 
the resulting institution is federally chartered, 
this issue will need to be addressed. 


FIDELITY BOND/D&O POLICY 


First Federal’s fidelity bond and D&O coverage 
was canceled on August 20, 1985. A discovery 
bond was purchased at that time for a three 
month period. The institution has not been able 
to obtain a fidelity bond or D&O coverage since 
the cancellation. 


Peoples’ fidelity bond expired November 22, 
1987, and the institution has been unable to 
obtain coverage elsewhere. 


275 


Perpetual’s surety bond expired in April 25, 
1987, and the institution has been unable to 
obtain coverage elsewhere. 


Daniel T. McKee, Supervisory Agent 


John A. Pringle, Supervisory Agent 


Attachments 

ec: Roger Lerner, MAD, FSLIC 
Michael Fanaroff, MAD, FSLIC 
Eric Berg, OGC, FHLBB 
John Wooten, ORPOS 
Jay Jupiter, MAD, FSLIC 


276 
March 11, 1988 


Office of Regulatory Policy 


Oversight and Supervison 


Memorandum for: John M. Buckley, Jr. 


From: 


Subject: 


Executive Secretary to the 
Board 


Darrel W. Dochow 
Executive Director 


FSLIC-Assisted Acquisition of: 
First Federal Savings Bank 
Waterloo, IA 

FHLBB No. 2321 


Assets: $152.4 million 
Liabilities: $196.8 million 
Reg. Capital: ($44.4) million 
RC/Liabs.: (29.1%) 

and 
Peoples FS&LA 
Waterloo, IA 
FHLBB No. 5965 
Assets: $152.4 million 
Liabilities: $154.8 million 
Reg. Capital: ($2.4) million 
RC/Liabs.: (1.6%) 

and 
Perpetual S&LA 
Waterloo, IA 
FHLBB No. 4477 
Assets: $118.9 million 
Liabilities: $123.6 million 


277 
Reg. Capital: ($4.7) million 
RC/Liabs.: (4.0%) 
and 


First Federated Savings Bank 
North Palm Beach, FL 
FHLBB No. 


Assets: $142.7 million 

Liabilities: $180.9 million 

Reg. Capital: ($38.2) million 

RC/Liabs.: (26.8%) 

by 

Statesman Group, Inc. 

Des Moines, IA 

Private Investor 

Assets: $1,192.1 mil- 
lion 

Liabilities: $1,131.2 mil- 
lion 

Stockholders $60.9 million 

Equity: 

- SE/Liabs.: 5.1% 


(Association data as of 12/31/87) 
(Statesman data as of 9/30/87) 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


ISSUE 


Whether the Board should approve the FSLIC- 
assisted acquisitions of First Federal SB, Waterloo, 
[A (“First”), Peoples FS&LA, Waterloo, IA (“Peo- 
ples”), Perpetual S&LA, Waterloo, IA (“Perpetual”), 
and First Federated, North Palm Beach, FL (“Fede- 
rated”) by the Statesman Group, Inc. (“Statesman”). 


278 


BACKGROUND 


First attempted to grow out of it’s early 1980’s loan 
difficulties by engaging in a policy of nationwide 
commercial lending. The association grew over 90 
percent in 20 months, but the operations of First 
remained unprofitable. The association is currently 
carrying on the books numerous nonperforming 
commercial and acquisition, development and con- 
struction loans. 


Peoples’ difficulties are attributable to the high level 
of delinquent 1-4 family mortgages, real estate owned, 
and real estate in judgment. The economy in the 
Waterloo area is weak resulting in a high level of 
unemployment and a decrease in housing values. In 
addition, unreserved loan losses currently exceed $2.5 
million. 


Perpetual has agreed to establish a loan loss reserve 
of $2.7 million in connection with problem secondary 
mortgage loans purchased from the now defunct First 
American Mortgage Company. Furthermore, the 
association is located in a depressed area and 
scheduled items are quite high. 


Federated’s problems stem primarily from the man- 
ner in which the mortgage banking subsidiary was 
operated. The subsidiary’s mortgage servicing port- 
folio was comprised largely of servicing rights on high 
coupon loans purchased at significant premiums. The 
prepayment of the underlying loans has resulted in 
significant writedowns of the abovementioned pre- 
miums. The association has also experienced manage- 
ment and lending difficulties. 


279 


TRANSACTION 


The Statesman Group, Inc. (“Statesman”) will issue 
$12.6 million in preferred stock to Statesman Savings 
Holding Company (“SSHC”) which will be used as 
partial capitalization of SSHC. The other portion of 
the capitalization of SSHC will be cash of $8.4 million 
from American Life and Casualty Company in 
exchange for common stock. SSHC will in turn issue 
$12.6 million in preferred stock to the Statesman and 
pass $8.4 million in cash, $12.6 million in preferred 
stock, and $5 million in subordinated debentures 
through to Statesman Bank for Savings, SB (“SBS”). 
SBS will then purchase substantially all the assets 
and liabilities of First, Peoples, Perpetual, and 
Federated. 


FORBEARANCES 


It is proposed that the following forbearances be 
granted in connection with the acquisition: 


1. Where scheduled items are referred to in the 
regulation, assets of First, Peoples, Perpetual, and 
Federated that are scheduled items or become 
classified assets shall be excluded for a period of 
five years following the acquisition from any 
computation which requires the inclusion of such 
assets. 


2. For a period not to exceed five years following the 
acquisition, FSLIC will not exercise its authority 
under Section 563.13 for a failure to meet the 
regulatory capital requirements due to the ac- 
quired scheduled items. 


280 


. For one year following the acquisition, liquidity 
penalties will not be assessed if the deficiency 
results from a liquidity deficiency existing at the 
time of the acquisition or from aggregate net 
withdrawals from the existing offices of First, 
Peoples, Perpetual, or Federated. 


. It is the FSLIC’s intention that $21 million of the 
cash contribution to be made to SBS pursuant to 
an assistance agreement to be entered into 
between the FSLIC and SBS is to be a credit to 
SBS regulatory capital; therefore, for regulatory 
accounting purposes, SBS may book such contribu- 
tion as a direct addition to its regulatory capital. 


- SBS shall be given a reasonable period of time, but 
not to exceed 3 years, to phase out, dispose of or 
discontinue in an orderly manner, any acquired 
investments, activities, or operations inconsistent 
with the Home Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as 
amended. 


. SBS shall not for a period not to exceed 3 years, 
be deemed in violation of any of the provisions of 
Section 545.74 (Service Corporations) for invest- 
ments acquired as part of the merger. 


. The Bank Board shall forbear from taking action 
due to SBS’ violations of the holding company 
regulations regarding the acceptance and holding 
of specified securities of its parent holding com- 
pany. In addition, the Bank Board will forbear 
from taking any supervisory/enforcement action 
due to the institution’s violation of the equity risk 
investment limitations due to its acceptance and 
holding of the specified securities of its parent 
holding company. 


281 


AFFILIATED TRANSACTIONS 


The applicant has requested waivers for numerous 
affiliated transactions such as, the servicing of SBS’ 
loans through Statesman’s mortgage subsidiary, 
providing adjustable rate loans and a line of credit to 
the mortgage subsidiary, and allowing Statesman to 
borrow from the institution and provide management 
services to the same. The applicant has requested 
that SBS be allowed to purchase GNMA and other 
securities from Statesman’s mortgage company. 


To allow for such affiliated transactions this Office 
recommends several restrictions and guidelines: 


1. Statesman and SBS must maintain documentation 
to justify the affiliated transactions and ensure that 
they are fair to and in the best interest of the 
institution. 


2. The PSA may revoke any approved affiliated 
transactions that are judged not to be fair or in the 
best interest of the institution. 


3. Affiliated transactions are to be limited to existing 
lines of business. 


4. The institution shall submit in advance an annual 
report to the PSA indicating the actual types and 
volumes of affiliated transactions. 


CROSS-MARKETING 


Statesman has requested the ability to market a 
variety of insurance products through the institution’s 
branches and to utilize Statesman’s and SBS’ 
customer bases for direct and personal solicitation. In 
addition, the applicant proposes to set up brokerage 
services within the branches and utilize the broker to 
trade for SBS’ account. 


Oe ee, ete 6 te, Ditee Ie,» sr 2h 


282 


ORPOS does not object to the cross-marketing as 
long as the purchasers of the insurance products are 
made aware that there is no link between the 
insurance products and FSLIC insurance. Further- 
more, the products to be marketed will be restricted 
to existing products being offered by Statesman 
unless approved by the PSA. 


DEBT APPROVAL 


Pursuant to be applicant attaining non-diversified 
status, there will be a Proposed Debt Budget filed 
with the PSA by the applicant to cover any 
contemplated debt for a given fiscal year. 


LOANS 


Loans aggregating $30 million, a $20 million loan and 
a $10 million loan to the Employee Stock Ownership 
Plan which is guaranteed by Statesman, currently in 
affect with Bank One, can be place on SBS’ books 
with the same rates, terms, restrictive covenants, and 
collateralization. A $17 million loan will also be 
allowed to cover payments to the Government 
National Mortgage Association for three months. At 
the end of the three months that loan will be reduced 
to $15 million for a period not to exceed 12 months in 
total duration. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


The Supervisory Agent’s recommendation as well as a 
more detailed history of the disappearing institutions 
is contained in the attached memorandum. This Office 
has no objection to the Supervisory Agent’s recom- 
mendation for approval. 


283 


FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK 
BOARD MEETING 
(Closed Session) 


March 11th, 1988 


M. DANNY WALL, 
Chairman 


ROGER MARTIN, 
Board Member 


LAWRENCE WHITE, 
Board Member 


REDACTED 


MS. BROOKINGS: There’s an additional exhibit 
that needs to be entered into the record. It’s Exhibit 
I-4. It’s the viability and revised proposal costing, the 
cost of the transaction, our net present value basis. 
(Inaudible)—has provided us with a range of $154 
million to $157 million, depending on various sce- 
narios. The cost of liquidations estimated to be $207 
million for these four institutions; thereby, a proposal 
of approximately 75 percent of the cost of liquidation. 

The proposal before the Board represents four 
previous liquidation candidates, which staff has 
successfully negotiated a transaction of approximately 
75 percent of the cost of liquidation by working with 
an acquirer who had specialized interest. This brings 
new capital into the industry and provides a 
substantial upside to the FSLIC in order to return on 
our investment. 

It’s, therefore, the staff of the Federal Home Loan 
Bank in Atlanta, the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des 
Moines, the Office of Regulatory Policy Oversight and 
Supervision, the Office of General Counsel and 
FSLIC’s recommendation that the Bank Board ap- 
prove this transaction. 

CHAIRMAN WALL: I would make the observa- 
tion that this has been quite an undertaking, as has 
just been identified by virtue of all of the people who 
have been involved in the process, and that the 
process has involved as a result many different people 
from many of the different aspects of the system and, 
of course, four different institutions, which itself is no 
simple matter. 

I recognize and want to acknowledge the fact that 
staff has put in just incredible hours and effort in this 
particular undertaking with confusions and with 


285 


problems of deadlines and such haying occurred and/ 
or having been revised, and perhaps having been 
revised again. I do want to acknowledge, commend 
and thank everybody who has been involved in the 
process. 

I think this particular step as far as the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board and the system is concerned 
is going to be seen as a significant one because there 
are many significant signs and signals being given by 
this action. So I think it’s important that we will have 
disposed of it and put it out for public perusal, 
whether it be just from the standpoint of what 
FSLIC is doing or whether it be from the standpoint 
of those who have been looking at such possibilities 
from their own point of view in terms of their own 
investment opportunities. 

It seems to me that it’s important that in light of 
the pressure that the people have been under as 
we’ve approached this meeting today that if anyone in 
this process is concerned or has a significant question 
whether or not this is the appropriate package, I 
want to hear from that person or those people at this 
point. I don’t want anyone to feel we have been 
pressuring in a precipitous way this decision. I think 
it’s appropriate, and it’s just 


286 


MERGER AGREEMENT 
AND 
PLAN OF MERGER 


THIS MERGER AGREEMENT is made and 
entered into as of the 11th day of March, 1988, by and 
between FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, Wa- 
terloo, Iowa (“MERGING ASSOCIATION”), and 
STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB, Water- 
loo, lowa (“SBS” or “RESULTING ASSOCIATION”), 


RECITALS 


1. SBS has been organized and chartered as a 
federal stock savings bank pursuant to § 406(a), 
(b)(1A), (c)1)(B) and (e)(3)B) of the National 
Housing Act, as amended (“NHA”), 12 U.S.C. 
$ 1729%a), (b)(1)(A), (c)(1)(B) and (e)(3)(B) (1982). 

2. It is deemed to be in the best interests of the 
members of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and the 
sole stockholder of SBS that such institutions effect a 
merger upon the terms and conditions stated in this 
Agreement (“Merger”). 

3. It is believed that the Merger will enable SBS to 
establish and maintain savings, mortgage and other 
services. 

4. The Merger is authorized by $5 of the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended (“HOLA”), 12 
U.S.C. § 1464 (1982), and the rules and regulations 
promulgated under and pursuant to the HOLA and 
the NHA by the FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK 
BOARD (“BANK BOARD”). 

5. The following agreement is entered into in 
consideration of the mutual promises contained in this 
Agreement. 


287 
AGREEMENT 


§ 1 Merger. The MERGING ASSOCIATION shall 
merge with and into SBS. 

§ 2 RESULTING ASSOCIATION. The RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall be STATEMAN BANK 
FOR SAVINGS, FSB, Waterloo, Iowa. 

§3 Name of the RESULT'NG ASSOCIATION. 
The name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall 
be STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB. 

$4 Home Office of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. The home office of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be located at Fourth and Mulberry, 
Waterloo, Iowa, the present home office of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION. 

§5 Charter and Bylaws of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. After the Merger, the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall operate under the charter and 
bylaws of SBS. 

§ 6 Directors of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The number of directors of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be 7. The names and addresses of 
those persons who shall serve as directors of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION and the expiration 
dates of their terms are listed on Exhibit A attached 
hereto, which constitutes a part of this Agreement. 

§ 7 Officers. The existing officers of SBS shall be 
the officers of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

§ 8 Branch Offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. After the Merger, the branch offices of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall include all the 
branch offices of the MERGING ASSOCIATION. 
The addresses of the offices that will be branch 
offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION are 
listed on Exhibit B attached hereto, which constitutes 
a part of this Agreement. 


= 
ee 


288 


$9 Accounts. Upon the effective date of the 
Merger (“Effective Date”), each accountholder of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall receive, without 
payment, a withdrawable account or accounts in the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION equa! in withdrawal 
value to the account or accounts held in the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION on such date, featuring 
the same rate, maturity and other terms, except that 
holders of such accounts shall not be members of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, shall have no voting 
rights in the RESULTING ASSOCIATION and shall 
have no rights to participate in the equity of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION upon liquidation or 
otherwise. 

$10 Transfer of Assets and Liabilities upon 
Merger. Upon the Effective Date, all of the assets and 
property of every kind or character, real, personal 
and mixed, tangible and intangible, choses in action, 
rights and credits, then owned by the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION, or that would inure to it, shall 
immediately by operation of law and without the 
necessity of any instrument of conveyance or transfer 
and without any further act or deed be vested in and 
become the property of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, which shall have, hold, and enjoy the same in 
its own right as fully and to the same extent as the 
same were possessed, held and enjoyed by the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION prior to the Merger. The 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shali be deemed to be 
and shall be a continuation of the entity and identity 
of SBS. All of the rights and obligations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall remain unimpaired, 
and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall, on the 
Effective Date, succeed to all of such rights and 
obligations and the duties connected with them. 

§ 11 Stock. Upon the Effective Date, each share of 
SBS capital stock outstanding immediately prior to 


such date shall remain outstanding as a share of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION’s stock. Upon the 
Effective Date, all voting rights of borrowers or 
accountholders of the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
shall cease, and ail voting rights in the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall be vested in and exercisable by 
the sole stockholder of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. No stock of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
shall be received or distributed in connection with the 
Merger. . 

§ 12 Effective Date of Merger. The transactions 
contemplated by this. Agreement shall be effective 
only when approved by the BANK BOARD. The 
Effective Date of the Merger shall be a date 
determined by the BANK BOARD in accordance with 
its resolution approving the Merger. 

$13 Further Actions. All of the transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement have been or will be 
authorized by all necessary corporate action of each 
institution. Both institutions by their proper officers 
shall execute and deliver all instruments, certificates 
and other documents as may be necessary or inci- 
dental to the performance of this Agreement. 

§ 14 Condition of the MERGING ASSOCIATION. 
The RESULTING ASSOCIATION acknowledges 
that it is familiar with the present financial condition 
of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and of the deterio- 
ration of the assets, business and operations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION. 

§ 15 Counterparts, Modifications, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, all of which taken together 
shall constitute one and the same instrument, and any 
party may execute this Agreement by signing any 
such counterpart. 


290 


(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 

$16 Entire Agreement, Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any inter- 
pretation or understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement between 
the parties pertaining to the subject matter hereof 
and supersedes all prior agreements and understand- 
ings of the parties in connection with it. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid 
or unenforceable, all of the remaining provisions of 
this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect 
and shall be binding upon the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

$17 Governing Law. This Agreement and the 
rights and obligations under it shall be governed by 
the laws of the State of Iowa to the extent that 
federal law does not control. Nothing in this Agree- 
ment shall require any unlawful action or inaction by 
either party. 

$ 18 Sole Benefit. Nothing expressed or referred to 
in this Agreement is intended or shall be construed to 
give any person other than the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION or the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
any legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim under, 
or in respect to, this Agreement, it being the 
intention of the parties that this Agreement, the 
assumption of obligations and statements of respon- 
sibilities under it, and all of its conditions and 


291 


provisions are for the sole benefit of the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION and the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and for the benefit of no other person. 

$19 Acknowledgment. Each party to this Agree- 
ment, by the execution of this Agreement, acknowl- 
edges and affirms that its board of directors has, by 
at least a two-thirds vote, approved this Agreement 
and the Merger, authorized the execution of this 
Agreement, empowered its signatories to execute this 
Agreement, and authorized the filing of this Agree- 
ment with the BANK BOARD. 

$20 Conditions. This Agreement is conditioned 
upon the execution of an Assistance Agreement 
among the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, The 
Statesman Group, Inc., Des Moines, lowa, American 
Life and Casualty Insurance Company, Fargo, North 
Dakota, and Statesman Savings Holding Corp., Des 
Moines, Iowa. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have 
caused this agreement to be executed on their behalf 
by their duly authorized agents. 


ATTESTED: STATESMAN BANK 
FOR SAVING FSB 

By: By: 

Its: Its: 

Date: 

ATTESTED: FIRST FEDERAL 
SAVINGS BANK 

By: By: 

Its: Its: 


292 


MERGER AGREEMENT 
AND 
PLAN OF MERGER 


THIS MERGER AGREEMENT is made and 
entered into as of the 11th day of March, 1988, by and 
between PEOPLES FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN ASSOCIATION, Waterloo, Iowa (“MERGING 
ASSOCIATION”), and STATESMAN BANK FOR 
SAVINGS, FSB, Waterloo, Iowa (“SBS” or “RE- 
SULTING ASSOCIATION”), 


RECITALS 


1. SBS has been organized and chartered as a 
federal stock savings bank pursuant to § 406(a), 
(b)(1XA), (c)X1(B) and (e)(3XB) of the National 
Housing Act, as amended (“NHA”), 12 U.S.C. 
§ 172% a), (b)(1)(A), (¢)(1)(B) and (c)(3)(B) (1982). 

2. It is deemed to be in the best interests of the 
members of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and the 
sole stockholder of SBS that such institutions effect a 
merger upon the terms and conditions stated in this 
Agreement (“Merger”). 

3. It is believed that the Merger will enable SBS to 
establish and maintain savings, mortgage and other 
services. 

4. The Merger is authorized by §5 of the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended (“HOLA”), 12 
U.S.C. § 1464 (1982), and the rules and regulations 
promulgated under and pursuant to the HOLA and 
the NHA by the FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK 
BOARD (“BANK BOARD”). 

5. The following agreement is entered into in 
consideration of the mutual promises contained in this 
Agreement. 


293 


AGREEMENT 


§ 1 Merger. The MERGING ASSOCIATION shall 
merge with and into SBS. 

§ 2 RESULTING ASSOCIATION. The RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall be STATESMAN BANK 
FOR SAVINGS, FSB, Waterloo, Iowa. 

§3 Name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall 
be STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB. 

$4 Home Office of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. The home office of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be located at Fourth and Mulberry, 
Waterloo, Iowa. The present home office of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall become a branch 
office of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

$5 Charter and Bylaws of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. After the Merger, the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall operate under the charter and 
bylaws of SBS. 

§ 6 Directors of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The number of directors of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be 7. The names and addresses of 
those persons who shall serve as directors of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION and the expiration 
dates of their terms are listed on Exhibit A attached 
hereto, which constitutes a part of this Agreement. 

§ 7 Officers. The existing officers of SBS shall be 
the officers of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

$8 Branch Offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. After the Merger, the branch offices of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall include the pres- 
ent home and branch offices of the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION. The addresses of the offices that will 
be branch offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION are listed on Exhibit B attached hereto, which 
constitutes a part of this Agreement. 


294 


$9 Accounts. Upon the effective date of the 
Merger (“Effective Date”), each accountholder of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall receive, without 
payment, a withdrawable account or accounts in the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION equal in withdrawal 
value to the account or accounts held in the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION on such date, featuring 
the same rate, maturity and other terms, except that 
holders of such accounts shall not be members of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, shall have no voting 
rights in the RESULTING ASSOCIATION and shall 
have no rights to participate in the equity of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION upon liquidation or 
otherwise. 

$10 Transfer of Assets and Liabilities upon 
Merger. Upon the Effective Date, all of the assets and 
property of every kind or character, real, personal 
and mixed, tangible and intangible, choses in action, 
rights and credits, then owned by the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION, or that would inure to it, shall 
immediately by operation of law and without the 
necessity of any instrument of conveyance or transfer 
and without any further act or deed be vested in and 
become the property of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, which shall have, hold, and enjoy the same in 
its own right as fully and to the same extent as the 
same were possessed, held and enjoyed by the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION prior to the Merger. The 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall be deemed to be 
and shall be a continuation of the entity and identity 
of SBS. All of the rights and obligations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall remain unimpaired, 
and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall, on the 
Effective Date, succeed to all of such rights and 
obligations and the duties connected with them. 

§ 11 Stock. Upon the Effective Date, each share of 
SBS capital stock outstanding immediately prior to 


295 


such date shall remain outstanding as a share of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION’s stock. Upon the 
Effective Date, all voting rights of borrowers or 
accountholders of the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
shall cease, and all voting rights in the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall be vested in and exercisable by 
the sole stockholder of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. No stock of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
shall be received or distributed in connection with the 
Merger. 

$12 Effective Date of Merger. The transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement shall be effective 
only when approved by the BANK BOARD. The 
Effective Date of the Merger shall be a date 
determined by the BANK BOARD in accordance with 
its resolution approving the Merger. 

$13 Further Actions. All of the transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement have been or will be 
authorized by all necessary corporate action of each 
institution. Both institutions by their proper officers 
shall execute and deliver all instruments, certificates 
and other documents as may be necessary or 
incidental to the performance of this Agreement. 

§$ 14 Condition of the MERGING ASSOCIATION. 
The RESULTING ASSOCIATION acknowledges 
that it is familiar with the present financial condition 
of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and of the deterio- 
ration of the assets, business and operations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION. 

$ 15 Counterparts, Modifications, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of countervarts, all of which taken together 
shall constitute one and the same instrument, and any 
party may execute this Agreement by signing any 
such counterpart. 


SS he 


296 


(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 

§ 16 Entire Agreement, Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any inter- 
pretation or understanding agreed to in_ writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement between 
the parties pertaining to the subject matter hereof 
and supersedes all prior agreements and understand- 
ings of the parties in connection with it. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid 
or unenforceable, all of the remaining provisions of 
this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect 
and shali be binding upon the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

§ 17 Governing Law. This Agreement and the 
rights and obligations under it shall be governed by 
the laws of the State of lowa to the extent that 
federal law does not control. Nothing in this Agree- 
ment shall require any unlawful action or inaction by 
either party. 

§ 18 Sole Benefit. Nothing expressed or referred to 
in this Agreement is intended or shall be construed to 
give any person other than the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION or the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
any legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim under, 
or in respect to, this Agreement, it being the 
intention of the parties that this Agreement, the 
assumption of obligations and statements of respon- 
sibilities under it, and all of its conditions and 


—— 


297 


provisions are for the sole benefit of the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION and the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and for the benefit of no other person. 

§ 19 Acknowledgment. Each party to this Agree- 
ment, by the execution of this Agreement, acknowl- 
edges and affirms that its board of directors has, by 
at least a two-thirds vote, approved this Agreement 
and the Merger, authorized the execution of this 
Agreement, empowered its signatories to execute this 
Agreement, and authorized the filing of this Agree- 
ment with the BANK BOARD. 

§ 20 Conditions. This Agreement is conditioned 
upon the execution of an Assistance Agreemer* 
among the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, The 
Statesman Group, Inc., Des Moines, lowa, American 
Life and Casualty Insurance Company, Fargo, North 
Dakota, and Statesman Savings Holding Corp., Des 
Moines, Iowa. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have 
caused this agreement to be executed on their behalf 
by their duly authorized agents. 


ATTESTED: STATESMAN BANK 
FOR SAVING FSB 

By: By: 

Its: Its: 

Date: 

ATTESTED: PEOPLES FEDERAL 
SAVINGS AND LOAN 
ASSOCIATION 

By: By: 

Its: Its: 

Date: 


298 


MERGER AGREEMENT 
AND 
PLAN OF MERGER 


THIS MERGER AGREEMENT is made and 
entered into as of the 11th day of March, 1988, by and 
between THE PERPETUAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
ASSOCIATION, Waterloo, lowa (“MERGING ASSO- 
CIATION”), and STATESMAN BANK FOR SAV- 
INGS, FSB, Des Moines, Iowa (“SBS” or “RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION”). 


RECITALS 


1. SBS has been organized and chartered as a 
federal stock savings bank pursuant to § 406(a), 
(b) 1A), (c)1)(B) and (c)(3)(B) of the National 
Housing Act, as amended (“NHA”), 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1729(a), (b)(1)(A), (e)(1)(B) and (c)(3)(B) (1982). 

2. It is deemed to be in the best interests of the 
members of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and the 
sole stockholder of SBS that such institutions effect a 
merger upon the terms and conditions stated in this 
Agreement (“Merger”). 

3. It is believed that the Merger will enable SBS to 
establish and maintain savings, mortgage and other 
services. 

4. The Merger is authorized by § 5 of the Home 
Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, as amended (“HOLA”), 12 
U.S.C. § 1464 (1982), and the rules and regulations 
promulgated under and pursuant to the HOLA and 
the NHA by the FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK 
BOARD (“BANK BOARD”). 

5. The following agreement is entered into in 
consideration of the mutual promises contained in this 
Agreement. 


299 


AGREEMENT 


§ 1 Merger. The MERGING ASSOCIATION shall 
merge with and into SBS. 

§ 2 RESULTING ASSOCIATION. The RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall be STATESMAN BANK 
FOR SAVINGS, FSB, Des Moines, Iowa. 

§3 Name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The name of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall 
be STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB. 

$4 Home Office of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. The home office of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be located at Fourth and Mulberry, 
Waterloo, Iowa. The present home office of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall become a branch 
office of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

§5 Charter and Bylaws of the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION. After the Merger, the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall operate under the charter and 
bylaws of SBS. 

§ 6 Directors of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 
The number of directors of the RESULTING ASSO- 
CIATION shall be 7. The names and addresses of 
those persons who shall serve as directors of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION and the expiration 
dates of their terms are listed on Exhibit A actached 
hereto, which constitutes a part of this Agreement. 

§ 7 Officers. The existing officers of SBS shall be 
the officers of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

§ 8 Branch Offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. After the Merger, the branch offices of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall include the pres- 
ent home and branch offices of the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION. The addresses of the offices that will 
be branch offices of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION are listed on Exhibit B attached hereto, which 
constitutes a part of this Agreement. 


300 


$9 Accounts. Upon the effective date of the 
Merger (“Effective Date”), each accountholder of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall receive, without 
payment, a withdrawable account or accounts in the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION equal in withdrawal 
value to the account or accounts held in the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION on such date, featuring 
the same rate, maturity and other terms, except that 
holders of such accounts shall not be members of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION, shall have no voting 
rights in the RESULTING ASSOCIATION and shall 
have no rights to participate in the equity of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION upon liquidation or 
otherwise. 

$10 Transfer of Assets and Liabilities upon 
Merger. Upon the Effective Date, all of the assets and 
property of every kind or character, real, personal 
and mixed, tangible and intangible, choses in action, 
rights and credits, then owned by the MERGING 
ASSOCIATION, or that would inure to it, shall 
immediately by operation of law and without the 
necessity of any instrument of conveyance or transfer 
and without any further act or deed be vested in and 
become the property of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION, which shall have, hold, and enjoy the same in 
its own right as fully and to the same extent as the 
same were possessed, held and enjoyed by the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION prior to the Merger. The 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall be deemed to be 
and shall be a continuation of the entity and identity 
of SBS. All of the rights and obligations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION shall remain unimpaired, 
and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION shall, on the 
Effective Date, succeed to all of such rights and 
obligations and the duties connected with them. 

§ 11 Stock. Upon the Effective Date, each share of 
SBS capital stock outstanding immediately prior to 


301 


such date shall remain outstanding as a share of the 
RESULTING ASSOCIATION’s stock. Upon the 
Effective Date, all voting rights of borrowers or 
accountholders of the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
shall cease, and all voting rights in the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION shall be vested in and exercisable by 
the sole stockholder of the RESULTING ASSOCIA- 
TION. No stock of the RESULTING ASSOCIATION 
shall be received or distributed in connection with the 
Merger. 

$12 Effective Date of Merger. The transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement shall be effective 
only when approved by the BANK BOARD and the 
Superintendent of Savings and Loans, State of Iowa. 
The Effective Date of the Merger shall be a date 
determined by the BANK BOARD in accordance with 
its resolution approving the Merger. 

$13 Further Actions. All of the transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement have been or will be 
authorized by all necessary corporate action of each 
institution. Both institutions by their proper officers 
shall execute and deliver all instruments, certificates 
and other documents as may be necessary or 
incidental to the performance of this Agreement. 

§ 14 Condition of the MERGING ASSOCIATION. 
The RESULTING ASSOCIATION acknowledges 
that it is familiar with the present financial condition 
of the MERGING ASSOCIATION and of the deterio- 
ration of the assets, business and operations of the 
MERGING ASSOCIATION. 

$15 Counterparts, Modifications, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, all of which taken together 
shall constitute one and the same instrument, and any 
party may execute this Agreement by signing any 
such counterpart. 


302 


(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 

§$ 16 Entire Agreement, Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any inter- 
pretation or understanding agreed to in writing by 
the parties, constitutes the entire agreement between 
the parties pertaining to the subject matter hereof 
and supersedes all prior agreements and understand- 
ings of the parties in connection with it. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid 
or unenforceable, all of the remaining provisions of 
this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect 
and shall be binding upon the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and the RESULTING ASSOCIATION. 

$17 Governing Law. This Agreement and the 
rights and obligations under it shall be governed by 
the laws of the State of Iowa to the extent that 
federal law does not control. Nothing in this Agree- 
ment shall require any unlawful action or inaction by 
either party. 

§ 18 Sole Benefit. Nothing expressed or referred to 
in this Agreement is intended or shall be construed to 
give any person other than the RESULTING 
ASSOCIATION or the MERGING ASSOCIATION 
any legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim under, 
or in respect to, this Agreement, it being the 
intention of the parties that this Agreement, the 
assumption of obligations and statements of respon- 
sibilities under it, and all of its conditions and 


303 


provisions are for the sole benefit of the RESULT- 
ING ASSOCIATION and the MERGING ASSOCIA- 
TION and for the benefit of no other person. 

$19 Acknowledgment. Each party to this Agree- 
ment, by the execution of this Agreement, acknowi- 
edges and affirms that its board of directors has, by 
at least a two-thirds vote, approved this Agreement 
and the Merger, authorized the execution of this 
Agreement, empowered its signatories to execute this 
Agreement, and authorized the filing of this Agree- 
ment with the BANK BOARD. 

$20 Conditions. This Agreement is conditioned 
upon the execution of an Assistance Agreement 
among the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation, the RESULTING ASSOCIATION, The 
Statesman Group, Inc., Des Moines, Iowa, American 
Life and Casualty Insurance Company, Fargo, North 
Dakota, and Statesman Savings Holding Corp., Des 
Moines, Iowa. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have 
caused this agreement to be executed on their behalf 
by their duly authorized agents. 


ATTESTED: STATESMAN BANK FOR 
SAVING FSB 

By: By: 

Its: Its: 

Date: 

ATTESTED: PERPETUAL SAVINGS 


AND LOAN ASSOCIATION, 
by the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation as 


Conservator 
By: By: 
Its: Its: Special 


Date: Representative 


304 


ACQUISITION AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION 


AS RECEIVER FOR 
FIRST FEDERATED SAVINGS BANK 
WEST PALM BEACH, FLORIDA 
AND 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 
WATERLOO, IOWA 


Dated: March 11, 1988 


305 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


ACQUISITION AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION 
AS RECEIVER FOR 
FIRST FEDERATED SAVINGS BANK 
WEST PALM BEACH, FLORIDA 


AND 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 
WATERLOO, IOWA 


Page 
NESE ROE DO APES SPOTTER ST TT l 
on oi, on ca base ccceeds of 2 
$2 Assumption of Liabilities.................... 3 
RS ae 4 
Be SET Aine cikap dbnedsecccbéccédededs ce 5 
aires ild si sdbuilec corde cecvece 5 
$6 Duties with Respect to Savers.............. 6 
$7 Office Space for the RECEIVER........... 7 
$8 Litigation; Power of Attorney............... 8 
$9 Rights and Forbearance .................... & 
nd oncs dk adedtnbasiedescouts 8 
$ 11 Successors and Assigns..................... 9 
PE Seo cetc ed cdcoccovccosevectocs i) 
$ 13 Accounting Principles....................... i) 
ns ccc ebcenocscbcbecees 10 
ESS Sa ae 11 
$ 16 Entire Agreement; Severability ............ ll 
$ 17 Counterparts; Modification; Headings ....... 11 
EES A a 12 
§ 19 Continuing Cooperation .................... 12 


IT rs be dalocatarbesbuscedocks eens 13 


306 
ACQUIs.TION AGREEMENT 


THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this 
llth day of March, 1988, by and between the 
FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE 
CORPORATION, in its capacity as Receiver for 
FIRST FEDERATED SAVINGS BANK, West Palm 
Beach, Florida (respectively, “RECEIVER” and 
“CLOSED ASSOCIATION”), and STATESMAN 
BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB, Waterloo, Iowa (“AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION”). 


RECITALS 


A. The CLOSED ASSOCIATION is a stock savings 
bank organized under the laws of the State of Florida, 
the accounts of which are insured by the FEDERAL 
SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORA- 
TION in its capacity as a corporate instrumentality of 
the United States (“CORPORATION”). 

B. The FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD 
(“BANK BOARD”), by its Resolution No. 88, dated 
March 11, 1988, duly appointed the CORPORATION 
as RECEIVER for the CLOSED ASSOCIATION, 
and the RECEIVER’s appointment has become 
effective. 

C. The RECEIVER has taken possession of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION and by operation of law 
has succeeded to all the rights, titles, powers, and 
privileges of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION. 

D. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION is a stock 
savings bank organized under the laws of the United 
States, the accounts of which are insured by the 
CORPORATION. 

E. It has been mutually agreed between the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the RECEIVER, 


307 


and the BANK BOARD has determined that it is in 
the best interests of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION, 
its savers, and the CORPORATION, that substan- 
tially all of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets, all 
of its deposits or withdrawable accounts, and substan- 
tially all of its other liabilities be immediately 
transferred to and assumed by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, as provided in this Agreement. 

F. In consideration of the foregoing and of the 
mutual covenants and agreements contained herein, 
the RECEIVER and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION enter into the following agreement. 


AGREEMENT 


$1 Purchase of Assets. The RECEIVER hereby 
sells to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION hereby purchases from 
the RECEIVER, all of the RECEIVER’s right, title, 
and interest in and to all of the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION’s assets that the RECEIVER owns or holds 
and any of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets 
hereafter acquired by the RECEIVER, excluding, 
however: (a) any known or unknown claim, demand, 
cause of action, or judgment (i) against the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION’s or any of its subsidiaries’ present 
or former employees, agents, or controlling persons, 
directors, officers, or other persons, directly or 
indirectly exercising a controlling influence over the 
management or policies of the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION or any of its subsidiaries, (ii) against any 
stockholder of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION, (iii) 
against any appraiser, accountant, auditor, attorney, 
investment banker or broker, loan broker, deposit 
broker, securities dealer, or other professional indi- 
vidual or entity performing services for the CLOSED 


308 


ASSOCIATION, and (iv) against any administrator, 
executor, personal representative, heir, assign, direc- 
tor or officer of any person or entity identified in 
$ l(a)i), (ii) or (iii), arising out of any act(s) or 
omission(s) of such person or entity prior to the 
effective date with respect to the CLOSED ASSO- 
CIATION or its property, or any of its subsidiaries or 
the subsidiaries’ property; (b) any known or unknown 
claim, demand, cause of action or judgment against a 
surety for any person or entity identified in § 1(a)(i), 
(ii), (iii) or (iv), including any insurer who may be 
liable for indemnification for the loss caused by the 
action or inaction of any such person or entity; (¢) any 
claim against counsel for the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION for recovery of sums paid by the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION to challenge the receivership or 
contemporary or subsequent actions of the BANK 
BOARD or the CORPORATION; and (d) such limited 
items, parts, or portions of the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TIQN’s books and records as are specifically identi- 
fied by the RECEIVER, provided that the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION consents to the RECEIVER’s 
retention of such records (the “excluded papers”). 
$2 Assumption of Liabilities. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION hereby expressly assumes and 
agrees to pay, perform, and discharge all of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s liabilities, including, but 
not limited to, those shown on the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION’s books and records at such time as 
the RECEIVER takes possession of the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION, but excluding, however, obligations 
under any compensation or employment contract 
between the CLOSED ASSOCIATION and any of its 
employees, officers, or directors, other than obliga- 
tions to honor or satisfy and right already vested 
under such contracts. The term “liability” as used in 


309 


this section does not refer to any obligation of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION to its stockholders arising 
out of or related in any way to their stock holdings 
(including claims for damages or rescission arising 
from the purchase or sale of such stock holdings) or 
any obligation to indemnify controlling persons, 
directors, officers or other persons as a result of suits 
arising from claims described in $1, and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION specifically does not 
assume by virtue of this Agreement any such 
obligations to the stockholders or for indemnification 
of the controlling persons, directors, officers or other 
persons. For the purposes of this Agreement, “stock- 
holder” means a holder of stock; and “stock” includes 
a nonwithdrawable account, as defined by 12 C.F.R. 
§ 561.42 (1987), stock, permanent stock, guarantee 
stock, common stock, preferred stock, and subordi- 
nated debt issued by the CLOSED ASSOCIATION. 
$3 Records. 

(a) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION acknowl- 
edges that the RECEIVER is delivering to it, among 
the assets sold and purchased under $1 of this 
Agreement, all of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s 
books and records, except the excluded papers, if any. 

(b) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees to 
preserve and keep safe all of the CLOSED ASSO- 
CIATION’s books and records that it acquires 
pursuant to this Agreement, to permit the RE- 
CEIVER at any reasonable time to inspect, make 
extracts from or copies of any of such books and 
records, and to cooperate fully with the RECEIVER 
in the preparation of the inventory described below. 

(c) As a condition of this Agreement, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees, at its own 
expense, either to segregate and keep separate or, in 
the alternative and at the option of the ACQUIRING 


310 


ASSOCIATION, to reconstruct, as of the date of this 
Agreement, the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s books 
and records transferred to it until the period in which 
the CLOSED ASSOCIATION may file an action for 
removal of the RECEIVER pursuant to law has 
expired, or, if such action is filed, until the dismissal 
of such action or the issuance of an order determining 
an appeal from any order of a court directing the 
removal of the RECEIVER. 

$4 Inventory. As soon as is practicable after the 
effective date of this Agreement, the RECEIVER 
shall make, or cause to be made, an inventory of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets and a record of its 
liabilities, as directed by the BANK BOARD. The 
RECEIVER shall furnish a copy of the inventory of 
the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets and record of 
its liabilities to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
upon their completion. 

§ 5 Purchase Price. The purchase price of all assets 
sold to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION pursuant to 
§ 1 shall be the assumption of liabilities provided for 
in § 2. 

$6 Duties With Respect to Savers. 

(a) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees to 
pay, in accordance with the provisions of applicable 
law and the individual contracts governing the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s deposits or withdrawable 
accounts, all properly drawn and presented with- 
drawal requests by the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s 
depositors or withdrawable accountholders whose 
deposits or accounts are assumed by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION pursuant to § 2 of this Agree- 
ment, to the extent that such deposits or withdraw- 
able account balances are sufficient to permit such 
payments and in compliance with the contractual 
terms of such deposits and accounts, and in all other 


311 


respects to discharge, in the usual course of business, 
the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s duties and obliga- 
tions with respect to its depositors or accountholders, 
provided, however, that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION does not assume any special or unusual duties 
of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION to such depositors 
or accountholders unless the terms of such duties are 
disclosed in the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s records. 
Further, in accordance with applicable law and the 
individual contracts governing such deposits or 
accounts, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees 
to pay interest on all of the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION’s deposits and withdrawable accounts that are 
assumed pursuant to § 2 of this Agreement. 

(b) If any such depositors or withdrawable 
accountholders decline to accept the obligation of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to pay the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION’s deposit or account liabilities as- 
sumed pursuant to § 2 of this Agreement and asserts 
a claim against the RECEIVER for any part of such 
assumed deposit liabilities, the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION shall provide the RECEIVER, upon 
demand, with an amount of money sufficient to enable 
it to pay the claims of such depositors or ac- 
countholders, less any applicable early withdrawal 
penalties, not exceeding the amount credited to such 
persons on the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s rec- 
ords at the time such demand is made, and, upon 
paying the RECEIVER as so demanded, the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION shall be discharged from 
any further liability for such claim under this 
Agreement. 

(c) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall given 
written notice, in a form approved by the RE- 
CEIVER or its counsel, to the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION’s depositors and withdrawable accountholders 


312 


whose deposits or accounts are assumed by the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION pursuant to § 2 of this 
Agreement of its assumption of liability for such 
deposits or accounts. 

§ 7 Office Space for the RECEIVER. The AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees to provide the 
RECEIVER, without charge and, if its duties so 
require, for a period of one year from the date of this 
Agreement, adequate space, including vault space and 
furnishings, for the RECEIVER’s use in connection 
with the transfers and transactions required by this 
Agreement and with the exercise and discharge of its 
powers and duties as receiver of the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION. After such period, the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall continue to provide to the 
RECEIVER, at a reasonable rental to be agreed 
upon by the parties, such space and furnishings for 
such period as the RECEIVER may request. 

§ 8 Litigation; Power of Attorney. In the event that 
any action at law or in equity in which the 
RECEIVER has an interest is instituted by any 
person against the CLOSED ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, or both of them, or 
against the RECEIVER and either or both of the 
foregoing as co-defendants, or in which action the 
RECEIVER joins or is joined as co-defendant, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION agrees to file, or to 
join with the RECEIVER in filing, a petition to 
remove the action to an appropriate court, and hereby 
authorizes and appoints, as its attorney for the 
purpose of effecting such removal, any attorney 
designated or approved by the RECEIVER to act in 
that capacity. 

$9 Rights and Forbearance. The rights, powers, 
and remedies given to the parties by this Agreement 
shall be in addition to all rights, powers, and remedies 


313 


given by any applicable statute or rule of law. Any 
forbearance, failure, or delay by either party in 
exercising or partially exercising any right, power, or 
remedy shall not preclude the further exercise of such 
right, power, or remedy. 

§$ 10 Sole Benefit. It is the intention of the parties 
that this Agreement, the assumption of obligations 
and statements of responsibilities under it, and all 
conditions and provisions of it, are for the sole benefit 
of the RECEIVER and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION and for the benefit of no other person. Nothing 
expressed or referred to in this Agreement is 
intended to or shall be construed to give any person 
other than the RECEIVER or the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION any legal or equitable right, remedy, 
or claim under or with respect to this Agreement or 
any of its provisions. 

$11 Swecessors and Assigns. All the terms and 
provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon 
and inure to the benefit of the parties, their 
respective transferees, successors, and assigns, but 
this Agreement may not be assigned nor may any 
rights under it be transferred to or vested in any 
other party, through merger, consolidation, or other- 
wise, without the prior written consent of the 
CORPORATION. 

§ 12 Notices. Any notice, request, demand, or other 
communication to either of the parties shall be 
deemed given when received and shall be given in 
writing and delivered in person or sent by first class 
mail in a prepaid envelope to such party at its 
address set forth below or at such other address as 
such party shall hereafter furnish in writing: 


314 


Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB 
Fourth and Mulberry 

Waterloo, lowa 50704 

Attn: President 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 

As Receiver for First Federated Savings Bank 
1700 G Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20552 

Attn: Special Representative 


§ 13 Accounting Principles. Except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement, any computations made 
for the purposes of this Agreement shall be governed 
by generally accepted accounting principles as applied 
in the savings and loan industry, except that where 
such principles conflict with the terms of this 
Agreement, any assistance agreement or agreements 
to which the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the 
CORPORATION are parties, including, but not 
limited to, an agreement to make a contribution or 
loan, an agreement to purchase subordinated debt, or 
an agreement to issue and purchase Income Capital 
Certificates, applicable regulations of the BANK 
BOARD or the CORPORATION, or any resolution or 
action of the BANK BOARD or CORPORATION 
approving, or adopted concurrently with, this Agree- 
ment, then this Agreement, such assistance agree- 
ment, such regulations, and such resolutions or 
actions shall govern. In the case of any ambiguity in 
the interpretation or construction of any provision of 
this Agreement, such ambiguity shall be resolved in a 
manner consistent with such assistance agreement, 
such regulations, and the BANK BOARD’s or the 
CORPORATION ’s resolutions or actions. If there is a 
conflict between this Agreement and such assistance 


315 


agreement or such regulations or reslutions or 
actions, then such assistance agreement or such 
regulations or resolutions or actions shall govern. 

§$ 14 Governing Law. To the extent that federal law 
does not control, this Agreement and the rights and 
obligations under it shall be governed by the law of 
the State of lowa. Nothing in this Agreement shall 
require any unlawful action or inaction by either 


y. 
$15 Effective Date. This Agreement, and the 
transfer of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets and 
liabilities provided for by this Agreement, shall 
become effective upon its execution by the parties. 
$16 Entire Agreement; Severability. 

(a) This Agreement, together with any inter- 
pretation of it or any understanding agreed to in 
writing by the parties, constitutes the entire agree- 
ment between the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and 
the CORPORATION as RECEIVER, but not in its 
corporate capacity, in connection with the transac- 
tions contemplated by this Agreement, and super- 
sedes all prior agreements and understandings of the 
parties, excepting only any resolutions or letters 
approved or adopted contemporaneously with this 
Agreemer* by the BANK BOARD or the 
CORPORATION. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid 
or unenforceable, then, to the extent possible, all of 
the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall 
remain in full force and effect and shall be binding 
upon the parties. 

§$ 17 Counterparts; Modification; Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, each of which shall be an 
original but all of which shall together constitute one 
and the same instrument, and either party may 


316 


execute this Agreement by signing any such 
counterpart. 

(b) No modification of this Agreement shall be 
binding unless executed in writing and signed by the 
parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings ure not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 

$18 Warranties. 

(a) The RECEIVER warrants and represents 
that it has authority to enter into this Agreement and 
that, as RECEIVER, it has full power and authority 
to transfer the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s assets and 
liabilities as provided by this Agreement. 

(b) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION warrants 
and represents that all of the transactions contem- 
plated by this Agreement have been or will be 
authorized by all necessary corporate actions and that 
it, by its proper officers or agents, has executed this 
Agreement and shall execute and deliver all instru- 
ments, certificates, and other documents that may be 
necessary or incidental to the performance of this 
Agreement. 

(c) These warranties shall survive the execution, 
performance, and termination of this Agreement. 

$19 Continuing Cooperation. The RECEIVER 
agrees, upon the request of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, to execute and deliver such further 
instruments and documents of conveyance as shall be 
necessary or proper to vest in the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION the RECEIVER’s full legal or 
equitable title to the property transferred to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION pursuant to this 
Agreement. 


ee caidas 


317 


IN WITNESS WHEREOPF, the parties hereto have 
executed this Agreement by their duly authorized 
officers or agents. 


Attest: FEDERAL SAVINGS 
Date: March 1, 1988 AND LOAN 
INSURANCE 


CORPORATION AS 
RECEIVER FOR 
FIRST FEDERATED 
SAVINGS BANK 


By: By: 


Attest: STATESMAN BANK 
FOR SAVINGS, FSB 


Date: March 11, 1988 


By: By: 


Its: Its: 


318 


ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 
AMONG 
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION, 


THE STATESMAN GROUP, INC. 
Des Moines, Lowa, 


AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY 
INSURANCE COMPANY 
Fargo, North Dakota, 


STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CORP. 


Des Moines, Iowa 
AND 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 
Waterloo, Iowa 


DATED March 11, 1988 


319 
SUMMARY OF SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS 


Assistance Provided........... Section in Agreement 
1. Initial contribution by the 
FSLIC § 6(a) 
2. Losses on Covered Assets $3 
3. Yield subsidy § 3 
6. Indemnification for 


Undisclosed Liabilities, 

Unreserved for Claims, and 

Challenges to the Acquisi- 

tion and the Mergers $7 


320 
ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 
AMONG - 


THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND 
LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION, 


THE STATESMAN GROUP, INC. 
Des Moines, lowa, 


AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY 
INSURANCF COMPANY 
Fargo, N...a Dakota, 


STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CORP. 


Des Moines, lowa 


AND 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS, FSB 


Waterloo, lowa 
Date March 11, 1988 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SR BD s cidedccnaidesdboneseteensas 
(a) “Acquired Association Claim”....... 
CD SE enc kasdbedsedewseterdacs 
(c) “Appraised Equity Capital” ........ 
SF eta ddcdbatinnivdescdecoviess 
OD TE pecicdsasteudsaaeuseus 
GD. RS abencidddcadtecmiads 
SD SE chdesocacds usdeecatsecentes 
GD Mo ruse cisics ocdiee oc 
(i) “Covered Asset Loss” ............. 
Gj) “Covered Asset Recovery”......... 


v 
IIIA AIAAK|s 


me um 
Co rh 


(k) 
(1) 
(m) 
(n) 
(0) 
(p) 
(q) 
(r) 
(s) 
(t) 
(u) 
(v) 
(w) 
(x) 
(y) 
(z) 


(aa) 
(bb) 
(ec) 


(dd) 
(ee) 
(ff) 

(gg) 


321 


“Credit” or “Credit Item”.......... 
“Debit” or “Debit Item”........... 
TEs dnd cebddcscccceces 
“Federal Regulations”.............. 
“Federated Financial Loans” ....... 


“Insurance Regulations”............ 
PRITAM Bina Ss cians aciecee eee ce 
“Negative Regulatory Capital” ..... 
“Net Proceeds Received” .......... 


“Participation Interest” ............ 
PT Wohi secs bisodecevesces 
“Real Estate Held for 
STS: a 
“Real Estate in Judgment”......... 
“Real Estate Owned” or “REO”.... 
“Regulatory Capital Maintenance 
DTT hkebckcsheceebcoesccoe ce 


“Special Reserve Account”......... 
“Termination Date”................ 


EEE EE 
Special Reserve Account................ 


(a) 


PR REh EMRE Loopreccceccese cs 
(1) Covered Asset Losses ......... 
(2) Appraisal Costs ............... 
(3) Indemnification ................ 
(4) Claim Expenses............... 
(5) Covered Asset Purchase ....... 
(6) Payment of Credits............ 
(7) Expenses to Cure............. 
(8) Assignment of Related Claim 
and Acquired Association Claim 
and Excess Recoveries.......... 


§ 4 


Lr LP 
oor 


322 


(9) Uncollected Interest ........... 

(10) Yield Subsidy ................. 

(11) Recoveries on Purchased 
CE IP i dr dh sc ddé sews ods 


(ERD Ri BO, cn cntncvedswceave 
(14) Tax Benefit Adjustment 
PUG 5s co dicb adeno’ Hecueecs 
(b) Exclusions From Debits ........... 
(c) Credits to Special Reserve Account 
(1) Covered Asset Recoveries ..... 
GE) BRR. on wocdaenccdatei bets cs 
(3) Pre-Effective Date Interest .... 
(4) Other Recoveries on Covered 


i BPR ee 5 ee 
Ff eee 
(T) BUG TERDOMGS 20 occ cccccccccss 
i =f RE ee rer 
(9) Uncollected Interest ........... 
(10) Recoveries on Acquired Associa- 
tion Claims and Related Claims 
(11) CORPORATION’S Contribution 
(12) Federal Financial Loan 
RR asccnsccdcdedecévecis 
CORD FE TE Soo vccewdebadhices 
(14) Income Payment Credits....... 
Write-Down of a Covered Asset ........ 
(a) Approval of a Write-Down......... 
(b) Determination of Write-Down...... 
(> BEGG FH iia ah ee os oder ecdecces 
(d) Adjustments at Termination........ 
Initial Audit and Inventory............. 
Payments and Contributions ............ 
(a) Initial Contributions by the 
Ce EET C5 wal dss abdscccecas 


(1) Cash Contribution ............. 45 
(2) Promissory Note .............. 46 
ee 5 OES Se 47 
(c) Contributions Resulting From 
Assignment of Claims............... 47 
(d) Income Payments.................. 48 
(e) Issuance of Subordinated Debenture 49 
(f) Reimbursement of Credit Balances 49 
(g) Optional Purchase of Covered 
ES ST eee a 50 
Gh EE Ge gab cscs e vbaebe coves 50 
Se A ii yecdede bv oececdivees 51 
Be SECS eee eee 52 
(a) Undisclosed Liabilities ............. 53 
(b) Unreserved for Claims............. 55 
(c) Challenges to the Acquisition or the 
RT RS ee a ae 55 
(d) Pursuit of Related Claims........... 56 
(e) Payments as Contributions......... 58 
(f) Limitations on Indemnification and 
Federated Financial Loan Losses.... 58 
§ 8 Acquired Association Claims and Related 
Ss weddenadeee eh PAY Sbss ceUebecccecces 59 
$9 Duplicate Payments ..........cccccceces 62 
§ 10 Non-Reimbursable Expenses ............ 63 
oS ee ee 63 
(a) Quarterly Reports................. 63 
(b) Reports on Covered Assets........ 65 
ee, 65 
(d) Access to Books and Records...... 66 
(e) dits and Examinations .......... 66 
(f) Reports Concerning Prosecution of 
Claims by Court Action and Settle- 
ment of Claims and Liabilities ...... 67 
(g) Reports on Net Tax Benefits ....... 70 
Se ee NO a das bl oct ccceccdsccs 70 


323 


324 


§ 12 Covenants of STATESMAN, AMERI- 
CAN LIFE the ACQUIRER and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION............ 
(a) Administration of Assets and 
RMU e Sava cbeedadddesicsovens 
(1) Managen.ent Standard ......... 
(2) Pursuit of Claims.............. 
(b) Conduct of Litigation.............. 
(c) Covered Asset Restrictions ........ 
(d) Covered Asset Requirements....... 
(e) Disclosure of Agreement........... 
> - FE We ocr ea cea SeeksaHi ccscc 
13 Sale and Repair of Covered Assets ..... 
BE PURO <5 0 v6 54 bbc 0 Kcthesid eds cece 
15 CORPORATION’s Right to Purchase 
CUOGRNES TGIID  i oc acd cae kbedebsdéacces 
16 Sale of Assets of the ACQUIRING 
pe eee eee eee 
17 Accounting Principles.......ccsccccccees 
SD PD  Nneeav tasadbesesbetecolbeceesass 
19 Termination of Agreement .............. 
20 Compliance with Law ...............+.- 
21 Rights and Forbearances ............... 
Fe SC GW sv ccenc wie ceheosst sete 
23 Entire Agreement, Severability ......... 
24 Counterparts, Modifications, Headings ... 
25 Successors and Assigns..............+.: 
PPE PCT eT ee Pe ore 
27 Continuing Cooperation ................. 
§ 28 Brokerage Commission.................. 
I Ps b edbdlicess desiideswioecs 
Exhibit A: Form of Promissory Note 
Exhibit B: Form of Subordinated Debenture 


Sr Sh TP 


ctr 


a 


80) 
85 


88 


325 
ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT 


THIS AGREEMENT, dated March 11, 1988, is 
entered into by and among THE STATESMAN 
GROUP, INC., a Delaware corporation (“STATES- 
MAN”), AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY IN- 
SURANCE COMPANY, a North Dakota corporation 
wholly owned by STATESMAN (“AMERICAN 
LIFE”), STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING CORP., 
Des Moines, lowa, a savings and loan holding company 
incorporated under the laws of the State of Iowa and 


‘owned by STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE 


(“ACQUIRER”), STATESMAN BANK FOR SAV- 
INGS, FSB, Waterloo, lowa, a federal stock savings 
bank wholly owned by the ACQUIRER (“ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION”), and the FEDERAL SAV- 
INGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION 
(“FSLIC”), in its capacity as a corporate instrumen- 
tality and agency of the United States 
(“CORPORATION”). 


RECITALS 


A. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION has been 
organized and chartered as a federal stock savings 
bank pursuant to § 406(a), (b)(1)(A), (c)(1)(B) and 
(c(3(B) of the National Housing Act, as amended 
(“NHA”), 12 U.S.C. § 1729(a), (b)(1)(A), (c)(1)(B) and 
(c(3)(B) (1982), and the ownership of the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION to the ACQUIRER and the 
ownership of the ACQUIRER by STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE have been authorized by the 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board (“Bank Board”) by 
Resolution No. 88-169, dated March __., 1988, in 
accordance with § 408(e) and (m) of the NHA, 12 
U.S.C § 1730a(e) and (m) (1982). 


326 


B. On March 11, 1988, the FSLIC was appointed 
receiver (“Receiver”) for First Federated Savings 
Bank, West Palm Beach, Florida, a stock savings bank 
chartered under the laws of the State of Florida 
(“CLOSED ASSOCIATION”). The Bank Board, by 
Resolution No. 88-169, dated March 11, 1988, has 
authorized the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to pur- 
chase and assume substantially all of the assets and 
liabilities, respectively, of the CLOSED ASSOCIA- 
TION from the Receiver (“Acquisition”) pursuant to 
the Acquisition Agreement (“Acquisition Agreement”) 
of even date herewith between the Receiver and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION. 

C. The Bank Board, by Resolution No. 88-169, dated 
March __., 1988, has authorized the supervisory 
conversion of First Federal Savings Bank, Waterloo, 
Iowa, a _ federally-chartered mutual savings bank 
(“First Federal”), and the merger of First Federal 
with and into the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
(“First Federal Merger’), pursuant to the Merger 
Agreement and Plan of Merger of even date herewith 
between First Federal and the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION (“First Federal Merger Agreement”). 

D. The Bank Board, by Resolution No. 88-169, dated 
March  __., 1988, has authorized the supervisory 
conversion of The Perpetual Savings and Loan 
Association, Waterloo, lowa, a mutual savings and loan 
association chartered under the laws of the State of 
lowa (“Perpetual”), and the merger of Perpetual with 
and into the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION (“Per- 
petual Merger”), pursuant to the Merger Agreement 
and Plan of Merger of even date herewith between 
Perpetual and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
(“Perpetual Merger Agreement”). 

E. The Bank Board, by Resolution No. 88-169, dated 
March __, 1988, has authorized the supervisory 


327 


conversion of Peoples Federal Savings and Loan 
Association, Waterloo, Iowa, a_ federally-chartered 
mutual savings and loan association (“Peoples”), and 
the merger of Peoples with and into the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION (“Peoples Merger”), pursuant to the 
Merger Agreement and Plan of Merger of even date 
herewith between Peoples and the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION (“Peoples Merger Agreement”). 

F. First Federal, Perpetual and Peoples may be 
sometimes referred to herein individually as a “MER- 
GED ASSOCIATION” and collectively as the “MER- 
GED ASSOCIATIONS”. The MERGED ASSOCIA- 
TIONS and the CLOSED ASSOCIATION may be 
sometimes referred to herein individually as an 
“ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION” and collectively as the 
“ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS”. The First Federal 
Merger, the Perpetual Merger and the Peoples Merger 
may be sometimes referred to herein individually as a 
“Merger” and collectively as the “Mergers”, and the 
First Federal Merger Agreement, the Perpetual 
Merger Agreement and the Peoples Merger Agree- 
ment may be sometimes referred to herein individually 
as a “Merger Agreement” and collectively as the 
“Merger Agreements”. 

G. The Bank Board, by Resolution No. 88-169, dated 
March ___., 1988, has certified for purposes of Section 
lillegible}(aX3)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code that 
the ground set forth in 12 U.S.C. § 1464(d)(6)(A)(i) 
exists with respect to each ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION in that each ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION is 
insolvent. 

H. The CORPORATION insured the accounts of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION prior to the appointment of 
the Receiver and insured the accounts of each 
MERGED ASSOCIATION prior to the Mergers, and 
the CORPORATION will insure the accounts of the 


328 


ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION after the Acquisition 
and the Mergers, in accordance with § 403 of the 
National Housing Act, as amended (”"NHA”), 12 U.S.C. 
§ 1726 (1982). 

I. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, pursuant to 
the Acquisition Agreement, will succeed to substan- 
tially all of the rights, obligations, duties and liabilities 
of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION, and substantially all 
of the assets and property of every kind and character 
belonging to the CLOSED ASSOCIATION will be 
vested in and become the property of the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION. 

J. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, pursuant to 
the Merger Agreements, will succeed to all of the 
rights, obligations, duties and liabilities of the MER- 
GED ASSOCIATIONS, and all of the assets and 
property of every kind and character belonging to the 
MERGED ASSOCIATIONS will be vested in and 
become the property of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. 

K. A condition to the obligation of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION to consummate the Acquisition pur- 
suant to the Acquisition Agreement, a condition to the 
obligations of the respective parties to the Mergers to 
consummate the Mergers pursuant to the Merger 
Agreements, and a condition of the ACQUIRER to 


acquire the common stock of the ACQUIRING — 


ASSOCIATION, is that the CORPORATION, 
STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE, the ACQUIRER 
and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION enter into an 
agreement in the form of this Agreement, pursuant to 
which the CORPORATION will provide financial 
assistance and indemnification to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE. 

L. The CORPORATION has decided, pursuant to 
§ 406(f)(1)-(4) of the NHA, 12 U.S.C. § 1729(f)(1)-(4) 


329 


(1982), to provide financial assistance and indemnifica- 
tion as set forth in this Agreement, having determined 
that each ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION is in danger of 
default and that the amounts payable pursuant to such 
assistance and indemnification would be less than the 
losses the CORPORATION would sustain upon the 
liquidation of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS 
through receiverships accompanied by payments of 
insurance of accounts. 

M. In consideration of the mutual promises con- 
tained in this Agreement, the parties hereto enter into 
the following agreement. 


AGREEMENT 


Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this 
Agreement, the following terms have the indicated 
meanings: 

(a) “Acquired Association Claim”: Any Claim that 
any MERGED ASSOCIATION or the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION as its successor has against (1) any 
person who is or was, on or prior to the Effective 
Date, a director, officer, controlling person (including 
any person who directly or indirectly exercised a 
controlling influence over the management or policies 
of any MERGED ASSOCIATION or any subsidiary 
thereof), employee or agent of any MERGED ASSO- 
CIATION or any subsidiary thereof, or an auditor, 
accountant, attorney, appraiser, broker, loan broker, 
deposit broker, securities dealer, investment banker, 
financial advisor or other professional, individual or 
entity that has performed services for any MERGED 
ASSOCIATION or any subsidiary thereof, or an 
employee, agent or other person acting for or in 
concert with any such person, provided that an action 


330 


or inaction of any such person on or prior to the 
Effective Date gave rise, in whole or in part, to such 
Claim; (2) an insurer who may be liable for indem- 
nification of the loss caused, in whole or in part, by the 
action or inaction of any person identified in § 1(a)(1) 
above; (3) an officer, director, agent, administrator, 
executor, personal representative, heir or assign of any 
person identified in § l(a)(1) above; or (4) any other 
person or persons, partnership, corporation, or legal 
entity, and any officer, director, partner, agent, 
administrator, executor, personal representative, heir 
or assign of any such third party, provided that the 
Claim against any such third party is related to a 
Claim against a party referred to in § 1(a)(1), (2) or (3) 
above. No Acquired Association Claim shall include 
any claim of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
against a party referred to above to collect on a loan 
made by any MERGED ASSOCIATION on which loan 
such party is an obligor. 

(b) “Affiliate”: Affiliate, as that term is defined in 
$ 561.25 of the Insurance Regulations. 

(c) “Appraised Equity Capital”: Appraised equity 
capital as that term is defined in § 563.13(c) of the 
Insurance Regulations. 

(d) “Bank”: The Federal Home Loan Bank of Des 
Moines. 

(e) “Bank Board”: The Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board. 

(f) “Book Value”: When used in connection with a 
Related Claim or an Acquired Association Claim, and 
(except as set forth in § 1(f(2) and (3) below) when 
used with respect to a Covered Asset, Book Value 
shall mean the value reflected on the books and 
records immediately prior to the Effective Date of the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION that owned such Claim 
or Covered Asset immediately prior to the Effective 


331 


Date (excluding any special reserve or valuation 
allowance for such Covered Asset on the books of such 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date), as adjusted by the Initial Audit and 
as thereafter adjusted or determined in accordance 
with the accounting principles required by this 
Agreement. 

(1) Except as set forth in § 1(f)(2) and (3) below, 
the following shall be included in the determination of 
Book Value: 

(A) With respect to any property or interest 
herein which secures a Covered Asset and which is 
acquired by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION after 
the Effective Date by Foreclosure, 

(i) The outstanding principal amount of the 
indebtedness secured by such property (excluding any 
specific loss reserve or valuation allowance relating to 
such indebtedness); 

(ii) Any taxes or hazard insurance premiums 
due and payable or accrued as of the Effective Date 
that are subsequently paid by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION; 

(iii) The costs, fees, and expenses of Fore- 
closure, provided that any costs, fees, and expenses 
incurred incident to the acceptance of a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure, or in connection with the repossession of 
property sold subject to a sales contract or loan which 
is in default, shall be included in Book Value only if 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION complies with 
§ 14(c) of this Agreement; 

(iv) The amount, if approved in advance by 
the CORPORATION, paid for the satisfaction or 
settlement of a lien upon a Covered Asset or security 
for a Covered Asset, provided that such amount has 
not been reimbursed under another provision of this 
Agreement; 


332 


(v) Any unamortized premium paid or cap- 
italized by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION; and 

(vi) Any other costs, fees, and expenses 
associated with the acquisition of any property or 
interest therein that secures a Covered Asset, 
provided that such costs, fees, and expenses have not 
been reimbursed under another provision of this 
Agreement and have been approved in advance by the 
CORPORATION. 

(B) Properly capitalized expenses or assess- 
ments, if approved in advance by the CORPORA- 
TION, for the repair, rehabilitation, or completion of 
property that is a Covered Asset, or security for a 
Covered Asset; provided that such expenses and 
assessments are within the limits permitted by § 13 of 
this Agreement, have not been reimbursed under 
another provision of this Agreement, and are deter- 
mined in accordance with the accounting principles 
required by this Agreement; 

(2) The following shall not be included in the 
determination of Book Value for Covered Assets: 

(A) Any amount of specific reserves and 
valuation reserves of any ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION as of the Effective Date, as adjusted by the 
Initial Audit; 

(B) Any amount of accrued and uncollected 
interest or late charges on the principal amount of the 
indebtedness related to a Covered Asset that has been 
accrued through the Effective Date; 

(C) The undisbursed portion of any loan in 
process account, provided, however, that disburse- 
ments made after the Effective Date pursuant to a 
legally binding commitment of the ACQUIRED ASSO- 
CIATION that owned such Covered Asset which 
exists immediately prior to the Effective Date, or 
pursuant to the prior written consent of the CORPO- 
RATION, shall be included in Book Value; 


333 


(D) The amount of any deferred income related 
to a Covered Asset, including, without limitation, 
unearned discounts on loans purchased, unearned 
profit on real estate sold, deferred loan fees or 
acquisition credits, unearned discounts on installment 
loans, deferred gains on securities, and other unearned 
discounts; 

(E) With respect to any Covered Asset re- 
flected on an ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION’s books 
and records immediately prior to the Effective Date, 
any adjustment to the value of such Covered Asset 
made solely as a result of the accounting treatment of 
the Acquisition or the Mergers as a purchase of assets: 
| (F) The amount of any net operating income or 
loss determined in accordance with the accounting 
principles required by this Agreement and attributable 
to Covered Assets on the books and records of any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date or acquired as a result of Foreclosure 
with respect to a Covered Asset; and 

(G) The cost of appraisals required by the 
CORPORATION pursuant to this Agreement. 

(3) Book Value, when used with respect to a 
Covered Asset that becomes such pursuant to § 1(h)(4) 
of this Agreement, shall mean the value of the 
Covered Asset on the books and records of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION as of the consummation 
of the transaction consented to pursuant to said 
$ 1(h)(4), as such value may be adjusted in accordance 
with the accounting principles required by this 
Agreement. 

(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless the 
CORPORATION expressly permits the write-down of 
the Book Value of a Covered Asset and a charge to 
the Special Reserve Account pursuant to § 3(a)(1) and 
$4 of this Agreement, Book Value shall not be 


334 


adjusted for any uninsured casualty loss or anticipated 
loss on any such Covered Asset, even though a specific 
reserve is or has been created for such anticipated loss 
or the asset’s value is or has been written down 
pursuant to a regulatory requirement. 

(g) “Claim”: Any claim, demand, or cause of action. 

(h) “Covered Asset”: Except as provided in § 1(h)(5), 
the term “Covered Asset” means the following: 

(1) Any loan which is on the books of any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date that is contractually delinquent 90 days 
or more as of the Effective Date or that becomes 
contractually delinquent 90 days or more at any time 
within two years after the Effective Date; provided 
that, with respect to loans other than Participation 
Interests, Foreclosure is formally instituted within the 
later of 18 months from the Effective Date or 90 days 
after the date on which such loan has become a 
Covered Asset; and provided further that, if Fore- 
closure is delayed or barred by an order or ruling of 
any court of proper jurisdiction or by operation of law, 
then the applicable period within which Foreclosure 
must be formally instituted shall be extended until a 
reasonable time following the date on which Fore- 
closure is no longer delayed or barred. 

(2) Real Estate Owned on the books of any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date or acquired after the Effective Date as 
a result of a Foreclosure of any loan constituting a 
Covered Asset. 

(3) Real Estate in Judgment and Real Estate Held 
for Investment on the books of any ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the Effective 
Date. 

(4) A loan, contract, or investment made by the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in connection with or to 


335 


facilitate the sale of, or to salvage, a Covered Asset, or 
any property or interest therein received in exchange 
for a Covered Asset, if, prior to the making of any 
such loan, contract, investment, or exchange of a 
Covered Asset the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION has 
obtained the CORPORATION ’s written consent to the 
transaction and to the treatment as a Covered Asset 
of such loan, contract, investment, or property or 
interest received in exchange for a Covered Asset; 
provided that the CORPORATION’s consent shall not 
be required if such Covered Asset is a Participation 
Interest and if, notwithstanding the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s best efforts to oppose such loan, 
contract, investment or exchange, the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION (as a consequence of being the 
Successor to a contractual or other legal obligation 
incurred by one of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS 
or as a consequence of entering into a contractual or 
other legal obligation which has been approved in 
writing by the CORPORATION) is contractually or 
otherwise legally obligated to make such loan, contract 
or investment or accept such exchange. 

(5) Notwithstanding anything herein to the con- 
trary, Covered Assets shall not include: 
| (A) Loans secured by valid and enforceable first 
liens or first mortgages on one to four family dwelling 
units; 

(B) Loans secured by valid and enforceable first, 
liens or first mortgages with an outstanding principal 
balance of $50,000 or less, provided that a participation 
loan is not excluded unless the total outstanding 
principal balance of the participation loan, not just the 
portion held by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, is 
$50,000 or less; 

(C) Any one to four family dwelling units; 

(D) Any office buildings and facilities of any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION, any real estate or 


OO EE OE ee 


336 


leasehold interest appurtenant thereto, any parking 
lots, any leasehold improvements, office furniture, 
fixtures and equipment, and any real estate held for 


development as an office site of any ACQUIRED. 


ASSOCIATION; and 

(E) Any property, real or personal, or interest 
therein, or any asset of any nature or kind that 
belongs to or is claimed to belong to a subsidiary of 
any ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION. 

(i) “Covered Asset Loss”: The amount: 

(1) by which the Book Value of a Covered Asset 
exceeds the Net Proceeds Received by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION upon the Liquidation of such 
Covered Asset; or 

(2) of any write-down in Book Value of a Covered 
Asset approved by the CORPORATION pursuant to 
§$ 4(b) of this Agreement. 

(j) “Covered Asset Recovery”: The amount by which 
the Net Proceeds Received by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION upon the Liquidation of any Covered 
Asset exceeds the Book Value of such Covered Asset 
or, if such Book Value had been written down with the 
CORPORATION’s permission as provided in § 4(b) of 
this Agreement, the amount by which the Net 
Proceeds Received exceeds the Book Value as written 
down. 

(k) “Credit” or “Credit Item”: An amount credited to 
the Special Reserve Account pursuant to the provi- 
sions of § 3(c) of this Agreement. 

(1) “Debit” or “Debit Item”: An amount charged or 
debited to the Special Reserve Account pursuant to 
the provisions of § 3(a). 

(m) “Effective Date”: The date and time at which the 
Acquisition and the Mergers have all become effective 
pursuant to the terms of the Acquisition Agreement, 
the Merger Agreements, Bank Board Resolutions and 
applicable law. 


337 


(n) “Federal Regulations”: The Rules and Regula- 
tions for the Federal Savings and Loan System, 12 
C.F.R. § 541.1 et seg. (1987), as now or hereafter in 
effect. 

(0) “Federated Financial Loans”: Loans that are 
insured by a governmental or private mortgage 
insurer and that are serviced by the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Federated 
Financial Corporation (“Federated Financial”): (1) that 
are in the process of Foreclosure on the Effective 
Date, (2) that are contractually delinquent 90 days or 
more as of the Effective Date, or (3) with respect to 
which the first or second settlement check has not 
been provided by the appropriate mortgage insurer as 
of the Effective Date. 

(p) “Foreclosure”: Unless specifically indicated oth- 
erwise by the context, includes, in addition to 
foreclosure, (1) the forfeiture of a contract of sale or a 
contract for deed, (2) a trustee’s sale under a deed of 
trust, (3) the grant of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, (4) 
the acquisition of title to real estate pursuant to other 
comparable procedures allowed under applicable law, 
(5) the acquisition of title to any property securing a 
loan that is a Covered Asset pursuant to procedures 
for the enforcement of a security interest in such 
property under applicable law, or (6) the exercise of 
rights of possession to or control over personal 
property arising under contract or applicable law. - 

(q) “GAAP”: Generally accepted accounting princi- 
ples, as applied in the savings and loan industry. 

(r) “Initial Audit”: The audit to be performed 
pursuant to § 5(a) of this Agreement. 

_(s) “Insurance Regulations”: The Rules and Regula- 
tions for the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation, 12 C.F.R. § 561.1 et seq. (1987), as now or 
hereinafter in effect. 


338 


(t) “Liquidation”: As used in reference to a Covered 
Asset, Federated Financial Loan, Claim, Acquired 
Association Claim, or Related Claim: 

(1) A sale of any asset or loan, at other than a 
Foreclosure sale at which the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION is the purchaser, whether for cash or on 
other terms; provided, however, that the sale of any 
asset or loan between the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION and the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN, AMERI- 
CAN LIFE or any other Affiliate of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall not constitute a Liquidation 
hereunder unless specifically approved in writing by 
the CORPORATION; or 

(2) The release, compromise, satisfaction, settle- 
ment, reduction to judgment, or assignment to other 
than the CORPORATION of any Claim. 

(u) “Negative Regulatory Capital”: The amount by 
which regulatory capital as defined in § 561.13 of the 
Insurance Regulations, as adjusted in this § 1(u), is 
less than zero. In determining such Negative Regula- 
tory Capital for the purposes of this § 1(u): 

(1) All general loss reserves, specific loss reserves 
or valuation allowances on Covered Assets (other than 
any such reserves or valuation allowances established 
for accrued and uncollected interest or for single 
family residential properties constituting REO) shall 
be credited to regulatory capital; 

(2) Deferred losses on loans and investments 
which have been disposed of by an ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION prior to the Effective Date shall be 
debited to regulatory capital; 

(3) Appraised Equity Capital, goodwill and other 
intangibles (of the type reported on line item A540 of 
the Quarterly Financial Report filed with the Bank 
Board) on the books and records of the ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATIONS as of the Effective Date shall be 
debited to regulatory capital; 


—s 


339 


(4) The value of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION’s 
investment in, including loans to, Federated Financial 
as of the Effective Date shall be adjusted to $15 
million; and 

(5) The value of single family residential proper- 
ties constituting REO of any of the ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATIONS shall be the fair market value of 
such properties as determined by the Initial Audit 
required by § 5(a) of this Agreement, provided that 
fair market value shall be calculated using a statistical 
sampling technique satisfactory to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION and the CORPORATION. 

(v) “Net Proceeds Received”: As used in reference to 
the amount received by any of the parties hereto upon 
the Liquidation of a Claim, Related Claim, Covered 
Asset, Acquired Association Claim or Federated 
Financial Loan, the amount computed by deducting 
from the gross proceeds received (including any 
amounts received from a gover.imental or private 
mortgage insurer) all reasonable expenses in the form 
of payments to third parties actually incurred or paid 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE or 
the CORPORATION with respect to Claims assigned 
to the CORPORATION or Covered Assets or Fede- 
rated Financial Loans purchased by the CORPORA- 
TION, provided, that such expenses have not been 
reimbursed otherwise. Such reasonable expenses may 
include, but not be limited to, attorneys’ and account- 
ants’ fees, travel expenses, court costs and related 
expenses, litigation expenses, settlement charges, sales 
commissions and such other actual and reasonable 
costs that are directly related to the Liquidation of the 


oo Asset, Federated Financial Loan or particular 
m. 


340 


(w) “Note”: A promissory note issued by the 


CORPORATION in substantially the form of Exhibit 
A attached hereto. 

(x) “Participation Interest”: The interest of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION as successor to any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION in any loan whereby the 
beneficial ownership of the indebtedness has been sold 
to more than one obligee including an ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION, but with respect to which the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION does not act as lead 
lender or have the ability, through the exercise of 
voting power or otherwise, to in any way control the 
administration of the loan or the disposition of any 
assets securing the loan. Where, before or after the 
Effective Date, any such loan has gone into default 
and the lead lender has foreclosed upon or otherwise 
acquired title to the assets securing any such loan, the 
term “Participation Interest” shall include the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION’s interest in such assets. 

(y) “Quarter”: Three consecutive calendar months, 
provided that the first Quarter during the term of this 
Agreement shall be deemed to be the period, if any, 
from the Effective Date to and including the last day 
preceding the first day of the first full calendar 
quarter following the Effective Date, and provided 
further, that the last quarter during the term of this 
Agreement shall be deemed to include the period, if 
any, from the first day after the last day of the last 
full calendar quarter during the term of this Agree- 
ment to the date on which this Agreement terminates. 

(z) “Real Estate Held for Investment”: Real Estate 
held for sale, development or investment by any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION. 

(aa) “Real Estate in Judgment”: Real estate 
acquired by Foreclosure for which the applicable 
period of redemption has not expired. 


341 


(bb) “Real Estate Owned” or “REO”: Real estate or 
such other property acquired by Foreclosure, which 
following Foreclosure is not held for investment or for 
use in development as an office site of the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION. 

(cc) “Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agreement”: 
The agreement among the ACQUIRER, the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION, STATESMAN, AMERI- 
CAN LIFE and the CORPORATION of even date 
herewith, in the form or substantially in the form of 
Exhibit B attached hereto, pursuant to which the 
ACQUIRER and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
agree to maintain the regulatory capital of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION at a certain level, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE provide a 
limited guarantee of such agreement and AMERICAN 
LIFE grants to the CORPORATION certain voting 
and disposition rights with respect to the common 
stock of the ACQUIRER held by AMERICAN LIFE. 

(dd) “Reimbursable”: As used in describing a 
liability, loss, charge, expenses, Claim, Acquired 
Association Claim, or Related Claim of the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION, “Reimbursable” shall mean a 
liability, loss or Claim as to which the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION has or had a right to reimbursement 
under any bond, insurance policy or other source 
(other than this Agreement), including any such 
liability, loss or Claim as to which the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION does not receive reimbursement due 
to its failure to pursue timely or vigorously such right 
in accordance with the management standard de- 
scribed in § 12 of this Agreement. 

(ee) “Related Claim”: Any counterclaim, offset, 
insurance settlement, or other Claim which may result 
in a recovery by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, 
the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN 


342 


LIFE and which is related to a Claim, liability, or loss 
under $3 of this Agreement, and for which the 
CORPORATION is obligated to indemnify or pay the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE under this 
Agreement. 

(ff) “Special Reserve Account”: The account 
established pursuant to § 3 of this Agreement. 

(gg) “Termination Date”: The date five (5) years 
after the Effective Date. 

Section 2. Conditions. 

(a) The obligations of the parties under this 
Agreement are conditioned upon the satisfaction of all 
of the following conditions: 

(1) Each Merger being duly authorized by the 
board of directors of the respective MERGED 
ASSOCIATION and effected in compliance with its 
charter and bylaws and applicable law; 

(2) The execution and delivery of each Merger 
Agreement being duly authorized by the board of 
directors of the respective MERGED ASSOCIATION 
in contemplation of each Merger; and 

(3) Receipt of certified copies of the corporate 
resolutions of the MERGED ASSOCIATIONS author- 
izing the Mergers and the execution and delivery of 
the Merger Agreements. 

(b) The CORPORATION’s obligations under this 
Agreement are also conditioned upon the satisfaction 
of all of the following conditions: 

(1) The consummation of the Acquisition and the 
Mergers; 

(2) The execution and delivery by the AC- 
QUIRER, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, as appropri- 
ate, of the Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agree- 
ment, a proxy in the form or substantially in the form 


343 


of the Irrevocable Proxy attached to such agreement, 
and a Misconduct Certification; 

(3A) Receipt of an opinion from outside counsel 
for the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the CORPORATION and its 
counsel, to the effect that the purchase of substantially 
all of the assets and the assumption of substantially all 
of the liabilities of the CLOSED ASSOCIATION by 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, and the merger of 
each MERGED ASSOCIATION with and into the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, have been duly author- 
ized by the directors of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION and effected in compliance with the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION’s charter and bylaws and appli- 
cable law and that the Acquisition Agreement, the 
Merger Agreements, the Regulatory Capital Mainte- 
nance Agreement and this Agreement have been duly 
authorized, executed and delivered by, and constitute 
valid and binding obligations of, the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, enforceable in accordance with their 
respective terms, except as enforceability thereof may 
be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, 
moratorium or similar laws affecting the rights of 
creditors generally, and except that the remedy of 
specific performance and injunctive and other forms of 
equitable relief are subject to certain equitable 
defenses and to the discretion of the court before 
which any proceedings may be brought; 

(B) Receipt of a certified copy of the corporat 
resolutions of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION au- 
thorizing execution and delivery on its behalf of the 
Acquisition Agreement, the Merger Agreements, the 
Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agreement and this 
Agreement; 

(4A) Receipt of an opinion from outside counsel! 
for the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN 


CO _— 


344 


LIFE, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
CORPORATION and its counsel, to the effect that the 
purchase of all of the stock of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION by the ACQUIRER has been duly 
authorized by the directors of the ACQUIRER and 
effected in compliance with the ACQUIRER’s charter 
and bylaws and applicable law and that this Agree- 
ment, the Regulatory Capital Maintenance Agreement 
(including the form of Irrevocable Proxy attached 
thereto), the Preferred Stock identified in § 6(d) and 
the Subordinated Debenture identified in § 6(¢) have 
been duly authorized, executed, and delivered by, and 
constitute valid and binding oblitigations of, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, 
as appropriate, enforceable in accordance with their 
respective terms, except as enforceability thereof may 
be limited by bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, 
moratorium or similar laws affecting the rights of 
creditors generally, and except that the remedy of 
specific performance and injunctive and other forms of 
equitable relief are subject to certain equitable 
defenses and to the discretion of the court before 
which any proceedings may be brought; 

(B) Receipt of certified copies of the corporate 
resolutions of the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE authorizing execution and delivery 
on their behalf of this Agreement, the Regulatory 
Capital Maintenance Agreement and the Irrevocable 
Proxy, the Preferred Stock and the Subordinated 
Debenture, as appropriate; 

(5) Receipt of a copy of the stock certificate issued 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to the AC- 
QUIRER, which certificate shall include a statement 
to the effect that the shares represented thereby are 
restricted as to transfer as provided in the Regulatory 
Capital Maintenance Agreement; 


345 


(6) All corporate and other proceedings taken in 
connection with the Acquisition and the Mergers, and 
all documents incident thereto, shall be satisfactory in 
form and substance to the CORPORATION and its 
counsel, and the CORPORATION and its counsel shall 
have received all such counterpart originals or 
certified or other copies of such documents as either 
may reasonably request; and 

(7) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE and any 
of their respective Affiliates and subsidiaries, within 
the time periods specified by the terms of this 
Agreement or by the Bank Board, (1) shall have 
executed and delivered to the CORPORATION all 
other agreements, instruments, and documents re- 
quired to be executed and delivered by the terms of 
this Agreement and by any action of the Bank Board 
in approving the Acquisition, the Mergers and related 
transactions and (2) shall have taken all other actions 
imposed, in any action by the Bank Board approving 
the Acquisition, the Mergers or related transactions, 
as conditions to the CORPORATION’s obligation to 
provide assistance hereunder. 

(c) The obligations of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERI- 
CAN LIFE under this Agreement are also conditioned 
upon the satisfaction of all of the following conditions: 

(1) The consummation of the Acquisition, the 
Mergers and the other transactions contemplated by 
this Agreement; and 

(2) Receipt of certified copies of the resolutions of 
the Bank Board authorizing execution and delivery on 
behalf of the CORPORATION or the Receiver of the 
Acquisition Agreement, the Regulatory Capital Main- 
tenance Agreement and this Agreement. 

Section 3. Special Reserve Account. The ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION for itself and the ACQUIRER, 


346 


STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE shall establish 
as of the Effective Date a single memorandum 
account, with an opening balance of zero, to be called 
the Special Reserve Account, and shall maintain such 
account solely for the purpose of, and in accordance 
with, the provisions of this Agreement, without 
limitation of its duty to maintain its books and records 
in accordance with proper accounting procedures and 
the Insurance Regulations. 

(a) Debits. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, for 
itself and the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE, following the Effective Date, may 
charge as Debits to the Special Reserve Account 
amounts equal to each of the following items: 

(1) Covered Asset Losses. Ninety-three percent 
(93%) of each Covered Asset Loss; 

(2) Appraisal Costs. The cost of any independent 
appraisal required by the CORPORATION pursuant 
to this Agreement and paid for by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION; provided, that the appraiser selected 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the cost of 
appraisal have been approved in advance by the 
CORPORATION, and provided further that the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall instruct the ap- 
praiser to deem both the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION and the CORPORATION as its client and to 
conduct the appraisal in accordance with standards 
approved by the Bank Board; 

(3) Indemnification. The amounts owed by the 
CORPORATION under §7 of this Agreement pur- 
suant to its obligations to indemnify the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE; 

(4) Claim Expenses. The amount of the reasonable 
costs and expenses incurred by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 


347 


AMERICAN LIFE, where appropriate, in pursuit of a 
Related Claim or Acquired Association Claim, and 
reimbursable by the CORPORATION pursuant to § 7 
or §8 of this Agreement; 

(5) Covered Asset Purchase. The amount of the 
purchase price of a Covered Asset purchased by the 
CORPORATION in accordance with §§ 13 or 15 of this 
Agreement; 

(6) Payment of Credits. The amount of any 
payments made by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, 
for itself and the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE, to eliminate a Credit balance in 
the Special Reserve Account; 

(7) Expenses to Cure. The amount of other 
payments or costs incurred with the CORPORA- 
TION’s prior written approval in order to cure or 
salvage any Covered Asset or security for a Covered 
Asset or prevent a substantial deterioration in value of 
a Covered Asset, provided that such payments or costs 
are not appropriately capitalized under the accounting 
principles required by this Agreement; 

(8) Assignment of Related Claim and Acquired 
Association Claim and Excess Recoveries. The Book 
Value reflected on the books and records of an 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date of a Related Claim or Acquired 
Association Claim assigned to the CORPORATION 
pursuant to § 8(b) of this Agreement and any excess 
recovery on any such claim to be debited to the 
Special Reserve Account pursuant to § 8(e) of this 
Agreement. 

(9) Uncollected Interest. The amount of the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION’s uncollected interest on 
any Covered Asset accrued prior to the Effective Date 
that remains uncollected subsequent to the Effective 
Date, at such time as such accrued and uncollected 


348 


interest is determined by the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, with the written concurrence of the 
CORPORATION, to be uncollectible and is written off, 
provided, that this amount shall not include any 
amounts paid by the CORPORATION to the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION pursuant to § 6(a)(1) and 
(2) of this Agreement, including any amounts with 
respect to which general loss reserves, specific loss 
reserves or valuation allowances were established 
prior to the Effective Date; and provided further, that 
the amounts of such interest that are subsequently 
collected shall be credited to the Special Reserve 
Account upon collection. 

(10) Yield Subsidy. 

(A) For any given Quarter during the first five 
years of this Agreement, with respect to all Covered 
Assets which have not been liquidated at the 
beginning of such Quarter, the excess, if any, of (i) the 
Guaranteed Yield Amount, as computed below over (ii) 
the actual yield, whether positive or negative, during 
such Quarter on such Covered Assets, which shall 
include all interest and other income received or 
accrued which as attributable to such Covered Assets, 
including, specifically, with respect to Real Estate 
Owned, Real Estate Held for Investment, and Real 
Estate in Judgment, any net operating income or net 
operating loss; provided, that for any Quarter during 
the term of this Agreement in which the actual yield 
exceeds the Guaranteed Yield provided for hereunder, 
there shall be a Credit to the Special Reserve Account 
for the amount of such excess. 

Net operating income or operating loss on Real 
Estate Owned, Real Estate Held for Investment and 
Real Estate in Judgment shall be determined by 
deducting all expenses directly attributable to such 
real estate (including all items appropriately expensed 


349 


under GAAP, but specifically excluding depreciation 
and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s administra- 
tive and overhead expenses), from the gross income 
attributable to such real estate. 

(B) The Guaranteed Yield Amount for any 
Quarter constituting a full calendar quarter shall be 
computed by multiplying the Average Book Value of 
such Covered Assets for such quarter (determined for 
a given Quarter by adding the Book Value of all 
unsold Covered Assets on the first day of the Quarter 
and the Book Value of all unsold Covered- Assets on 
the last day of each calendar month within the Quarter 
and dividing the sum by four) by the Guaranteed Yield 
Percentage. The Guaranteed Yield Percentage for all 
Covered Assets other than Participation Interests 
shall be equal to one-quarter of a rate that is equal to 
the cost of funds for savings and loan institutions 
operating in the Bank Board’s Eighth District, as most 
recently reported at the end of a Quarter by the Bank 
(“Eighth District COF”), plus 225 basis points until 
the second anniversary of the Effective Date, shall 
then decline by 50 basis points and shall decline 
further by an additional 25 basis points on the third 
anniversary of the Effective Date and on each 
anniversary thereafter until the termination of the 
CORPORATION’s obligations under this Agreement. 
The Guaranteed Yield Percentage for Participation 
Interests shall remain fixed at one-quarter of Eighth 
District COF plus 225 basis points. 

(C) If the first or last Quarter during the term 
of this Agreement does not constitute a full Quarter, 
the Guaranteed Yield Amount for such Quarter shall 
be the product of 

(i) the Average Book Value of such Covered 
Assets for such Quarter or portion thereof (determined 
by adding the Book Value of all unsold Covered Assets 


350 


on the first day of the Quarter and the last day of each 
calendar month ending within the Quarter or portion 
thereof and dividing the sum by the number of such 
first and last days) multiplied by a fraction (the 
numerator of which shall be the number of days during 
which this Agreement was in effect in suc Quarter 
and the denominator of which shall be 90), and 
(ii) the Guaranteed Yield Percentage. 

(D) In the event of reinstatement of a loan to 
income-producing status and collection of delinquent 
interest so that such ioan ceases to be a Covered 
Asset, the Guaranteed Yield Amount for any previous 
Quarter that included such loan in the determination of 
Average Book Value for all or any portion of such 
quarter shall be recalculated excluding such loan, and 
the sum of the differences between the Guaranteed 
Yield Amount as recalculated and as_ originally 
calculated for each such Quarter shall be a Credit to 
the Special Reserve Account. The calculation of the 
Credit to be made to the Special Reserve Account, if 
any, pursuant to this § 3(a)(10)(D) shall be made at the 
end of each Quarter for all loans which cease to be 
Covered Assets during such Quarter. 

(E) With respect to loans that become contrac- 
tually delinquent 90 days or more after the Effective 
Date, such loans shall be deemed to be Covered 
Assets, for purposes of this § 3(a)(10), from the time 
they first become contractually delinquent. At the end 
of each Quarter during which a loan becomes 
contractually delinquent 90 days or more, the Guaran- 
teed Yield Amount for the previous Quarter (if such 
loan became contractually delinquent in such prior 
Quarter) shall be recalculated including such loan as of 
the day it first became contractually delinquent, and 
the difference between the Guaranteed Yield Amount 
as recalculated and as originally calculated for such 


351 


prior Quarter shall be added to the Guaranteed Yield 
Amount calculated for such current Quarter. 

(F) For any Quarter that has more than one 
Guaranteed Yield Percentage applicable to portions of 
such Quarter, the Guaranteed Yield Percentage to be 
applicable to the entire Quarter shall be determined by 
multiplying each Guaranteed Yield Percentage by the 
number of days in such Quarter to which such 
Guaranteed Yield Percentage applies, adding the 
results of such multiplications. and dividing such sum 
by the totai number of days in the Quarter. 

(11) Recoveries on Purchased Covered Assets. Any 
amount permitted to be debited to the Special Reserve 
Account pursuant to § 15(d). 

(12) Federated Financial Loan Losses. Eighty-five 
percent (85%) of the amount by which the value 
reflected by the books and records of Federated 
Financial of a Federated Financial Loan exceeds the 
Net Proceeds received by the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION upon the Liquidation of such loan subject to 
the limitation of § 7(f)(2) of the Agreement; provided 
that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION: (A) provides 
to the CORPORATION the same rights and the same 
reports and other documentation, follows the same 
procedures and obtains from the CORPORATION the 
same consents, if any, it would have had to provide to, 
follow with respect to or obtain from the appropriate 
governmental or private mortgage insurer to recover 
losses on such loan, or (B) provides such other rights, 
reports and documentation, follows such other proce- 
dures and obtains such other consents as shall be 
mutually agreed upon by the CORPORATION and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION. For purposes of this 
paragraph the value of each such loan shall be the 
unpaid principal balance, unfunded escrow advances, 
interest advances and other advances, including but 


352 


not limited to, reasonable attorney fees, inspection 
fees, appraisals and insurer required repair costs. 

(13) Lease Losses. Beginning on the dates the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION ceases to occupy the 
respective leased premises, fifty percent (50%) of the 
expenses and losses incurred by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION up to the date of and upon the 
disposition or termination of the lease held by the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the 
Effective Date for the building located at 11300 US 
Highway 1, Suite 300, North Palm Beach, Florida, and 
the lease held by Federated Financial immediately 
prior to the Effective Date for the building located at 
6560 Powers Ferry Road, Atlanta, Georgia; provided 
that such disposition or termination shall have been 
approved in writing by the CORPORATION, which 
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 

(14) Tax Benefit Adjustment Payments. Any 
amount permitted to be debited to the Special Reserve 
Account pursuant to § 3(c)(13)(F); and 

(b) Exclusions from Debits. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, for itself and the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, may not debit 
the Special Reserve Account and shall not seek 
reimbursement from the CORPORATION for: 

(1) Any of the expenses or costs of STATESMAN, 
AMERICAN LIFE, the ACQUIRER or the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION incident to the Acquisition 
or the Mergers not specifically reimbursable under this 
Agreement; 

(2) Any increase in the operating expenses of 
STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE, the ACQUIRER 
or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION as a result of the 
Acquisition or the Mergers or the administration and 
management of the assets and liabilities of the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS not specifically reim- 
bursable under this Agreement; 


353 


(3) Any loss, charge, or expense actually caused 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s failure to 
comply with the management standard set forth in 
§ 12(a) of this Agreement in its administration of the 
assets and liabilities of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TIONS after the Effective Date. 

(4) That portion of any loss, charge, or expense 
actually recovered by STATESMAN, AMERICAN 
LIFE, the ACQUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION or Reimbursable under any insurance policy 
or bond or other provision for funding (other than 
under this Agreement), including from any govern- 
mental or private mortgage insurer; 

(5) Except to the extent specifically reimbursed 
under other sections of this Agreement, any expenses 
of STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE, the AC- 
QUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in- 
curred in the administration of this Agreement, 
including, but not limited to, compensation paid to 
employees or agents of STATESMAN, AMERICAN 
LIFE, the ACQUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION for services performed in connection with 
the preparation of reports and supporting documenta- 
tion required to be filed with the CORPORATION 
under this Agreement; and ; 

(6) The write down of the Book Value of any 
Covered Asset, if the CORPORATION has denied the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s application pursuant 
to § 4 to write down such asset, of if the CORPORA- 
TION has approved the application with modifications 
or conditions that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
has not met. 

(c) Credits to Special Reserve Account. The AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION, for itself and the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, 
shall promptly credit to the Special Reserve Account 


354 


an amount equal to each of the following items to the 
extent that such item was not shown as an asset on 
the books and records of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION immediately prior to the Effective Date, was 
adjusted by the Initial Audit: 

(1) Covered Asset Recoveries. With respect to any 
Covered Asset, ninety-three percent (93%) of any 
Covered Asset Recovery on such Covered Asset; 

(2) Refunds. The amount of any refund (excluding 
the tax refunds made pursuant to § 3(c)(6)) received 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION with respect to 
payments or expenditures made by any ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION prior to the Effective Date; 

(3) Pre-Effective Date Interest. The amount of any 
interest not accrued by, or for which any reserves or 
valuation allowances were established by, an AC- 
QUIRED ASSOCIATION prior to the Effective Date 
but collected by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
subsequent to the Effective Date; 

(4) Other Recoveries on Covered Assets. Ninety- 
three percent (93%) of the amount of any other net 
recovery or any benefit realized by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION in satisfaction of or recovery on any 
Covered Asset in excess of Book Value or, if such 
Covered Asset has been written down pursuant to § 4 
of this Agreement, in excess of Book Value as so 
written down, including but not limited to, any 
recoveries on any Claim or judgment related to or in 
connection with such Covered Asset; 

(5) Offset Gains. Any amount the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION recovers from other than the COR- 
PORATION, whether by counterclaim, offset, insur- 
ance settlement, or otherwise, with respect to any 
liability or Claim as to which the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, acting for itself and the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, debited the 
Special Reserve Account; 


355 


(6) Tax Refunds. The amount of the net tax 
refund received after the Effective Date, if any, from 
whatever governmental source derived, of taxes paid 
relating to a taxable year of an ACQUIRED ASSO- 
CIATION which ends on or prior to the Effective 
Date, including, but not limited to, a refund of state or 
local taxes, plus any interest received by the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION on such refund to the 
extent any such refund has not been accrued prior to 
the Effective Date as determined pursuant to the 
Initial Audit. The net tax refund shall be equal to the 
total refunds received in a particular year, plus 
interest received on such refunds, less the Federal, 
state, or local tax liability payable with respect to such 
refunds and interest and less any administrative 
expenses incurred by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION in obtaining such refunds. The Federal, state 
and local tax liability associated with such refunds and 
interest shall be the difference between the actual tax 
liability payable by reason of the inclusion of such 
refunds and interest in gross income and the tax 
liability which would have been payable if such refunds 
and interest had not been includible in gross income; 

(7) Audit Expense. Fifty percent (50%) of the cost 
of preparing the Limited Audit and the inventory 
required by § [illegible] of this Agreement, provided 
that the Initial Audit and the inventory are completed 
within 120 days of the date hereof. 

(8) Excess Yield. (A) With respect to the Covered 
Assets for which the CORPORATION provided a 
yield subsidy pursuant to § (3)(a)(10) for any given 
Quarter, the amount of any excess of actual yield for 
such Quarter over the Guaranteed Yield Amount for 
such Quarter and (B) any amount due pursuant to 
§ 3(a(10)D). 

(9) Uncollected Interest. The amount of un- 
collected interest written off in accordance with 


356 


§ 3(a)(9), but subsequently collected by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION; 

(10) Recoveries on Acquired Association Claims 
and Related Claims. Any amount received or benefit 
realized by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION or, 
where appropriate, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or 
AMERICAN LIFE, upon Liquidation of any Acquired 
Association Claim or Related Claim as provided in 
§ 7(d) and § &(c) of this Agreement to the extent such 
recoveries do not exceed contributions by the CORPO- 
RATION under this Agreement. 

(11) CORPORATION’s Contribution. Contribu- 
tions made by the CORPORATION to eliminate a 
Debit balance in the Special Reserve Account. 

(12) Federated Financial Loan Recoveries. 
Eighty-five percent (85%) of (i) any amount by which 
the Net Proceeds Received by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION upon the Liquidation of a Federated 
Financial Loan exceeds the value of such loan reflected 
by the books and records of Federated Financial 
immediately prior to the Effective Date, as adjusted to 
the extent allowable under the applicable rules and 
procedures of the appropriate governmental or private 
mortgage insurer of such loan, and of (ii) any Net 
Proceed Received on a deficiency judgment or other 
Claim related to a Federated Financial Loan. 

(13) Tax Benefits. 

(A) The amount of the net tax benefits, if any, 
realized by any consolidated group of which the 
ACQUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION is 
a member (“Taxable Party”), in any year (“Net Tax 
Benefits”) calculated as provided in this § 3(c)(13). For 
purposes of this Agreement, the Net Tax Benefits 
shall be the tax. benefits that are attributable to the 
items described below (“Tax Benefit Items”) that are 
utilized by the Taxable Party to reduce its tax liability 


357 


in a given tax year as calculated in paragraph (B) 
below: Any federal, state or local income tax deduc- 
tions or losses actually taken by the Taxable Party 
with respect to net operating losses of any of the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS through the Effective 
Date. Such net operating losses shall be deemed to be 
actually taken when used by the Taxable Party to 
reduce its tax liabilities that were incurred during the 
taxable year of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS 
ending on the Effective Date. 

(B) The Net Tax Benefits for a taxable year 
shall be equal to: 

(i) fifty (50%) percent of the excess, of any, of 
(AA) the federal, state and local income tax 
liability for such taxable year (taking into account all 
allowable carryovers and carrybacks to such taxable 
year) which would have been imposed on the Taxable 
Party if the deductions or losses described in 
§ 3(c13(A) had not been deducted in any taxable 
year over 
(BB) the federal, state and local income tax 
liability for such taxable year (taking into account all 
allowable carryovers and carrybacks to such taxable 
year) actually imposed on the Taxable Party; 

(C) The Net Tax Benefits shall be credited to 
the Special Reserve Account or paid in cash, pursuant 
to § 3(c)(11)(G) of this Agreement, at the time of filing 
of the federal income tax return of the Taxable Party 
for the taxable year in which said Net Tax Benefits 
are realized (including by any of carryovers and 
carrybacks); 

(D) In the event Net Tax Benefits are credited 
or paid with respect to Tax Benefit Items that are 
subsequently disallowed or that cease to be Tax 
Benefit Items because it is determined that payments 
with respect to deductions and losses otherwise 


358 


described in § 3(c)13A) were not excludable from 
gross income, such Net Tax Benefits shall be debited 
to the Special Reserve Account or shall be paid by the 
CORPORATION or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION as set forth in § 3(c)13\F); 

(E) Each of the ACQUIRER and the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall, upon request of the 
CORPORATION, provide copies of the tax returns 
and amended tax returns of itself and of the 
consolidated group, if any, of which it is a member, for 
any taxable year(s) that are specified by the CORPO- 
RATION and relevant to the determination of the 
Credit to the Special Reserve Account or payments 
required to be made to the CORPORATION pursuant 
to this section; 

(F) Repayments or payments by the CORPO- 
RATION required by this § 3(c)(13) shall be effected 
by a Debit to the Special Reserve Account, if made 
prior to the Termination Date, and by a cash payment 
or wire transfer within ten days after the CORPORA- 
TION’s receipt of written demand for payment, if 
made after the Termination Date; provided, that in 
either case the CORPORATION shall receive a full 
written explanation of the basis for its payment 
obligation; and provided further, that the ACQUIRER 
or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION or each of them, 
as the case may be, has compiled with § 12(f) with 
respect to the Tax Benefit items or Net Tax Benefits 
that are subject to adjustment; 

(G) The provisions of this § 3(c)(11) shall sur- 
vive the Termination Date. After the Termination 
Date, each of the ACQUIRER and the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall pay to the CORPORATION by 
cash payment or wire transfer amounts equal to all the 
Net Tax Benefits that prior to the Termination Date 
would have been credited to the Special Reserve 
Account. 


359 


(14) Income Payment Credits. Any amount per- 
mitted [illegible] be credited to the Special Reserve 
Account pursuant to § 6(d). 

Section 4. Write-Down of a Covered Asset. 

(a) Approval of Write-Down. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall not write down any Covered 
Asset without first obtaining the CORPORATION’s 
written consent pursuant to the terms of this § 4, and 
shall undertake to liquidate each Covered Asset in 
accordance with the terms of this Agreement prior to 
applying to the CORPORATION for such consent. In 
the event that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
proposes to write down a Covered Asset, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall first apply to the 
CORPORATION for permission to write down a 
Covered Asset by submitting to the CORPORATION 
in writing the terms, including the amount, of the 
proposed write-down, and the grounds for the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION’s opinion that the Covered 
Asset should be written down, supported by such 
information or documents as the CORPORATION may 
reasonably request. 

(b) Determination of Write-Down. With respect to 
any Covered Asset, any write-down shall be deter- 
mined as follows: 

(1) The CORPORATION may require the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION to write down the Book 
Value of any Covered Asset; and such amount of the 
resulting Covered Asset Loss shall be debited to. the 
Special Reserve Account as provided in § 3(a)(1); or 

(2) Within thirty (30) days of the CORPORA- 
TION’s receipt for an application from the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION setting with the grounds for the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s opinion that the value 
of a Covered Asset is less than its Book Value, and 
such information or documents as the CORPORA- 
TION may request, the CORPORATION shall: 


360 


(A) approve the application, with or without 
modifications or conditions, and permit the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION to write down the Covered 
Asset’s Book Value and Debit such amount of the 
resulting Covered Asset Loss to the Special Reserve 
Account as provided in § 3(a)(1); 

(B) deny the application (the basis for such 
denial shall not be unreasonable), in which case the 
CORPORATION shall direct the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION to take such action with respect to the 
Covered Asset as, in the exercise of reasonable 
judgment, the CORPORATION deems necessary or 
appropriate; or 

(C) require the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
to submit additional information, including, but not 
limited to, an independent appraisal. Within thirty (30) 
days after the CORPORATION’s receipt of any 
additional information requested, the CORPORATION 
shall approve, with or without modifications or 
conditions, or deny such application, in which case the 
CORPORATION shall direct action by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION as provided by paragraph (B) 
above. 

(c) Required Sale. The CORPORATION may at any 
time require the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to sell 
any Covered Asset to any person or entity the 
CORPORATION designates, including the CORPO- 
RATION, at a price specified pursuant to § 13 of this 
Agreement, provided, that the CORPORATION can 
not require the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to 
provide financing to such person or entity. 

(d) Adjustment at Termination. As of the Termina- 
tion Date of this Agreement, the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall adjust, if necessary, the Book 
Value of each Covered Asset remaining on its books to 
the value of such asset as determined by agreement 


361 


between the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the 
CORPORATION or by an appraisal acceptable to both 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the CORPO- 
RATION. Such agreement may be made or such 
appraisals may be obtained at any time beginning on 
the date which is four years and six months from the 
Effective Date. The amount of any adjustment of the 
Book Value of any Covered Asset pursuant to this 
§ 4(d) shall be deemed, for purposes of this Agree- 
ment, a Covered Asset Loss or a Covered Asset 
Recovery, respectfully, prior to the Termination Date. 
An appraisal pursuant to this § 4(d) shall be performed 
by an appraiser selected by the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION and acceptable to the CORPORATION. In 
the event either party objects to an appraisal prepared 
by such an appraiser, such party shall submit its 
objections in writing to the other party. Such 
objections shall be specific and shall be based upon the 
Bank Board’s appraisal policies then in effect. Follow- 
ing any such objections, the parties can request the 
appraiser to revise his appraisal in light of such 
objections or can select a new appraiser in the same 
manner as the initial appraiser was selected; provided 
that any new appraisal requested by the Acquiring 
Association shall be performed at the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s expense. Any revised or new ap- 
praisal shall be subject to approval by both parties on 
the same basis. 

Section 5. Initial Audit and Inventory. As soon as 
is practicable after the Effective Date, the CORPO- 
RATION with the assistance of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s personnel, whose salaries and ex- 
penses shall be paid by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION without reimbursement from the CORPORA- 
TION, shall cause to be prepared and completed by 
Coopers & Lybrand. 


362 


(a) an Initial Audit of each ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION as of immediately prior to the Effective Date, to 
be performed in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards, except that the scope of the Initial 
Audit shall be determined by the CORPORATION 
consistent with this Agreement and shall not include a 
revaluation of any ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION’s 
assets, other than single family residential properties 
constituting REO (selected on a sampling basis), or a 
determination whether accrued but uncollected inter- 
est, if any, is collectible; and 

(b) an inventory of all assets and liabilities required 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION as of the Effec- 
tive Date under the Acquisition Agreement and the 
Merger Agreements. Such inventory shall be limited 
to such assets and liabilities as are shown on the books 
and records of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS 
immediately prior to the Effective Date, or which are 
reasonably ascertainable during the preparation of the 
inventory. A copy of the Initial Audit and the 
inventory, in such forms as the CORPORATION shall 
determine, shall be furnished to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION upon completion and approval by the 
CORPORATION. 


Section 6. Payments and Contributions. 


(a) Initial Contributions by the CORPORATION. 

(1) Cash Contribution. If the conditions set 
forth in §2 of this Agreement have been satisfied, 
within five business days after the Effective Date, the 
CORPORATION shall wire transfer to the account of 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION at the Bank imme- 
diately available funds in an amount equal to $60 
million or approximately fifty-eight percent (58%) of 
the estimated combined Negative Regulatory Capital 
of all of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS imme- 
diately prior to the Effective Date, which the parties 


362a 


agree equals $103 million (“Estimated Negative Reg- 
ulatory Capital”). 

For the purposes of reports to the Bank Board, 
other than reports or financial statements prepared for 
reporting or disclosure purposes that are required to 
be governed by GAAP, $26 million of the contribution 
made under this § 6(a)(1) shall be credited to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s regulatory capital ac- 
count and shall constitute regulatory capital (as 
defined in § 561.13 of the Insurance Regulations). The 
parties understand that the preceding sentence is not 
intended to address in any way the accounting 
treatment of contributions from the CORPORATION 
that must be reflected in any filing that the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATIONS may make, whether 
to the Bank Board (for reporting or disclosure 
purposes) or otherwise, that requires the submission of 
financial statements prepared in accordance with 
GAAP. 

(2) Promissory Note. If the conditions set forth in 
§ 2 of this Agreement have been satisfied, on the 
Effective Date the CORPORATION shall deliver to 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION the Note, duly 
executed by the CORPORATION, the principal 
amount which shall be equal to the difference between 
the Estimated Negative Regulatory Capital and the 
amount of cash contributed to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION within five business days after the 
Effective Date pursuant to § 6(a)(1) above. Promptly 


THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


363 


after the CORPORATION’s receipt and approval of 
the Initial Audit referred to in § 5(a): 

(i) the Corporation shall increase, as of the 
Effective Date, the principal balance of the Note by 
the amount, if any, by which the combined Negative 
Regulatory Capital of all of the ACQUIRED ASSO- 
CIATIONS immediately prior to the Effective Date, 
as reflected by the Initial Audit, exceeds the amount 
of Estimated Negative Regulatory Capital and shall 
pay, at the next Interest Payment Date (as defined in 
the Note), following such increase, all interest on the 
amount of such increase accrued from the Effective 
Data through the Interest Payment Period (as defined 
in the Note) immediately preceding such Interest 
Payment Date; or 

(ii) the Corporation shall decrease, as of the 
Effective Date, the principal balance of the Note by 
the amount, if any, by which the amount of Estimated 
Negative Regulatory Capital exceeds the combined 
Negative Regulatory Capital of all of the ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the Effective 
Date, as reflected by the Initial Audit, and the amount 
of accrued interest on the Note due and payable on the 
next Interest Payment Date following such decrease 
shall be reduced by the amount of interest on the 
amount of such increase which has been accrued or 
paid through the Interest Payment Period immediately 
preceding such Interest Payment Date. 

(b) Debit Balance. Within thirty (30) days after 
receipt of each Quarterly Report required pursuant to 
§ 11(a) of this Agreement or within ninety (90) days of 
the final accounting required pursuant to § 11(c) of this 
Agreement, the CORPORATION will contribute to 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, by deposit into the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s account at the Bank, 
an amount equal to the Debit balance of the Special 


364 


Reserve Account that is not offset by Credits due to 
the CORPORATION calculated as of the last day of 
the applicable Quarter or as of the Termination Date. 
After the Termination Date, amounts payable to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION by the CORPORA- 
TION pursuant to §§ 7 and 8 of this Agreement shall 
be paid in a like manner. 

(c) Contributions Resulting from Assignment of 
Claims. The amount of any payment made by the 
CORPORATION in excess of the fair market value of 
any Acquired Association Claim or Related Claim 
assigned to the CORPORATION pursuant to § 8, shall 
be deemed to be a contribution by the CORPORA- 
TION. Fair market value may be determined, at the 
election of the CORPORATION, by Agreement of the 
CORPORATION and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, or by an appraisal by an independent appraiser 
by the CORPORATION and the Acquiring Associa- 
tion, the cost of which appraisal shall be paid by the 
CORPORATION. 

(d) Income Payments. 

(1) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall pay 
to the FSLIC- 9% of its Gross Book Income for the 
first two fiscal years following the Effective Date and 
18% of its Gross Book Income for the fiscal years and 
any portion thereof from and including the third fiscal 
year through the 10th anniversary of the Effective 
Date. Any payments due hereunder shall be credited 
to the Special Reserve Account if the Gross Book 
Income is determined prior to the termination of this 
Agreement-and shall be paid in immediately available 
funds if the Gross Book Income is determined after 
the termination of this Agreement. 

(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s Gross Book In- 
come for any year equals to exceeds $5 million, then 


365 


the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall assign and 
transfer to the FSLIC 20,000 shares of Statesman 
Preferred Stock having an initial book value of $2.0 
million for such a year, and the transfer of Preferred 
Stock in each such year shall be in lieu of payments 
which would otherwise be paid under § 6(d)(1) for each 
such year. 

(3) In the event, pursuant to § 6(d)(2), the FSLIC 
receives in the aggregate 100,000 shares of Statesman 
Preferred Stock having a book value of $10 million, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall have no further 
obligations to make any credits, payments or transfers 
pursuant to this § 6(d). 

(4) Credits, payments or transfers pursuant to 
this § 6(d) shall be made as soon after the end of the 
applicable fiscal year or, in the case of the portion of a 
fiscal year ending on the tenth anniversary of the 
Effective Date, as soon after the end of such portion, 
as the Gross Book Income for such fiscal year or 
portion thereof, but in no event later than 90 days 
after the end of such fiscal year or portion thereof. 

(5) For purposes of this § 6(d), the term Gross 
Tax Income shall mean net income in accordance with 
GAAP but without any deduction for any payments 
made on the subordinated debenture issued to the 
CORPORATION pursuant to § 6(e). For purposes of 
this § 6(d) “Statesman Preferred Stock” shall mean 
1988 Series I Convertible Preferred Stock of STATES- 
MAN bearing a dividend rate of 8%. 

(e) Issuance of Subordinated Debenture. On the 
Effective Date, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
shall issue and deliver to the CORPORATION a 
subordinated debenture, in the form or substantially in 
the form of Exhibit B attached hereto, with a face 
amount of $5.0 million and a term of ten years. 


366 


(f) Reimbursement of Credit Balances. 

(1) Within thirty (30) days after the CORPORA- 
TION’s receipt of each Quarterly Report required 
pursuant to § 6(a) of this Agreement, the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall, for itself and the AC- 
QUIRER, remit to the CORPORATION an amount 
equal to the aggregate amount of the net Credit 
Balance of the Special Reserve Account as of the last 
day of the Quarter reported in the Quarterly Report; 
provided, that if such amount exceeds the total of the 
contributions made by the Corporation to date and not 
repaid, then the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall 
remit to the Corporation only so much of such amount 
as equals the total of the contributions, and the excess, 
if any, shall remain as a credit balance in the Special 
Reserve Account. 

(2) Within ninety (90) days after rendering its 
final accounting required under § 11(c) of this Agree- 
ment, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall, for 
itself and the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE, remit to the CORPORATION an 
amount equal to the aggregate net Credit balance in 
the Special Reserve Account as of the Termination 
Date; provided, that the amount so remitted shall not 
exceed the total contributions made by the CORPO- 
RATION under this Agreement and not repaid. 

(g) Optional Purchase of Covered Assets. In the 
event that the CORPORATION exercises its right to 
purchase a Covered Asset pursuant to § 13 or § 15 of 
this Agreement, the excess, if any, of the purchase 
price paid by the CORPORATION over the fair 
market value of such asset shall be deemed to be a 
contribution to the CORPORATION. Fair market 
value shall be determined, at the election of the 
CORPORATION, by agreement of the CORPORA- 
TION and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, or by 


367 


an independent appraisal accepted by the CORPORA- 
TION and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION. 

(h) Adjustments. Any contribution or payment by 
the CORPORATION or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION pursuant to this Agreement, any Credit or 
Debit to the Special Reserve Account, or any 
accounting or report furnished by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION under this Agreement shall be subject 
to adjustment if it subsequently is determined that 
such contribution, payment, Credit, Debit, accounting, 
or report was based upon error or upon a tax 
determination that has been subsequently adjusted, or 
was not computed in accordance with the accounting 
principles prescribed in this Agreement, or, without 
the approval of the CORPORATION and the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION, was otherwise inconsist- 
ent with the terms of this Agreement. 

(i) Repayment. In the event that a court of 
competent jurisdiction directs the ACQUIRING AS- 
SOCIATION to divest itself of the assets it acquired 
and the liabilities it assumed from any ACQUIRER 
ASSOCIATION or directs the ACQUIRER to divest 
itself of the stock of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the contribution made pursuant to §§ 6(a), 
§ 6(c) and § 6(g) and all amounts debited to the Special 
Reserve Account pursuant to §§ 3(a)(1), (2) and (9) less 
all amounts credited to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to §§ 3(c)(1), (4), and (9) shall be repaid to 
the CORPORATION by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION; provided, that amounts credited or debited to 
the Special Reserve Account shall be included in the 
calculation required by this § 6(i) only to the extent 
such Debits or Credits relate to periods for which 
payments have been made, or no payments were 
required to be made pursuant to § 6(b) or § 6(f), and 
further provided, that no such payments will be made 


368 


until after the Acquirer has fully recovered its capital 
investment in the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, and 
the Acquirer and the Acquiring Association have fully 
recovered all of their reasonable out-of-pocket ex- 
penses to unaffiliated third parties incurred by them 
or on their behalf on or after the Effective Date in 
connection with the Acquisition and the Mergers. 
Section 7. Indemnification. To the extent not 
otherwise reimbursed or Reimbursable, the CORPO- 
RATION will indemnify the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE for, and pay, as provided in this $ 7, the 
amounts actually paid by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE or all of them in connection wth the 
satisfaction, settlement, or compromise of the fdlowing 
liabilities, Claims and challenges to the Acquisition and 
the Mergers (except that the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, but not the ACQUIRER, STATESNAN or 
AMERICAN LIFE, shall be indemnified as to 
liabilities -deseribed in § 7(a) below); the reasonable 
costs and expenses of litigation related to such 
liabilities, Claims and challengers to che Acquisition 
and the Mergers, including reasonadle attorneys’ and 
accountants’ fees, travel expenses, court costs and 
related litigation expenses; an¢ such other actual and 
reasonable costs as may ke actually incurred and 
payable by the ACQULKING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE in 
connection with such satisfaction, settlement, or 
compromise, or défense of such liabilities, Claims or 
challenges (“Incemnifiable Losses”); provided, that the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE comply with 
the covenants set forth in § 12; and provided further, 
that such costs and expenses shall be subject to 


approval by the CORPORATION which shall not be 
unreasonably withheld as being related to matters 
subject to indemnification under this § 7; and provided 
further, that the reports required by § 11(a) and (f) of 
this Agreement, in a form satisfactory to the CORPO- 
RATION, shall be submitted to the CORPORATION 
before such costs and expenses will be paid by the 
CORPORATION pursuant to § 6(b) of this Agree- 
ment; and provided further, that the CORPORATION 
will indemnify the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE 
for such amounts as relate to liabilities or Claims 
described in this §7 and respect to any subsidiary 
(other than Federated Financial) only to the extent of 
an ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION’s investment in such 
subsidiary as of the Effective Date. 

(a) Undisclosed Liabilities. Except as provided in 
this § 7(a), and liabilities of any ACQUIRED ASSO- 
CIATION or any subsidiary thereof (other than 
Federated Financial) to the extent such liabilities were 
not fully disclosed in, or fully reflected as a liability on, 
the books and records of any ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION or its subsidiaries immediately prior to the 
Effective Date and which, under GAAP as of the 
Effective Date consistently applied, are of the type 
that are reserved for, disclosed, or reflected as 
liabilities, but excluding any inadequacy in or lack of 
an asset valuation allowance or specific reserve; 
provided that, in the event that the satisfaction, 
settlement, or compromise of any liability or liabilities 
described in this § 7(a) results in the acquisition by the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION of an asset or assets, 
then at the CORPORATION’s election: 

(1) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall as- 
sign such asset or assets to the CORPORATION 
without cost to the CORPORATION; or 


370 


(2) The amount paid by the CORPORATION 
pursuant to this § 7(a) shall be limited to the amount, 
if any, by which the amounts paid by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION in connection with the satisfac- 
tion, settlement, or compromise of such liability or 
liabilities exceed the fair market value of the asset or 
assets, if any, acquired as a consequence of the 
satisfaction, settlement, or compromise of such liability 
or liabilities as determined by agreement between the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the CORPORA- 
TION, or by an appraisal mutually approved by the 
CORPORATION and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION and performed by an independent appraiser 
acceptable to the CORPORATION, the cost of which 
appraisal shall be paid by the CORPORATION. 

The CORPORATION’s obligation to provide indem- 
nification under this §7(a) shall not extend to 
liabilities of any ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION or its 
subsidiaries incurred prior to the Effective Date which 
normally recurred in such ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION’s or its subsidiaries’ ordinary course of business 
and operations, which are ordinary posted on the 
books and records of such ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION or its subsidiaries on a periodic basis, and which 
are in amounts that are materially the same as and can 
reasonably be predicted from prior postings on the 
books and records of such ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION or its subsidiaries concluding, but not limited to, 
items such as accrued employee salaries, utility bills, 
accrued interest due to depositors and accountholders, 
and accrued interest payable to the Bank or the 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, or any other 
lender to such ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION; provided 
that, with respect to accrued interest payable to a 
lender, the underlying obligation to pay principal is 
reflected on the books and records of any ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION. 


371 


(b) Unreserved for Claims. Any Claim against any 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRING AS- 
SOCIATION as its successor, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE or any subsidiary 
of an ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION (other than Fede- 
rated Financial), based upon an action or failure to act 
on the part of such ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION or 
such subsidiary prior to the Effective Date, whether 
dated before or after the Effective Date, to the extent 
that such Claim: 

(i) was not adequately reserved for or adequate 
provision was not made for its payment on the books 
and records of such ACQUIRED ASSOCIATION or 
such subsidiary prior to the Effective Date as reflected 
in the Initial Audit; and 

(ii) is not Reimbursable under any insurance 
equity, bond, or other provision for funding. 

(c) Challenges to the Acquisition or the Mergers. 
Any action brought by any person other than the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE, or any Affiliate, 
subsidiary, service corporation, accountholder, stock- 
holder (if any), or creditor of any of them, within one 
year following the Effective Date to challenge or set 
aside the Acquisition or any merger, in whole or in 
part, or this Agreement, that is grounded from a claim 
that an action or failure to act by the Bank Board or 
the CORPORATION was not in accordance with the 
Bank Board’s or the CORPORATION’s enabling 
legislation, and, in the event that a court of competent 
jurisdiction, by final order, directs the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION to divest itself of any MERGED 
ASSOCIATION of the assets and liabilities of the 
CLOSED ASSOCIATION on such ground, the capital 
investment of the ACQUIRER in the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION and the reasonable, out-of-pocket 


372 


expenses of unaffiliated third parties incurred by the 
ACQUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION or 
on behalf of either of them on or after the Effective 
Date in connection with the Acquisition and the 
Mergers; provided, that such reasonable costs and 
expenses are attributable to such action or failure to 
act by the Bank Board of the CORPORATION, and 
provided further, that the ACQUIRER and the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION are unable to recover 
such amounts, despite good faith efforts, in the 
divestiture. 

(d) Pursuit of Related Claims. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE shall, in accordance with the 
management standards described in § 12(a) of this 
Agreement, use their best efforts to reimburse, reduce 
or minimize the CORPORATION’s indemnity pay- 
ments under §7 or § 12(dX7) and any contribution 
under § 6(a) or (b), by the pursuit of Related Claims, 
whether discovered before or after the Effective Date. 
The CORPORATION shall indemnify and pay, as 
provided in this § 7(d) of this Agreement, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE for reasonable 
and related costs and expenses, incurred in connection 
with the prosecution of a Related Claim, including, but 
net limited to, reasonable attorneys’ and accountants’ 
fees, travel expenses, court costs and related litigation 
expenses, but only to the extent that such actual and 
reasonable costs and expenses are not otherwise 
reimbursed or Reimbursable; provided, that the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE comply with 
the covenants set forth in § 12 of this Agreement; and 
provider further, that the pursuit of Related Claims 
shall be subject to approval by the CORPORATION 


373 


and the reports required § 11(a) and (f) of this 
Agreement, in forms satisfactory to the CORPORA- 
TION, shall be submitted to the CORPORATION 
before costs and expenses related to the pursuit of 
Related Claims shall be paid by the CORPORATION. 
All sums recovered on each of such Related Claims in 
excess of the value of such Related Claims reflected on 
the books and records of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TIONS immediately prior to the Effective Date, as 
adjusted by the Initial Audit and as thereafter 
adjusted or determined in accordance with the 
accounting principles required by this Agreement, 
shall be credited to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to § 3(c\(10) of this Agreement. Any such 
sums recovered after the Termination Date shall be 
paid over to the CORPORATION to the extent that 
the CORPORATION has made contributions pursuant 
to this Agreement, and otherwise shall be retained by 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION. 

(e) Payments as Contributions. All payments made 
by the CORPORATION to the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or 
AMERICAN LIFE under this § 7 shall be considered 
contributions under this Agreement. 

(f) Limitations on Indemnification and Federated 
Financial Loan Losses. 

(1) The indemnification provided for in this § 7 
with respect to Federated Financial shall be limited to 
Indemnifiable Losses arising from or related to the 
pending results and litigation threatened in a writing 
delivered to Federated Financial or to the CLOSED 
ASSOCIATION prior to the Effective Date. 

(2) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION may 
charge as a Debit to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to § 3(aX(3) of this Agreement the amount of 
any Indemnifiable Loss arising from it related to the 


374 


lawsuits or threatened litigation identified in § 7(f)(1) 
hereto or liabilities of and Claims against the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in any way based on 
activities of Federated Financial, or charge as a Debit 
to the Special Reserve Account pursuant to § 3(a)(13) 
of this Agreement the amount of any Federated 
Financial Loan Loss; provided that the total amount of 
any such debits authorized by this § 7(f)(2) shall not 
exceed $15 million in the aggregate. 

(3) The CORPORATION’s obligation to provide 
indemnification under this § 7 shall not extend beyond 
five years near the Effective Date, subject to the 
provisions of §§ 7(c) and 19 of this Agreement. 

Section 8. Acquired Association Claims and Re- 
lated Claims. 

(a) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall in good 
faith and accordance with the management standard 
described in § 7(a)(1) of this Agreement exercise its 
best efforts in pursuing and filing actions on all 
potentially recoverable Acquired Association Claims, 
whether discovered before or after the Effective Date. 
Provided that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION com- 
plies with the covenants set forth in §12, the 
CORPORATION will indemnify the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION for all reasonable costs the expenses 
actually incurred and payable by the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION in connection with the prosecution of 
an Acquired Association Claim, including, but not 
limited to, reasonable attorneys’ and accountants’ fees, 
travel expenses, court costs and related expenses in 
connection with such prosecution, but not to the extent 
that such costs and expenses are not otherwise 
Reimbursed or Reimbursable; provided further, that 
the prosecution of an Acquired Association Claim shall 
be subject to approval by the CORPORATION and 
the reports required by this Agreement, in a form 


375 


satisfactory to the CORPORATION, shall be submit- 
ted to the CORPORATION before costs and expenses 
related to the prosecution of an Acquired Association 
Claim shall be paid by the CORPORATION. Any 
amount paid by the CORPORATION pursuant to this 
subsection shall be considered to be a contribution by 
the CORPORATION to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. 

(b) At any time during the term of this Agreement 
and until the later of ninety (90) days after the 
Termination Date, or termination of the CORPORA- 
TION’s obligation to provide assistance pursuant to 
$$ 16 or 19 of this Agreement, the CORPORATION 
shall have the right to obtain from the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE, where appropriate, an Assign- 
ment of any Acquired Association Claim or Related 
Claim or the Net Proceeds Received from the 
Liquidation of any such Claim. If an Acquired 
Association Claim or Related Claim had a value 
reflected on the books and records of any MERGED 
ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the Effective 
Date, the CORPORATION shall [illegible] for such 
assignment that value, as adjusted by the Initial Audit 
and as thereafter adjusted or determined in accord- 
ance with the accounting principles required by this 
Agreement. The purchase price shall be debited to the 
Special Reserve Account pursuant to § 3(a)(8) of this 
Agreement as of the assignment date, if the transfer 
occurs prior to the Termination Date, or shall be paid 
in cash to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION by the 
CORPORATION within ten (10) days after completion 
of such assignment if assignment occurs after the 
Termination Date. In order to facilitate the transfer of 
any Acquired Association Claim or Related Claim, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 


376 


STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, where appro- 
priate, shall, at the CORPORATION’s request: 

(1) Execute and deliver such instruments of 
assignment or transfer and make endorsements in such 
form and manner, and at such times, as the CORPO- 
RATION requires; 

(2) Execute and deliver all other instruments that 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE possess and 
the CORPORATION deems necessary to complete 
such assignment or transfer; and 

(3) Deliver to the CORPORATION all documents 
and manner materials in their possession or control, 
and use their best efforts to obtain any further 
information that the CORPORATION deems neces- 
sary to prosecute effectively any Acquired Association 
Claim or Related Claim. 

(c) If the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION has re- 
covered on an Acquired Association Claim, the Net 
Proceeds Received upon the Liquidation of such Claim, 
in excess of the value, if any, of such Claim reflected 
on the books and records of the ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION on or prior to the Effective Date, as 
adjusted by the Initial Audit and as thereafter 
adjusted or determined in accordance with the 
accounting principles required ‘by this Agreement, 
shall be credited to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to § 3(c)(10) of this Agreement. Recoveries 
on Related Claims by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall be similarly credited, as provided in § 7(d) 
of this Agreement. 

(d) If the CORPORATION has recovered on an 
Acquired Association Claim or Related Claim that has 
been assigned to the CORPORATION, the Net 
Proceeds Received upon the Liquidation of such Claim 
shall be retained by the CORPORATION to the 


377 


extent of the amount, if any, paid by the CORPORA- 
TION for the assignment of such claims and to the 
extent of any other contributions made by the 
CORPORATION pursuant to this Agreement. 

(e) Any recoveries by the CORPORATION on 
Acquired Association Claims or Related Claims ex- 
ceeding the aggregate amount to be retained by the 
CORPORATION pursuant to § 8(d) of this Agreement 
shall be debited to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to § 3(a)(8) of this Agreement. 

(f) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE shall 
promptly notify the CORPORATION of any evidence 
that they discover indicating a basis for an Acquired 
Association Claim or Related Claim, and covenant to 
use their best efforts, cooperate fully and take all such 
actions as are necessary to assist the CORPORATION 
in the pursuit of such Claims assigned to the 
CORPORATION pursuant to this Agreement. 

Section 9. Duplicate Payments. Any cost or expense 
for which the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE 
has been reimbursed under any section of this 
Agreement, or any recovery which has been paid over 
to or retained by the CORPORATION under any 
section of this Agreement, shall not also be reimbursed 
to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE or 
paid over to or retained by the CORPORATION, 
under any other section of this Agreement, even 
though such cost, expense, or recovery may be 
described in whole or in part in two or more sections 
of this Agreement. 

Section 10. Non-Reimbursatle Expenses. The AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION shall not seek reimburse- 
ment from the CORPORATION for expenses incurred 


378 


in the administration of this Agreement. For purposes 
of this § 10, such expenses shall include, but shall not 
be limited to, compensation paid to employees or 
agents of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION for 
services performed in connection with the preparation 
of reports and supporting documentation required to 
be filed with the CORPORATION under § 11 of this 
Agreement. 

Section 11. Reports, Records. In the event of the 
failure of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE, 
where appropriate, to comply with any of the following 
requirements, the CORPORATION may delay pay- 
ment of a related charge for reimbursement under this 
Agreement until, in the CORPORATION’s reasonable 
judgment, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION meets 
such requirement. 

(a) Quarterly Reports. Within thirty (30) days 
following the end of each Quarter, the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall furnish a report or reports to 
the CORPORATION, in a format approved by the 
CORPORATION and supported by such data as, in 
the CORPORATION’s judgment, may be necessary 
for verification, which report or reports shall include: 

(1) an accounting of all Debits and Credits to the 
Special Reserve Account; 

(2) itemization of payments made by and due from 
the CORPORATION, which, with respect to charges 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE for 
reimbursement of attorneys’ and accountants’ fees 
pursuant to § 7 of this Agreement, shall be supported 
by the following documentation and by such other 
documentation as the CORPORATION may request: 

(A) Copies of itemized statements of charges 
received by the \CQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 


379 


ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE 
from each law firm and accounting firm, specifying 
with respect to each Claim, undisclosed liability, cause 
of action challenging the Acquisition or any Merger, or 
other matter for which reimbursement is sought: 

(i) the nature and resulting work product of 
each service performed by each attorney and 
accountant; 

(ii) the identify of the person who performed 
each service; 

(iii) the date on which 
iia each service was 

p (iv) the hourly rate charged for each service; 
an 

_ (v) the total number of hours billed such 
services; and 
‘ wed — ~P any letters, contracts, or other 

ocumen t set forth the ment between 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION. the ACQUIRER 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE and such law 
firms and accounting firms concerning the basis on 
which fees and other compensation due such attorneys 
and accountants from the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE are to be computed. 

(3) A statement of payments made by or due from 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION under this 
Agreement. , 

(4) Status reports on all current and potential 
claims and iiabilities, with litigation evaluation reports 
current within thirty (30) days, that may result in a 
Debit or Credit to the Special Reserve Account, other 
than litigation in connection with an uncontested 
Foreclosure action. 


(b) Reports on Covered Assets. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall submit to the CORPORATION 


380 


reports concerning Covered Assets that fall within the 
categories described below. Such reports shall be in a 
form mutually satisfactory to the CORPORATION 
and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and shall be 
submitted within thirty (30) days of the end of each 
Quarter during the term of this Agreement, unless for 
good cause the CORPORATION extends the time for 
submission of any report: 

(1) loans, delinquent more than ninety (90) days 
or loans to be foreclosed, showing date of commence- 
ment of foreclosure; 

(2) the anticipated date of the Foreclosure sale for 
all loans on which Foreclose has commenced; and 

(3) Real Estate Owned, showing the anticipated 
disposition of such, including listing prices and sales 
methods. 

(c) Final Accounting. Within ninety (90) days after 
the date this Agreement terminates, or such longer 
time as the CORPORATION may permit, the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE shall render to 
the CORPORATION a final accounting, and shall 
include such information and be in such form as the 
CORPORATION shall request. 

(d) Access to Books and Records. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE shall make available to the 
CORPORATION all books, papers, records, and 
information of any kind relating to any or all matters 
subject to the provisions of this Agreement, including 
any such materials or information in the possession of 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE or any of their 
Affiliates, subsidiaries, service corporations, agents, or 
counsel. . 

(e) Audits and Examinations. The CORPORA- 
TION may audit or examine the ACQUIRING 


381 


ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN, 
AMERICAN LIFE or any of their Affiliates, service 
corporations, or subsidiaries, with respect to transac- 
tions affecting the implementation of this Agreement 
at any time upon reasonable notice. Such audits shall 
be conducted by the CORPORATION at its own 
expense but, it requested by the CORPORATION, 
with the assistance of the personnel of any of the 
parties hereto whose salaries and expenses shall be 
paid by the appropriate carry without reimbursement 
from the CORPORATION. 

(f) Reports Concerning Prosecution of Claims by 
Court Action and Settlement of Claims and 
Liabilities. 

(1) In requesting the CORPORATION’s written 
consent, pursuant to § 12(a) of this Agreement, to 
engage attorneys or accountants the cost of whose 
services may be debited to the Special Reserve 
Account, or otherwise to incur expenses which may be 
debited to the Special Reserve Account under § 3(a)(3) 
of this Agreement in connection with the pursuit of a 
Related Claim, which may be chargeable to the 
CORPORATION in connection with the pursuit of 
Acquired Association Claims, the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or 
AMERICAN LIFE, where appropriate, promptly 
upon determining the necessarily to engage such 
attorneys or accountants or otherwise to incur such 
expenses, shall obtain and submit to the CORPORA- 
TION the following information, in a form satisfactory 
to the CORPORATION, supported by the supplemen- 
tary documentation as in the opinion of the CORPO- 
RATION is necessary to enable the CORPORATION 
to give an informed consent to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s, the ACQUIRER’s, STATESMAN’s 
or AMERICAN LIFE’s engaging such attorneys or 


382 


accountants or otherwise incurring such expenses, 
which information shall include, but shall not be 
limited to, the following: 

(A) The parties to the dispute and the relation- 
ships among them; 

(B) The nature of the dispute and the basic 
facts concerning the dispute; and 

(C) A description of the specific actions taken 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the AC- 
QUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE in 
pursuit of such Claim prior to determining the need to 
engage attorneys or accountants or otherwise to incur 
expenses in pursuit of such Claim. 

(2) In requesting the CORPORATION’s written 
consent, pursuant to § 12(b) of this Agreement, to 
prosecute any Related Claim or Acquired Association 
Claim by court action, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, were appropriate, promptly upon deter- 
mining the necessity for such court action, shall obtain 
and submit to the CORPORATION an opinion 
prepared by the attorney handling such Claim in a 
form satisfactory to the CORPORATION and its 
counsel, supported by such supplementary documenta- 
tion as in the opinion of counsel to the CORPORA- 
TION is necessary to enable the CORPORATION to 
give an informed consent to the prosecution of such 
Claim by court action, which opinion shall include, but 
shall not be limited to the following: 

(A) The parties to the dispute and the relation- 
ships among them; 

(B) The nature of the dispute and the basic 
facts concerning the dispute; 

(C) A discussion of the causes of action raised 
by the dispute and the defenses to such causes of 
action, including citations to relevant statutes and 


383 


significant case law, and the attorney’s evaluation of 
the merits of such causes of action and defenses; and 

(D) The attorney’s estimate of the time in- 
volved in prosecuting the Claim by court action, and 
the foreseeable costs and expenses, including at- 
torneys’ fees, which will be incurred in prosecuting the 
Claim by court action. 

(3) In requesting the CORPORATION’s written 
consent, pursuant to § 12(b\(5) of this Agreement, to 
enter into a binding commitment with respect to the 
satisfaction, settlement, or compromise of any Claim, 
liability or challenge referred to in § 12(b)(5\C) and 
(D) of this Agreement, the aCQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, where appropriate, promptly upon deter- 
mining that the satisfaction, settlement, or compromise 
is appropriate, shall obtain and submit in the CORPO- 
RATION an opinion prepared by the attorney hand- 
ling any such Claim, liability, or challenge, in a form 
satisfactory in the CORPORATION and its counsel, 
supported by such supplementary documentation as in 
the opinion of counsel to the CORPORATION is 
necessary to enable the CORPORATION to give an 
informed consent to such satisfaction, settlement, or 
compromise of such Claim, liability, or challenge, which 
opinion and supporting documentation shall include, 
but shall not be limited to, the following: 

(A) The information required by subparagraphs 
(2A)-(D) of this § 11(f); 

(B) Information concerning the status of litiga- 
tion regarding the Claim, liability, or challenge if 
litigation has been instituted, and, at the request of 
the CORPORATION, copies of all pleadings or other 
documents which have been filed in connection with 
such litigation; and 

(C) The precise terms of the satisfaction, settle- 
ment, or compromise and the attorney’s basis for 


ee Ee SS ee eee, tone re’ 


384 


recommending the proposed satisfaction, settlement, or 
compromise of such Claim, liability or challenge. 

(g) Reports on Net Tax Benefits. Unless waived by 
the CORPORATION, in each year the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall submit a report to the CORPO- 
RATION, prepared by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION independent auditors and in a form and at a 
level of detail satisfactory to the CORPORATION, 
showing the total Tax Benefit Items available to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the total Tax Benefit 
Items, if any, utilized in such year, and the calculation 
of the Net Tax Benefits, if any, for such year. Such 
report shall be due on the date Net Tax Benefits, if 
any, are required to be credited to the Special Reserve 
Account or paid to the CORPORATION pursuant to 
§ 3(c(11) of this Agreement. 

(h) Other Reports. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall provide upon demand by the CORPORA- 
TION such other reports concerning the status and 
condition of any asset or liabilities of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION as the CORPORATION reasonably 
may require. 

Section 12. Covenants of STATESMAN, AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, the ACQUIRER and the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
covenants as follows: ' 

(a) Administration of Assets and Liabilities. The 
failure of STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE, the 
ACQUIRER or the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to 
comply with any of the covenants in this § 12(a) with 
respect to any asset or liability acquired or assumed 
from the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS, or with 
respect to any Related Claim or Acquired Association 
Claim, shall result in the disallowance of Debits to the 
Special Reserve Account that are related to such 
failure to comply or the adjustment of a contribution 


or payment by the CORPORATION that i lated 
such failure to comply. sry ‘ 


from the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS, employing 
the standard or prudent business practice used by the 


. > a ring 

liabilities and Claims of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION not obtained from the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TIONS. Furthermore, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall use its best efforts in accordance with the 


LIFE, the ACQUIRER, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 

TION and the CORPORATION™ re 
(2) Pursuit of Claims. 

(A) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 


and Related Claims which accrue to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION as successor in interest to the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS or arise otherwise 
including, but not limited to, claims under the 
appropriate fidelity bond(s) or insurance policy or 
policies of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION or the 
ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS, whether discovered 
wes ag the Effective Date. 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, t 

ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN ue 
—— appropriate, “yee the CORPORATION 

> ~pursuing any Claim or Acquired 
Association Claim which could result in a Debit or 


386 


Credit to the Special Reserve Account. The ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATES- 
MAN and AMERICAN LIFE, \where appropriate, 
agree institute any legal action with respect to a 
Related Claim or Acquired Association Claim re- 
quested by the CORPORATION in connection with 
this Agreement. If the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, 
the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN 
LIFE objects to any such request, it shall provide its 
reasons in writing to the CORPORATION. If, after 
receipt of such statement, the CORPORATION nev- 
ertheless determines that a reasonable basis exists for 
instituting such legal action, then the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and 
AMERICAN LIFE shall institute such action. The 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE, where appro- 
priate, will be indemnified by the CORPORATION for 
all losses resulting from, and reasonable costs and 
expenses of pursuing, the action excepting only losses 
arising from and to the extent attributable to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s, the ACQUIRER’s, 
STATESMAN’s or AMERICAN LIFE’s negligence or 
lack of the diligence in pursuing or prosecuting the 
action. 

(b) Conduct of Litigation: With respect to all 
facilities, Claim, and challenges that could result in or 
effect a Debit or Credit to the Special Reserve 
Account (“Matter”), the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, as appropriate, shall: 

(1) Keep the CORPORATION fully informed of 
the status of such Matters by timely filing current 
reports pursuant § 11 of this Agreement; 

(2) Observe the right of the CORPORATION to 
monitor and direct the defense or prosecution of such 


387 

Matters, including the right to direct the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION to file a petition to 

action to the appropriate court or to repeal any 
determination of any court; provided that the CORPO- 
RATION shall bear the cost of removal or appeal and 
of monitoring and directing such defense or 
prosecution; 

(3) Authorize the CORPORATION, upon the 
CORPORATION’s election and at the CORPORA- 
TION’s expense and with its own attorneys, to defend 
or to prosecute in the name of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN, 
AMERICAN LIFE or the CORPORATION, as the 
case may be, any such Matter, and cooperate fully with 
the CORPORATION in such defense or prosecution, 
including, not limited to, furnishing to the CORPORA- 
TION all applicable books, records, and other informa- 
tion in the possession of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER or any of their Affiliates, 
service corporations, or subsidiaries; 

(4) At the request of the CORPORATION, assign 
to the CORPORATION, and subrogate the CORPO- 
RATION to, any right, title, or interest of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE in any such 
Claim, liability, challenge, any related defense (includ- 
ing counterclaim and settle), and any proceeds, and, in 
the event of such assignment, cooperate fully with the 
CORPORATION in the defense or prosecution of any 
such Claim, liability, or challenge, including, but not 
limited to, furnishing to the CORPORATION all 
books, records, and other information that are in the 
possession of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN, AMERICAN LIFE or 
any of other Affiliates, subsidiaries, service corpora- 
tions, agents or counsel; provided, that if a Claim had a 


388 


value on the books and records of any ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATION immediately prior to the Effective 
Date, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall Debit 
such value, and adjusted or determined in accordance 
with the accounting principles required by this 
Agreement, to the Special Reserve Account; and 

(5) By submission of a written request on a form 
pre-approved by the CORPORATION, obtain the 
CORPORATION’s written consent before: 

(A) engaging attorneys or accountants to pur- 
sue a Related Claim or Acquired Association Claim, 
the cost to those services may be chargeable to the 
CORPORATION pursuant to §7 or §8 of this 
Agreement, or otherwise incurring expenses in connec- 
tion with a Related Claim or Acquired Association 
Claim maybe chargeable to the CORPORATION 
pursuant to § 7 or §8 of this Agreement; 

(B) prosecuting any Related Claim or Acquired 
Association Claim by court action; 

(C) entering into any binding commitment with 
respect to the satisfaction, settlement, or compromise 
of any Related Claim, Acquired Association Claim or 
challenge to the Acquisition or any Merger described 
in § 7(c); or 

(D) entering into any binding commitment with 
respect to the satisfaction, settlement, or compromise 
of any Claim for which the CORPORATION is 
obligated to indemnify the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, other than a Related Claim, Acquired 
Association Claim, or a challenge to the Acquisition or 
any Merger, unless such satisfaction, settlement, or 
compromise would involve payment by the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATES- 
MAN or AMERICAN LIFE of an aggregate amount 
not in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars 


389 


($25,000.00), or is entered into pursuant to an 
adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction 
which, with the permission of the CORPORATION, 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE has not 
appealed. 

(c) Covered Asset Restrictions. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall not, without the CORPORA- 
TION’s written consent (which shall be granted or 
denied within a reasonable period of time following 
receipt of a request for such consent) unless the 
CORPORATION waives such requirement in writing: 

(1) lease any Covered Asset for a fixed term of 
more than one year; 

(2) engage the services of any consultant, at- 
torney, accountant, agent, or other professional in 
connection with the management or administration of 
any Covered Asset the cost of whose services may be 
debited to the Special Reserve Account pursuant to 
§ 3(a); and 

(3) extend, modify, or sell at a loss any loan or 
contract that is a Covered Asset, or extend or modify 
any loan or contract that could become a Covered 
Asset and result in a Debit to the Special Reserve 
Account; provided that, at the direction of the 
pate the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
Shall sell any such loan or contract; provided that the 
CORPORATION’s consent shall not be required if 
such Covered Asset is a Participation Interest and if 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION used its best 
efforts to oppose any such action identified in 
subsections (1), (2), or (3) above. 

(d) Covered Asset Requirements. The ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION shall, unless the CORPORATION 
waives any such requirement in writing: 


390 


(1) submit to the CORPORATION upon request 
an independent appraisal, acceptable to the CORPO- 
RATION, of any Covered Asset; 

(2) promptly institute Foreclosure proceedings, as 
provided in § 14 of this Agreement, with respect to 
any loan that is a Covered Asset (other than a 
Participation Interest), unless the CORPORATION 
has given written approval for an alternative action; 

(3) proceed promptly, within those procedures 
provided for in § 14 and in accordance with prudent 
business practice, with the Liquidation of any Real 
Estate Owned that is a Covered Asset (other than a 
Participation Interest); 

(4) retain all written offers to purchase any 
Covered Asset pending inspection by the CORPORA- 
TION and not dispose of any such offer without the 
CORPORATION’s prior written approval; 

(5) use its best efforts, in accordance with the 
management standard described in § 12(a)(1) of this 
Agreement, to cause each parcel of Real Estate 
Owned, each Covered Asset or the property securing 
each Covered Asset, to be insured against loss or 
damage by fire (extended coverage), flood and any 
other such hazards that may normally be encountered 
with respect to such property and, to the extent 
applicable, in accordance with § 571.4 of the Insurance 
Regulations, or any successor regulation. Where 
appropriate, all insurance contracts shall contain the 
standard mortgage loss payable clause in favor of the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION; and 

(6) finance the disposition of Real Estate Owned 
for a Covered Asset in accordance with the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION’s normal underwriting standards, 
and without assistance from the CORPORATION 
except as may otherwise by provided pursuant to 
§ [illegible)(a) of this Agreement. 


391 


(7) with respect to any loan that is a Covered 
Asset, use its best efforts, in accordance with the 
management standard described in § 12(a)(1) of this 
Agreement, to undertake any and all actions directed 
by the CORPORATION to collect on such debt, 
including the institution and prosecution of legal action 
against the borrower; provided that 

(A) in the event that the CORPORATION 
directs the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to institute 
and prosecute legal action against the borrower, any 
Claim of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION arising in 
connection with such action shall be seemed to be a 
Related Claim under this Agreement and the CORPO- 
RATION shall indemnify the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION with respect to the pursuit of such Related 
Claim in accordance with § 7 of this Agreement; 

(B) any sums recovered from a Related Claim 
under this § 12(d)(7) shall be credited to the Special 
Reserve Account pursuant to § 3(c)(10) of this Agree- 
ment; and 

(C) any payment due from the CORPORA- 
TION to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION under this 
§ 12(d)(7) shall be debited to the Special Reserve 
Account pursuant to § 3(a)(3) of this Agreement and 
deemed to be a contribution under this Agreement. 

(e) Disclosure of Agreement. Except as otherwise 
required by law or generally accepted accounting 
principles, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE 
shall not, without the prior consent of the CORPORA- 
TION, disclose the terms of this Agreement, or the 
obligation of the CORPORATION to indemnify the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE to any person, 
other than its employees or agents. 


SS a 


392 


(f) Tax Benefits. The ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERI- 
CAN LIFE shall treat all Tax Benefit Items received 
from the CORPORATION on tax returns in such a 
manner as to maximize Net Tax Benefits that may 
result in a credit to the Special Reserve Account 
pursuant to § 3(c)(7), payment to the CORPORA- 
TION, or reduction in the loss incurred by the 
CORPORATION, provided that this covenant shall not 
be interested as requiring the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or 
AMERICAN LIFE (i) to take any return position that 
(A) would be inconsistent with a published position of 
the Internal Revenue Service, unless the CORPORA- 
TION, after receipt for a request from the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, STATES- 
MAN or AMERICAN LIFE, provides an opinion of 
independent counsel to the effect that such return 
position has a substantial likelihood of success, or (B) 
would increase a tax liability, or (ii) to make an 
election to file a separate return to satisfy this 
covenant. In the event that any such return position 
should be challenged by the Internal Revenue Service, 
the taxpayer shall (with the prior consent and at the 
expense of the CORPORATION, including reasonable 
attorneys’ fees) take such steps as may reasonably be 
necessary to contest such challenge whether by way of 
contesting a proposed deficiency or by way of a refund 
claim), provided that the taxpayer may cease to defend 
such return position if it determines in good faith after 
prior consultation with the CORPORATION that 
further defense of such return position would ad- 
versely affect its federal income tax posture viewed as 
a whole. The CORPORATION shall cooperate with 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in all reasonable 
ways to assist the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in 


393 


establishing its entitlement to the Net Tax Benefits, 
including in connection with any possible audit by the 
Internal Revenue Service with respect thereto, and 
shall make such supporting documentation, not priv- 
ileged or confidential, available to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION as the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
may reasonably request. The covenants in this § 12(f) 
shall survive the Termination Date. 

Section 13. Sale and Repair of Covered Assets. 

(a) Unless otherwise permitted by the CORPORA- 
TION, compliance with the terms of this section shall 
be a condition precedent to the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION’s right to Debit to the Special Reserve 
Account, pursuant to §3 of this Agreement, the 
amount of any loss on the Covered Asset, or to add to 
the Book Value of any Real Estate Owned that is a 
Covered Asset, any expenditure to repair, rehabilitate, 
or complete Real Estate Owned that is a Covered 
Asset, or portion thereof, that exceeds the applicable 
limitation of § 13(e) of this Agreement; provided that 
the terms of this section shall not apply to Participa- 
tion Interests. 

(b) As soon as practicable and not less than forty- 
five (45) days prior to the offering for sale of Real 
Estate Owned that is a Covered Asset as of the Effec- 
tive Date, and otherwise within forty-five (45) days 
after the completion of a Foreclosure, including any 
applicable redemption period, of a loan that constitutes 
a Covered Asset and results in the acquisition of Real 
Estate Owned, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
shall provide to the CORPORATION a schedule of 
each such Covered Asset, setting forth a description of 
the Covered Asset, its Book Value, its estimated 
market value, the recommended listing sales price, the 
minimum sales price, the proposed terms of sale, and 
the estimated selling costs, and, unless waived by the 


394 


CORPORATION, an appraisal acceptable to the 
CORPORATION of each such Covered Asset. 

(c) Within thirty (80) days after receipt of a 
schedule and an appraisal required by § 13(b), the 
CORPORATION shall: 

(1) approve the proposed minimum sales price 
and the terms of sale for each Covered Asset, which 
may then be sold at less than such approved minimum 
sales price, upon the approved sales terms, without 
further notice to the CORPORATION; or 

(2) disapprove the proposed minimum sales price 
of the terms of sale for any Covered Asset and 
establish a minimum sales price, which shall in no 
event be more than ninety (90%) percent of the value 
established by the appraisal, plus one hundred (100%) 
percent of the estimated selling costs, and the terms 
of sale. Thereafter, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
may sell such asset, at not less than the approved 
price and upon the approved sales terms, without 
further notice to the CORPORATION; 

(3) purchase such Covered Asset at the lesser of 
Book Value, ninety (90%) percent of the value 
established by the appraisal, and the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s proposed minimum sales price 
(minus estimated selling costs). Purchases by the 
CORPORATION pursuant to this § 13 shall be treated 
as purchases by third parties for the purposes of 
§§ 3(a)(1) and 3(c)(1) of this Agreement. The amount 
payable by the CORPORATION in connection with 
such a purchase shall be debited to the Special 
Reserve Account as of the purchase date if the 
purchase occurs prior to the Termination Date, and 
shall be paid to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION by 
the CORPORATION in immediately available funds 
no later than ten (10) days following conveyance to the 
CORPORATION of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s rights, title, and interest in such Covered 


395 


— if the purchase occurs after the Termination 
ate. 

(d) The CORPORATION shall evaluate the market- 
ing efforts made by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, all written offers to purchase, current condi- 
tion, and all other pertinent factors with respect to 
any Covered Asset on which a sales contract has not 
been accepted within ninety (90) days from the date 
on which the CORPORATION approved its sales 
price. The CORPORATION thereafter shall advise 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION in writing concern- 
ing a revised sales price or additional marketing 
efforts. 

(e) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall not: 


(1) expend for the repair, rehabilitation, or 
completion of any Real Estate Owned that is a 
Covered Asset an amqunt win excess of Ten 
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for a residential 
property, or in excess of Five Thousand Dollars 
($5,000.00) per family unit plus Twenty Thousand 
Dollars ($20,000.00) for common areas, up to a 
maximum of Forty Thousand Dollars ($40,000.00) 
for a multi-family building, or in excess of 
Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) for a 
commercial property; or 

(2) expend any sum for the repair, rehabilita- 
tion, or completion of any Covered Asset thet is 
not Real Estate Owned, 


without the prior written consent of the CORPORA- 
TION, unless the CORPORATION expressly waives 
this requirement in writing or unless an emergency 
exists, such as a deficiency of the asset that violates a 


a”  ——-_ .- = 6 . oe \ ~ £ 
ills Pag at TO nt Se we eee ne ee 


396 


provision of the sanitary, health, building, or notice 
code of the municipality, county, or state in which the 
asset is located or that affects its habitability, in 
which case the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION may, 
without the CORPORATION’s prior consent, expend 
such sums as may be necessary to correct or prevent 
such emergency. 

(f) With respect to any Real Estate Owned that is a 
Covered Asset and for which the estimated costs of 
repair, rehabilitation, or completion exceed the limita- 
tion of § 13 (e), the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION 
agrees to prepare a schedule showing Book Value, 
estimated market value as is, estimated cost to cure, 
estimated time for completion, and estimated market 
value as repaired or completed. Schedules for all such 
real estate shall be submitted within one hundred 
eighty (180) days from the Effective Date and 
thereafter as requested by the CORPORATION. 
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such a schedule, 
the CORPORATION will advise the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION concerning the action it shall take 
with respect to each asset that appears on the 
schedule. 

(g) The CORPORATION shall have the right at 
any time to interview real estate agents, brokers, and 
others to whom listings have been given pursuant to 
this section. 

(h) The CORPORATION, after discussion with the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, shall have the right to 
alter the procedures required by this § 13, including 
changing the dollar limits of 13(e), provided that any 
such change does not increase the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION’s duties, obligations, or expense of 
administration under this Agreement. The ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION and the CORPORATION agree 


397 


to cooperate to facilitate any possible simplification of 
procedures under this § 13. : me 


Section 14. Foreclosures. 

(a) Prior to the Foreclosure of any instrument 
securing a loan that is or may become a Covered 
Asset (other than a participation Interest), the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall, upon the COR- 
PORATION’s request, inspect and evaluate or ap- 
praise the security property to determine its recover- 
able value, taking into consideration all circumstances 
affecting marketability of title, including the existence 
of any mechanic’s or materialman’s liens or other 
encumbrances on the security property. 

(1) Except as provided in § 14(a)(2) below, if, the 
opinion of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
security property has recoverable value and the Book 
Value of the related covered Asset is less than One 
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), the AC- 
7 ee shall bid as follows: 

if there are no other bidders, the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION may bid any amount which, ‘ 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s opinion, will 
protect its interests and those of the CORPORA- 
TION and is in accordance with the management 
standard described in § 12(a)(1) of this Agreement. In 
no event, however, shall the amount of the bid be in 
excess of the principal amount to the indebtedness 
secured by such property immediately before fore- 
closure, plus: 
(i) all costs and expenses of foreclosure: 
rind ee, ma — ry hazard insurance premiums 
res 0 real property securi 
as of the date of “omer ate : ee, 
ne (iii) any accrued and unpaid interest on the 
principal amount of the indebtedness: and 


eT eee | -_ 


See: ee i A. ie ie i 
° ’ = 


398 


(iv) any existing encumbrances such as 

having or sewage liens. 
(B) If there are other bidders, the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION may bid an amount not in 
excess of the lesser of appraised value and the 
amount provided in (A) above, provided that, in the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s opinion, such bid will 
protect its interests and those of the 

CORPORATION. 

(2) If the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION proposes 
to foreclose on a security property which has a 
recoverable value on the Book Value of the related 
Covered Asset is One Hundred Thousand Dollars 
($100,000.00) or more, it shall so notify the CORPO- 
RATION in writing within thirty (30) days of 
commencing foreclosure and state the Book Value of 
the Covered Asset and all Interest due thereon, the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s estimate of the mar- 
ket value of the property securing such Covered 
Asset and the amount of the bid proposed for such 
sale (“first notice”). The ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION shall notify the CORPORATION of the 
foreclosure sale date when it is determined. Within 
thirty (30) days of receipt of the first notice, the 
CORPORATION shall approve the proposed bid; or 
advise the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION of any 
other amount it should bid at such sale; or instruct 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION to order an inde- 
pendent appraisal of such security property by an 
appraiser acceptable to the CORPORATION, in 
which case the CORPORATION shall notify the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, within ten (10) days 
after receipt of an appraisal acceptable to the 


= Se a a 


CORPORATION, of the amount to be bid at the 
foreclosure sale. 

(b) The ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall advise 
the CORPORATION monthly of all completed Fore- 
closures subject to 12(a), citing the Book Value, 
appraised value, and the amount of the successful bid 
in each case. In addition, if the successful bid, 
whether by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, or 
another party, results in a deficiency, the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall advise the CORPORA- 
TION concerning the likelihood of securing a judg- 
ment against the defaulting mortgagor. 

(c) A deed in lieu of Foreclosure or any equivalent 
instrument may not be obtained and no consideration 
shall be paid to the debtor under such deed without 
the written consent of the CORPORATION. 

(d) In the case of any instrument securing a 
nonmortgage loan that is or may become a Covered 
Asset, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall follow 
up on such procedures and take such actions as the 
CORPORATION may request. 

(e) Unless otherwise permitted by the CORPORA- 
TION, compliance with the provisions of this section 
by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall be a 
condition precedent to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION’s right to Debit the Special Reserve Account 
with respect to any loss resulting from a Foreclosure. 

Section 15. CORPORATION’s Right to Purchase 
Covered Assets. 

(a) At any time during the term of this Agreement 
and until the later of ninety (90) days after the 
Termination Date, or termination of the CORPORA- 
TION’s obligation to provide assistance pursuant to 
$19 of this Agreement, the CORPORATION shall 


400 


have the right to purchase without recourse against 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION any or all Covered 
Assets that have not been liquidated prior to the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION’s receipt of the COR- 
PORATION’s notice that it shall exercise its right to 
purchase, at a purchase rice as stated in § 13(c)(3) of 
this agreement. Purchases by the CORPORATION 
pursuant to this § 15 shall be treated as purchases by 
third parties for the purposes of §§ 3(a)(1) and 3(¢)(1) 
of this Agreement. 

(b) The purchase price shall be debited to the 
Special Reserve Account as of the purchase date if 
the purchase occurs prior to the termination of this 
Agreement, or shall be paid to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION by the CORPORATION in imme- 
diately available funds within ten (10) days following 
conveyance to the CORPORATION of the ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION’s right, title, and interest in 
such asset if the purchase occurs after the termina- 
tion of this Agreement. The excess, if any, of the 
purchase state over the fair market value of such 
asset shall be deemed to be a contribution by the 
CORPORATION as provided in §6 of this 
Agreement. 

(c) In order to facilitate such sale to the CORPO- 
RATION, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall, at 
the CORPORATION’s request: | 

(1) Provide the CORPORATION with such 
information as the CORPORATION deems necessary 
regarding the nature or condition of the Covered 
Asset and documenting the Book Value of such 
Covered Asset; 

(2) Execute and deliver such instruments of sale, 
grant, conveyance, or transfer, and make endorse- 


401 


ments in such term and manner and at such time as 
the CORPORATION shall require; and 

(3) Execute and deliver all such other instru- 
ments together with all insurance policies, title 
policies, and title certificates which the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION possesses and are necessary or 
requisite, in the opinion of the CORPORATION, to 
complete such sale, grant, conveyance, or transfer. 

(d) The Net Proceeds Received by the CORPORA- 
TION as a result of Liquidation of any Covered Asset 
purchased pursuant to 13 or 15 of this Agreement in 
excess of the purchase price and by the CORPORA- 
TION shall be retained by the CORPORATION to 
the extent it has made contributions under this 
Agreement that have not been repaid, and the 
remainder, if any, shall be paid to the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. 

Section 16. Sale of Assets of the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. In the event of a Sale (as defined 
below), within seven (7) years following the Effective 
Date, by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION of any of 
its assets, or any of the capital stock of any 
subsidiary or Affiliate of the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION formed to conduct any of the operations, or 
hold any of the assets, of the ACQUIRING ASSO- 
CIATION, the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION shall 
pay promptly to the CORPORATION a percentage to 
be agreed upon at such time, but in no event greater 
than fifty percent (50%), of the net proceeds of such 
Sale; provided that no such sale shall be consummated 
without the prior written approval of the CORPORA- 
TION; and provided further that in determining the 
amount of such net proceeds, an appropriate amount 
thereof (based upon the ratio of the assets being sold 
to the total assets of the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 


OES ES ELLE Oe a aT ee 


402 


TION) shall be allocated as a return of the invest- 
ment of the ACQU'TRER in the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION. For the purposes of this § 16, the 
term “Sale” shall mean any and all sales consum- 
mated or agreed to during any 90 day period having 
an aggregate sales price of $20 million. If a Sale shall 
occur within five (5) years following the Effective 
Date without the approval of the CORPORATION, 
which approval may be granted or withhold at the 
sole discretion of the CORPORATION, notwithstand- 
ing the provisions of § 19 of this Agreement, this 
Agreement and all of the CORPORATION’s obliga- 
tions under it shall terminate immediately after the 
consummation of the sale. Notwithstanding anything 
herein to the contrary, the term “Sale” shall not 
include the transfer to an Affiliate of the AC- 
QUIRER the stock or any or all of the assets and 
liabilities of Federated Financial, Combined Mortgage 
Corporation, Homestead Mortgage Corporation or 
Perpetual Financial Corporation. 

Section 17. Accounting Principles. Except as 
otherwise provided, any computations made for 
purposes of this Agreement shall be governed by 
GAAP, except that where such principles conflict 
with the terms of the Agreement, applicable regula- 
tions in the Bank Board or the CORPORATION, or 
any resolution or action in the Bank Board approving 
or relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or to this 
Agreement, then this Agreement, such regulations, or 
such resolution or action shall govern. In the case of 
any ambiguity in the interpretation or construction of 
any provision of this Agreement, such ambiguity shall 
be resolved in a manner consistent with such 
regulations and the Bank Board’s resolution or action 


403 


relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or of this 
Agreement. If there is a conflict between such 
regulations and the Bank Board’s resolution or action 
relating to the Acquisition, the Mergers or to this 
Agreement, the Bank Board’s Resolution or action 
shall govern. For purposes of this section, the 
accounting principles and governing regulations shall 
be those in effect on the Effective Date, as 
subsequently changed, amended, clarified or inter- 
preted by the Bank Boad (as proposed, for example, 
at 52 Fed. Reg. 39112 et seq. (October 20, 1987)), its 
staff, or the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(“FASB”), or any successor organization of the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(“AICPA”). If there is a conflict between what is 
required by the FASB or the AICPA ‘and what is 
required by the Bank Board, the interpretation of the 
Bank Board shall govern. The valuation of real estate 
assets shall be in accordance with the Bank Board’s 
proposed regulations published on October 20, 1987 
(52 Fed. Reg. 39070) or as those regulations are 
finally adopted by the Bank Board, or any successor 
regulations then in effect. 

Section 18. Notices. 

(a) Any notice or other communication required or 
submitted under this Agreement, unless otherwise 
specifically provided for, shall be deemed given if sent 
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to a party at its 
address set forth below or at such other address as 
the party shall furnish in writing: 


If to the CORPORATION: 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 


404 


Attn: Director, Financial Assistance Division 
1700 G Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20552 


If to the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION: 


Statesman Bank for Savings, FSB 
Attn: Virgil Maxwell 

1400 Des Moines Building 

Des Moines, Iowa 50309 


If to the ACQUIRER: 


Statesman Savings Holding Corp. 
Attn: David J. Noble 

1400 Des Moines Building 

Des Moines, Iowa 50309 


If to STATESMAN: 


The Statesman Group, Ine. 
Attn: D.J. Noble, President 
1400 Des Moines Building 

Des Moines, Iowa 50309 


If to AMERICAN LIFE: 


American Life and Casualty Insurance Company 
Attn: Jon P. Newsome, President 

P.O. Box 2507 

Fargo, North Dakota 58108 


(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided for, if 
this Agreement requires that notice be given within a 
certain period of time, notice shall be deemed given 
as of the date of-writing. 


405 


Section 19. Termination of Agreement. 

(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in § 16 
elsewhere in this Agreement, this Agreement shall 
terminate five (5) years following the Effective Date 
or on such other date which the parties or their 
Successors agree in writing, provided that if a 
receiver is appointed for the purpose of liquidating 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, or if the AC- 
QUIRING ASSOCIATION ceases to be an associa- 
tion the accounts of which are insured by the 
CORPORATION, this Agreement and all of the 
CORPORATION’s obligations under it shall termi- 
nate upon the effective date of such occurrence. 

(b) Upon the Termination Date, the net Credit or 
Debit balance of the Special Reserve Account, if any, 
shall be paid or distributed in accordance with the 
provisions of § 6 of this agreement. 

(c) Nothwithstanding termination of this Agree- 
ment as prescribed in § 19a), the CORPORATION 
shall indemnify the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, 
the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN 
LIFE, as the case may be, for any loss arising from 
liabilities and Claims to the extent described in § 7 of 
this Agreement, including the reasonable costs and 
expenses of related litigation actually incurred and 
payable by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE 
and shall indemnify for the reasonable costs and 
expenses actually incurred and payable by the 
ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the ACQUIRER, 
STATESMAN or AMERICAN LIFE, where appro- 
priate, in pursuit of a Related Claim or Acquired 
Association Claim pursuant to §$7 or 8 of this 
Agreement, provided, that any such liability or Claim 


406 


is in litigation on the Termination Date; provided 
further, that the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE 
continue to observe after the Termination Date all 
covenants, agreements of cooperation, reporting re- 
quirements, and agreements for the use of best 
efforts set forth in this Agreement; provided further, 
that any recovery by the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, and ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, where appropriate, on any Related 
Claims or required Association Claims shall be paid 
over to the CORPORATION, subject to the limita- 
tions of §§ 7 and 8; and provided further, that the 
obligation of the CORPORATION stated in this 
§ 19%(c) shall terminate as stated in the proviso to 
§ 19a). 

(d) Notwithstanding § 19(a) of this Agreement, the 
CORPORATION shall consider and act upon, in 
accordance with this Agreement, all reports, applica- 
tions, requests, and other submissions that are 
subject to the CORPORATION’s approval, consent, 
or other action, and that are actually received by the 
CORPORATION prior to or on the Termination 
Date, and the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION, the 
ACQUIRER, STATESMAN and AMERICAN LIFE 
shall cooperate in the resolution of all such pending 
submissions as contemplated in this Agreement. The 
final accounting required by § 11(c) of this Agreement 
shall take account of all actions taken and determina- 
tions made by the CORPORATION pursuant to this 
§ 19d) and any related provisions of this Agreement. 

Section 20. Compliance with Law. The ACQUIR- 
ING ASSOCIATION shall, and shall cause its 
subsidiaries, Affiliates, and service corporations to, 


407 


comply in all material respects with all appli 
statutes, regulations, orders of, and Be 
imposed by the United States or any state, munici- 
pality, or other political subdivision, or by any agency 
of the foregoing public units, regarding the ownership 
of its properties and conduct of its business, includ- 
ing, without limitation, all applicable statutes, regula- 
tions, orders, and _ restrictions relating to equal 
employment opportunities, employment retirement 
income security, and environmental standards and 
controls; provided, however, that nothing contained in 
this § 20 shall require the ACQUIRING ASSOCIA- 
TION, or any of its subsidiaries, Affiliates, or service 
corporations, to comply with any law so long as the 
applicability thereof shall be contested in good faith 

Section 21. Rights and Forbearances. The rights, 
powers, and remedies given to the parties by this 
Agreement shall be in addition to all rights, powers 
and remedies given by any applicable statute or rule 
of law. Any forbearance, failure, or delay by either 
party in exercising or partially exercising any such 
right, power, or remedy shall not preclude its further 
exercise. 

Section 22. Governing Law. This Agreement and 
the parties’ rights and obligation under it shall be 
governed by the law of the State of Iowa, to the 
extent that Federal law does not control. Nothing in 
this Agreement shall require any unlawful action -or 
inaction by either party. 

Section 23. Entire Agreement, Severability. 


(a) This Agreement, together with any resolutions 


adopted by the Bank Board and documents delivered 
at closing which contain written interpretations or 
understandings of the parties, constitutes the entire 


ae eS ee 


408 


agreement between the parties and supersedes all 
prior agreements and understandings of the parties in 
connection with it, excepting only the Acquisition 
Agreement, the Merger Agreements and any resolu- 
tions or letters concerning the Acquisition, the 
Mergers or this Agreement issued by the Bank Board 
or the CORPORATION in connection with the 
approval of the Acquisition, the Mergers and this 
Agreement, provided, however, that in the event of 
any conflict, variance, or inconsistency between this 
Agreement and the Acquisition Agreement or the 
Merger Agreements, the provisions of this Agree- 
ment shall govern and be binding on all parties 
insofar as the rights, privileges, duties, obligations, 
and liabilities of the parties are concerned. 

(b) If any provision of this Agreement is invalid or 
reinforceable, all of the remaining provisions of this 
Agreement shall nevertheless remain in full force and 
effect and shall be binding upon all the parties hereto. 

Section 24. Counterparts, Modifications, Headings. 

(a) This Agreement may be executed in any 
number of counterparts, each of which shall be an 
original but all of which shall constitute one and the 
same instrument, and any party may execute this 
Agreement by signing any such counterpart. 

(b) No amendment or modification of this Agree- 
ment shall be binding unless executed in writing by 
the parties or their successors. 

(c) Section headings are not to be considered part 
of this Agreement, are solely for convenience of 
reference, and shall not affect the meaning or 
interpretation of this Agreement or any of its 
provisions. 


409 


Section 25. Successors and Assigns. All the terms 
and provisions of this Agreement shall be binding 
upon and inure to the benefit of the parties and their 
respective transferees, successors, and assigns, but 
this Agreement may not be assigned to any party nor 
may any rights or obligations under it be transferred 
or delegated to or vested in any other party, through 
merger, consolidation, or otherwise, without the prior 
written consent of the CORPORATION. 

Section 26. Sole Benefit. It is the intention of the 
parties that this Agreement, the assumption of 
obligations and statements of responsibilities under it 
and all of its conditions and provisions are for the sole 
benefit of the parties hereto and for the benefit of no 
other person. Nothing expressed or referred to in this 
Agreement is intended or shall be construed to give 
any person other than the parties hereto any legal or 
equitable right, remedy, or claim under, or in respect 
to, this Agreement or any of its provisions. 

Section 27. Continuing Cooperation. It is the 
purpose of this Agreement to provide a means by 
which the failure of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TIONS may be prevented, the depositors and other 
creditors of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIATIONS may 
be protected against losses, the thrift and financing 
needs of the communities in which the ACQUIRED 
ASSOCIATIONS’ offices are located may be served 
the ACQUIRING ASSOCIATION and the CORPO. 
RATION may receive the benefits and assume the 

risks contracted for, and expense to the CORPORA- 
TION may be reduced. The parties therefore agree 
that they shall in good faith, and with their best 
efforts, cooperate to carry out the purposes of this 
Agreement as described in this section. 


410 


Section 28. Brokerage Commission. The CORPO- 
RATION agrees to pay one half of any brokerage 
commission or finders fee that the ACQUIRING 
ASSOCIATION, whether in its own right or as 
successor to any of the ACQUIRED ASSOCIA- 
TION’s, the ACQUIRER, STATESMAN or AMERI- 
CAN LIFE, pays to an unaffiliated third party 
pursuant to a binding obligation incurred in connec- 
tion with the requisition or any of the Mergers, 
provided that the CORPORATION’s maximum lia- 
bility pursuant to this paragraph shall be $170,000.00, 
and provided further that the CORPORATION shall 
not be obligated under any other provision of this 
Agreement (including without limitation § 7 hereof) to 
reimburse or indemnify any party to this Agreement 
in connection with any such brokerage or finders fee. 
Any amount owed by the CORPORATION pursuant 
to this paragraph shall be debited to the Special 
Reserve Account. 


411 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have 


executed this Agreement by their dul i 
as oe ae y uly authorized 


FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN 


INSURANCE © Tl 
. - - ; Jig 
oo ay: ¢ 4 


a Ties . . . s 
set! " ‘ :tsr. 


STATESMAN BANK FOR SAVINGS. FSB 


y 


af, P 
Let thant 


STATESMAN SAVINGS HOLDING 


‘ . 
ye By: 


—— Its: 


CORP 
“gre: Jil anW- Lp 4a? By: \ noth 
west: fhe 77. SIT BG in Its: “-. :\: 


THE STATESMAN GROUP, INC. 


“ate: ie Lit? By: ! \ WE 4, 


“test: wth = f/ ST Mex Its: 


. a 


AMERICAN LIFE AND CASUALTY 


—™ 


IN CE COMPANY 
ae: s/,. [as s By: 
“test: Dayle Its: ;, 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


