TE IT OT LOT Te 
= 


np eTTr 


la 


APPENDIX 


We set forth below the relevant portions of the Endan- 
gered Species Act of 1973, as amended and codified at 
16 U.S.C. 1531-44 (1988), which were not included in 
the Appendix to the Brief for Petitioners: 


§ 1532. Definitions 
For the purpose of this chapter— : 


* %* * * * 


(3) The terms “conserve”, “conserving”, and 
“conservation” mean to use and the use of all meth- 
ods and procedures which are necessary to bring any 
endangered species or threatened species to the point 
at which the measures provided pursuant to this 
chapter are no longer necessary. Such methods and 
procedures include, but are not limited to, all activi- 
ties associated with scientific resources management 
such as research, census, law enforcement, habitat 
acquisition and maintenance, propagation, live trap- 
ping, and transplantation, and, in the extraordinary 
case where population pressures within a given eco- 
system cannot be otherwise relieved, may include 
regulated taking. 


os S a * * 


(5)(A) The term “critical habitat” for a threat- 
ened or endangered species means— 


(i) the specific areas within the geographi- 
cal area occupied by the species, at the time 
it is listed in accordance with the provisions 
of section 1533 of this title, on which are 
found those physical or biological features (1) 
essential to the conservation of the species and 
(Il) which may require special management 
considerations or protection; and 


(i1) specific areas outside the geographical 
area occupied by the species at the time it is 


2a 


listed in accordance with the provisions of sec- 
tion 1533 of this title, upon a determination 
by the Secretary that such areas are essential 
for the conservation of the species. 


(B) Critical habitat may be established for those 
species now listed as threatened or endangered spe- 
cies for which no critical habitat has heretofore been 
established as set forth in subparagraph (A) of this 
paragraph. 

* rk nk 

(13) The term “person” means an_ individual, 
corporation, partnership, trust, association, or any 
other private entity; or any officer, employee, agent, 
department, or instrumentality of the Feedral Gov- 
ernment, of any State, municipality, or political sub- 
division of a State, or of any foreign government; 
any State, municipality, or political subdivision of 
a State; or any other entity subject to the jurisdiction 
of the United States. 


He rf x Hf *k 
(19) The term “take” means to harass, harm, 


pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or 
collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct. 


§ 1534. Land acquisition 


(a) Implementation of conservation program; authoriza- 


tion of Secretary and Secretary of Agriculture 


The Secretary, and the Secretary of Agriculture with 
respect to the National Forest System, shall establish and 
implement a program to conserve fish, wildlife, and 
plants, including those which are listed as endangered 
species or threatened species pursuant to section 1533 
of this title. To carry out such a program, the appro- 
priate Secretary— 


(1) shall utilize the land acquisition and other 
authority under the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956, 


3a 


as amended [16 U.S.C. 742a et seq.], the Fish and 
Wildlife Coordination Act, as amended [16 U.S.C. 
661 et seq.], and the Migratory Bird Conservation 
Act [16 U.S.C. 715 et seq.], as appropriate; and 


(2) is authorized to acquire by purchase, dona- 
tion, or otherwise, lands, waters, or interest therein, 
and such authority shall be in addition to any other 
land acquisition authority vested in him. 


(b) Availability of funds for acquisition of lands, waters, 
etc. 


Funds made available pursuant to the Land and Water 
Conservation Fund Act of 1965, as amended [16 U.S.C. 
4601-4 et seq.], may be used for the purpose of acquiring 
lands, waters, or interests therein under subsection (a) 


of this section. 
2 # Hf * % 


§ 1540. Penalties and enforcement 
(a) Civil penalties 


(1) Any person who knowingly violates, and any per- 
son engaged in business as an importer or exporter of 
fish, wildlife, or plants who violates, any provision of this 
chapter, or any provision of any permit or certificate 
issued hereunder, or of any regulation issued in order to 
implement subsection (a)(1)(A), (B), (C), (D), (E), 
or (F), (a)(2)(A), (B), (C). or (D), (c), (d} (other 
than regulation relating to recordkeeping or filing of re- 
ports), (f) or (g) of section 1538 of this title, may be 
assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than 
$25.000 for each violation. Any person who knowingly 
violates, and any person engaged in business as an im- 
porter or exporter of fish, wildlife, or plants who violates, 
any provision of any other regulation issued under this 
chapter may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary 
of not more than $12,000 for each such violation. Any 
person who otherwise violates any provision of this chap- 


4a 


ter, or any regulation, permit, or certificate issued here- 
under, may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary 
of not more than $500 for each such violation. No penalty 
may be assessed under this subsection unless such person 
is given notice and opportunity for a hearing with respect 
to such violation. Each violation shall be a separate 
offense. Any such civil penalty may be remitted or miti- 
gated by the Secretary. Upon any failure to pay a penalty 
assessed under this subsection, the Secretary may request 
the Attorney General to institute a civil action in a dis- 
trict court of the United States for any district in which 
such person is found, resides, or transacts business to 
collect the penalty and such court shall have jurisdiction 
to hear and decide any such action. The court shall hear 
such action on the record made before the Secretary and 
shall sustain his action if it is supported by substantial 
evidence on the record considered as a whole. 


(2) Hearings held during proceedings for the assess- 
ment of civil penalties authorized by paragraph (1) of 
this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with 
section 554 of title 5. The Secretary may issue subpenas 
for the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the 
production of relevant papers, books, and documents, and 
administer oaths. Witnesses summoned shall be paid the 
same fees and mileage that are paid to witnesses in the 
courts of the United States. In case of contumacy or re- 
fusal to obey a subpena served upon any person pursuant 
to this paragraph, the district court of the United States 
for any district in which such person is found or resides 
or transacts business, upon application by the United 
States and after notice to such person, shall have jurisdic- 
tion to issue an order requiring such person to appear and 
give testimony before the Secretary or to appear and pro- 
duce documents before the Secretary, or both, and any 
failure to obey such order of the court may be punished 
by such court as a contempt thereof. 


5a 


(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chap- 
ter, no civil penalty shall be imposed if it can be shown 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant 
committed an act based on a good faith belief that he 
was acting to protect himself or herself, a member of his 
or her family, or any other individual from bodily harm, 
from any endangered or threatened species. 


(b) Criminal violations 


(1) Any person who knowingly violates any provision 
of this chapter, of any permit or certificate issued here- 
under, or of any regulation issued in order to implement 
subsection (a)(1)(A), (B), (C), (D), (E), or (FP), 
(a)(2)(A), (B), (C), or (D), (c), (d) (other than a 
regulation relating to recordkeeping, or filing of reports), 
(f), or (g) of section 1538 of this title shall, upon con- 
viction, be fined not more than $50,000 or imprisoned 
for not more than one year, or both. Any person who 
knowingly violates any provision of any other regulation 
issued under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined 
not more than $25,000 or imprisoned for more than six 
months, or both. 


* * * * * 


(g) Citizen suits 


(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this sub- 
section any person may commence a civil suit on his own 
behalf— 


(A) to enjoin any person, including the United 
States and any other governmental instrumentality 
or agency (to the extent permitted by the eleventh 
amendment to the Constitution), who is alleged to 
be in violation of any provision of this chapter or 
regulation issued under the authority thereof; or 


(B) to compel the Secretary to apply, pursuant 
to section 1535(g)(2)(B) (ii) of this title, the pro- 


6a 


hibitions set forth in or authorized pursuant to sec- 
tion 1533(d) or 1538(a)(1)(B) of this title with 
respect to the taking of any resident endangered 
species or threatened species within any State; or 


(C) against the Secretary where there is alleged 
a failure of the Secretary to perform any act or duty 
under section 1533 of this title which is not discre- 
tionary with the Secretary. 


The district courts shall have jurisdiction, without regard 
to the amount in controversy or the citizenship of the 
parties, to enforce any such provision or regulation, or 
to order the Secretary to perform such act or duty, as 
the case may be. In any civil suit commenced under sub- 
paragraph (B) the district court shall compel the Secre- 
tary to apply the prohibition sought if the court finds that 
the allegation that an emergency exists is supported by 
substantial evidence. 


(2)(A) No action may be commenced under subpara- 
graph (1)(A) of this section— 


(i) prior to sixty days after written notice of the 
violation has been given to the Secretary, and to any 
alleged violator of any such provision or regulation; 


(ii) if the Secretary has commenced action to im- 
pose a penalty pursuant to subsection (a) of this 
section; or 


(iii) if the United States has commenced and is 
diligently prosecuting a criminal action in a court 
of the United States or a State to redress a violation 
of any such provision or regulation. 


(B) No action may be commenced under subpara- 
graph (1)(B) of this section— 


(1) prior to sixty days after written notice has 
been given to the Secretary setting forth the reasons 
why an emergency is thought to exist with respect 


dainty 


es 


Ta 


to an endangered species or a threatened species in 
the State concerned; or 


(ii) if the Secretary has commenced and is dili- 
gently prosecuting action under section 1535(g) (2) 
(B)(ii) of this title to determine whether any such 
emergency exists. 


(C) No action may be commenced under subpara- 
graph (1)(C) of this section prior to sixty days after 
written notice has been given to the Secretary; except 
that such action may be brought immediately after such 
notification in the case of an action under this section 
respecting an emergency posing a significant risk to the 
well-being of any species of fish or wildlife or plants. 


(3)(A) Any suit under this subsection may be 
brought in the judicial district in which the violation 
occurs. 


(B) In any such suit under this subsection in which 
the United States is not a party, the Attorney General, 
at the requcst of the Secretary, may intervene on behalf 
of the United States as a matter of right. 


(4) The court, in issuing any final order in any suit 
brought pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, 
may award costs of litigation (including reasonable at- 
torney and expert witness fees) to any party, whenever 
the court determines such award is appropriate. 


(5) The injunctive relief provided by this subsection 
shall not restrict any right which any person (or class 
of persons) may have under any statute or common law 
to seek enforcement of any standard or limitation or to 
seek any other relief (including relief against the Secre- 
tary or a State agency). 


