| Greraor: owt, US j 
‘ PILED | 


No. 94-859 DEC 2 8 1994 


GFFiceE OF THE @6LERK 
Jn the Supreme Court of the Chuted States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


BRUCE BABBITT, SE TARY OF THE INTERIOR, ET AL., 
T 


‘RE 
PETITIONERS 


v. 


SWEET HOME CHAPTER OF COMMUNITIES FOR A GREAT 
OREGON, ET AL 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 
Page 
Pacific Northwest Generating Cooperative v. Brown, 

25 F.3d 1443, amended and superseded by 38 F.3d 1058 

SO EE EE ikesstislosnnssdehdjebsuemimianddaadinnasaiisedpsbiebeteessenss 7 
Palila v. Hawaii Dep’t of Land & Natural Resources, 

RR Fe. Be CUE Sle UD cnpstecsececctnsdnscthtenscescserineces 4,5 
Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991) .............ccccccccccssecees 3 
Seattle Audubon Soc’y v. Espy, Civ. No. 92-479WD 

Scere. SUMIINs. CPUIL Sie. UMN spsactcdnrseindsnasnenpssietasontonadocrenss 5, 6 
Be Os Sees ET CAs BP MUTED beticketsiintccsctessnsssssecscsssesce 5 
United States v. Hayashi, 22 F.3d 859 (9th Cir. 1993) .... 6, 7 
United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739 (1987) ................. 3 

Statutes and regulation: 
Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.: 

> REE MEET isses a bai cessapuderoninbiientandetndaannieenencatese 7 

§ 7(b)(4)(B), 16 U.S.C. 1536(b)(4)(B) ou... eee eseesereees 7 

i a, BEEN a dcclainiuiisniistsibiagiibbindaedadsaestunvsesiicssdenene 2,7 

© FRR: Be SIs, BILE Sbesnstentnvecansesesssvescscsecsonen 1,2 

De es ID deuteblictinietencitesecrecdécnnensuesavineconecssenes 8 

§ 10(a)(1)(B), 16 U.S.C. 1539(a)(1)(B) ...... eee eeeeeeeee 3 

© RR Pe A BUD srcsttntcccscsttrcctnsnesesnvescssccnccecees 2 

§ 11(g)(1)(A), 16 U.S.C. 1540(g))(A) wee eee 8 
Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972, 16 U.S.C. 1361 

OR UI, cctnnecisdncsecnasecisncssanqnnsavasccetvnssnencenasanestuscuusescsveveses 6 
Be NT TIIPINEAR - acc ddniehackisodetakuassindesshinnsemnieansessoeninnsmesniinduenni 6 

Miscellaneous: 
H.R. Rep. No. 412, 93d Cong., Ist Sess. (1973) ............006. 4 
S. Rep. No. 307, 938d Cong., Ist Sess. (1978) ............eeeecees 4 


(1) 


Jn the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-859 


BRUCE BABBITT, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, ET AL., 
PETITIONERS 


v. 


SWEET HOME CHAPTER OF COMMUNITIES FOR A GREAT 
OREGON, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


Respondents’ challenge to the Fish and Wildlife Service’s 
“harm” regulation under the Endangered Species Act is 
premised on two incorrect assertions. First, respondents 
erroneously maintain (Br. in Opp. 8, 10) that the “take” 
prohibition (which includes the prohibition against “harming” 
a listed species) in Section 9(a)(1) of the Act is limited to 
actions “directed against wildlife,” and that it does not 
prohibit “ordinary” land use even when that use causes death 
or significant injury to listed species. Second, respondents 
contend (Br. in Opp. 8-10) that the “harm” regulation is 
facially invalid because it extends to actions other than those 
“directed against wildlife,” i.e., that the regulation is 
“overbroad in every application” inasmuch as it applies to an 


(1) 


———— ai iii. 


2 


“innocent” use of land that has the unintended effect of 
injuring listed wildlife. 

1. a. With regard to respondents’ construction of the “take” 
prohibition in Section 9(a)(1) of the Act, 16 U.S.C. 1538(a)(1), it 
is not altogether clear what respondents mean py “directed 
against wildlife” or “ordinary” land use. See Br. in Opp. 8, 10; 
see also id. at 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, 15.' Moreover, respondents’ 
interpretation appears to differ from the court of appeals’ 
interpretation of the Act’s “take” prohibition as applying only 
to a “direct application of force.” Pet. App. 4a, 5a. 

What is clear, however, is that both those statutory 
interpretations are incorrect. Section 9 of the Act forbids 
any person from “taking” an endangered species, regardless of 
whether the taking is the primary purpose of the person’s 
actions. The taking of a listed species through an un- 
intentional killing or wounding violates the Act. The court of 
appeals recognized that “(t]he trapping of a nonendangered 
animal, for example, may incidentally trap an endangered 
species,” and poses the problem of an incidental take (Pet. App. 
lla)—a take that 7s prohibited by the Act, but that may not 
give rise to civil or criminal penalties if the actor obtained an 


1 Respondents’ adoption of the “directed against” terminology, 
combined with their emphasis on the actor’s purpose, suggests an 
implausible standard that requires proof in civil (as well as criminal) cases 
of an actor’s subjective purpose and intent actually to kill or significantly 
injure an endangered species. The statutory language defining. “take” does 
not address the actor’s state of mind. Respondents confuse the act itself 
with the mens rea required for criminal liability. The court of appeals 
recognized that imposition of criminal penalties under the “take” 
prohibition requires a scienter element that is specified by the Act. Pet. 
App. 6a, citing 16 U.S.C. 1540(b) (“knowingly violate”). Respondents, 
however, ignore that element in the criminal penalties provision of the Act 
and ‘instead erroneously contend that the scienter issue should be addressed 
by restricting the scope of activities that constitute a “take” in the first 
place. 

Respondents’ repeated references to “ordinary” land use are without 
any concrete content and are not rooted in the text or purposes of the 
Endangered Species Act or the administrative and judicial interpretations 
of the Act. 


3 


incidental take permit that covered his trapping activity.” If, 
as respondents suggest, the Act bans only purposeful takes, 
there would have been no need for Congress to amend the Act 
in 1982 to provide for a permit allowing incidental takes. See 
Pet. 16-17. 

b. Respondents also err in asserting that the regulation is 
“overbroad in every application,” and therefore facially in- 
valid, because it applies to unintended “takes.” The “harm” 
regulation is not applicable only to actions that result in the 
unintended death or significant injury of a listed species. It is 
aimed at activities that are intended to kill or injure wildlife 
as well. In fact, respondents in essence concede that habitat 
modifications for the purpose of eliminating listed wildlife 
from a site do constitute unlawful “takes,” although they dis- 
count such violations as “theoretical.” Br. in Opp. 9. 

Despite respondents’ attempt to dismiss the argument 
about the facial nature of their challenge as an argument 
“lead[ing] nowhere,” they concede, as they must, that such a 
challenge raises “conceptual difficulties.” Br. in Opp. 8. 
Indeed, this Court has emphasized the heavy burden parties 
must meet to succeed in a facial challenge. See Rust v. 
Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173, 183 (1991), quoting United States v. 
Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987). 

2. Respondents selectively emphasize portions of the 1973 
legislative history in an effort to support their argument that 
Congress intended a narrow interpretation of “take” to 
exclude any injury or death to species resulting from 
significant habitat modification or degradation. Respondents 
ignore, however, those portions that undercut their argument. 
For example, in quoting a Senate report, respondents omit 
(Br. in Opp. 14 n.13 ) the following emphasized language: 


2 An incidental take permit may be issued where a “taking is 
incidental to, and not the purpose of, the carrying out of an otherwise lawful 
activity.” 16 U.S.C. 1539(a)(1)(B). 


4 


“*Take’ is defined * * * in the broadest possible manner to 
include every conceivable way in which a person can ‘take’ or 
attempt to ‘take’ any fish or wildlife.” S. Rep. No. 307, 93d 
Cong., Ist Sess. 7 (1973) (emphasis added). Respondents also 
ignore the House report’s explanation that “take” includes | 
the activities of birdwatchers where “the effect of those ) 
activities might disturb the birds and make it difficult for | 
them to hatch or raise their young.” H.R. Rep. No. 412, 93d 
Cong., Ist Sess. 11 (1973) (emphasis added). The latter 
passage demonstrates that Congress’s concern was with the 
impact of activities on species, not with the intentions of the 
actor.’ It also demonstrates that Congress intended to en- 
compass actions that adversely affect behavioral patterns, not 
just those that cause bodily pain. 

Respondents do not address the 1982 amendments to the 
Endangered Species Act other than to refer (Br. in Opp. 15 
n.13) to Judge Williams’s discussion (Pet. App. 10a-24a) and to 
Judge Mikva’s statement (id. at 39a) that the amendments 
alone do not define the contours of the “take” definition. As 
we show in the petition (Pet. 16-17), however, the enactment in 
1982 of a process for obtaining an exemption for incidental 
takes evidences the reasonableness of the Secretary’s inter- 
pretation, because the exemption provision was established in 
response to circumstances involving (and despite comments 
criticizing) the “harm” regulation’s application to habitat 
modification activities. 

3. Respondents contend (Br. in Opp. 16-17) that no conflict 
among the circuits exists because the Ninth Circuit’s 
conclusion in Palila v. Hawaii Dep’t of Land & Natural 
Resources (Palila II), 852 F.2d 1106, 1108-1109 (9th Cir. 1988), 


| 
3 


Since it almost always could be claimed that the intended purpose of | 
an activity included something other than the foreseeable death of, or | 
significant injury to, an endangered species, respondents’ interpretation 
would eviscerate the “take” prohibition by making it virtually unen- 
forceable. 


— 


5 


that the “harm” regulation’s inclusion of habitat destruction 
follows the plain language of the statute and conforms to 
congressional intent is dictum. Specifically, respondents 
contend that the conclusion is dictum because the state 
defendant in Palila I] did not argue that the “harm” regula- 
tion’s application to habitat modification activities was 
altogether invalid. The State of Hawaii did, however, unsuc- 
cessfully argue in Palila I] that “harm” could not include 
habitat modification that could result in extinction of the 
species by future interference with essential behavioral 
patterns. Respondents’ attempt to distinguish actions that 
“indirectly” cause harm from those that “directly” do so 
echoes the argument that was rejected in Palila IJ.‘ In short, 
both appellate decisions cannot be correct: The decision below 
holds that no application of the regulation to habitat 
modification activities is valid, whereas Palila IJ holds that 
the regulation is valid as applied to an action that would cause 
the extinction of an endangered species by destroying its 
habitat.° 


4 If the Secretary’s interpretation of “harm” in the case of the indirect 


effects on an endangered species resulting from destruction of its food source 
comports with congressional intent, as the Ninth Circuit held in Palila J], 
then that holding dictates the validity of the “harm” regulation in instances 
in which the habitat modification more directly and immediately causes 
death or injury, such as the alteration of a water body that provides the sole 
habitat for an entire species. See TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 184 n.30 (1978). 

5 The existence of a circuit conflict is confirmed by a recent district 
court decision in the Ninth Circuit that discusses the two cases. Seattle 
Audubon Soc’y v. Espy, Civ. No. 92-479WD (W.D. Wash. Dec. 21, 1994). We 
discussed that case in the certiorari petition (Pet. 24-25) in connection with 
our explanation of how the decision below threatens to cause significant 
disruptions to federal actions. As an example, we pointed to the then-still 
pending case, in which environmental groups challenged the President’s 
proposed plan to permit the lifting of the injunctions banning timber 
harvests on federal lands within the range of the northern spotted owl 
throughout the Pacific Northwest. See ibid. The plaintiffs in the Seattle 
Audubon case alleged that the underlying environmental documents were 
inadequate because they assumed that private landowners’ activities that 
“harm” protected species may be circumscribed, but, according to the 


—iiaaaamaaasaaaaaacaaaa aaa i 


6 


Respondents fare no better in their attempt to explain away 
the reasoning in Palila II by reference to subsequent Ninth 
Circuit decisions. United States v. Hayashi, 22 F.3d 859 (9th 
Cir. 1993), addressed whether particular conduct violated a 
regulation that defines actions that constitute an unlawful 
“take” under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972, 
16 U.S.C. 1361 et seq. (MMPA).° Respondents’ suggestion 
(Br. in Opp. 17) that Hayashi somehow marks a retreat from 
Palila II is contradicted by the Ninth Circuit’s statement 
that the “harm” regulation, issued under the Endangered 
Species Act, “is not the controlling regulatory definition and 
is an improper starting point for any MMPA prosecution.” 22 
F.3d at 864; see also id. at 862. Specifically, the issue in 
Hayashi was whether a fisherman’s firing of a rifle in order to 
scare porpoises away from his fishing lines constituted a 
criminal “take” by “harassment” under the MMPA regula- 
tions. Jd. at 861. In holding that it did not, the court reasoned 
that the fisherman’s action did not disrupt normal behavioral 
patterns because feeding from a fishing line is not part of 
porpoises’ normal eating habits. /d. at 864-865. The court also 
regarded the disruption to be of sufficiently short duration 


plaintiffs, that assumption was inconsistent with the decision of the D.C. 
Circuit in the instant case. In its December 21, 1994, ruling, the district 
court upheld the government’s plan. The district court noted that the D.C. 
Circuit’s ruling in the instant case is not binding in the Ninth Circuit and 
that a contrary conclusion had already been reached by the Ninth Circuit in 
Palila II, which held that the “harm” regulation is valid. The district court 
reasoned that Palila I] is the law of the Ninth Circuit unless changed by the 
Ninth Circuit itself or by this Court. See slip op. 34-37. 

6 That regulation, 50 C.F.R. 216.3, is different from the one at issue 
here. Section 216.3 defines “take” under the MMPA as including: 


The collection of dead animals, or parts thereof; the restraint or 
detention of a marine mammal, no matter how temporary; tagging a 
marine mammal; the negligent or intentional operation of an aircraft 
or vessel, or the doing of any other negligent or intentional act which 
results in disturbing or molesting a marine mammal; and feeding or 
attempting to feed a marine mammal in the wild. 


7 


and consistent with the regulatory feeding prohibition, so that 
it did not have a significant impact on the species. /bid. 

Respondents mischaracterize Pacific Northwest Gener - 
ating Cooperative v. Brown, 25 F.3d 1443, 1452, amended and 
superseded by 38 F.3d 1058 (9th Cir. 1994), by asserting (Br. in 
Opp. 17) that it held that an inadvertent killing of listed 
salmon while fishing is not a “take” under the Endangered 
Species Act. The issue in that case was not whether a “take” 
occurred; rather, it was whether the undisputed “take” of 
listed species properly could be authorized by a Section 7 
“incidental” take statement issued in conjunction with an 
approval of the harvest of nonlisted species. See 16 U.S.C. 
1536(b)(4)(B). In other words, the question was whether the 
“take” of the listed salmon was in fact “incidental” as opposed 
to the intended purpose of the federally authorized action.’ 
The Ninth Circuit held that the federal agencies properly 
treated the “take” of listed species, which was an inevitable 
byproduct of the harvest of nonlisted species, as an 
“incidental” take that was eligible for exemption from the 
Section 9 prohibition pursuant to an incidental take statement 
issued under Section 7 of the Act. Thus, Pacific Northwest 
Generating Cooperative in no way undermines the holding in 
Palila 11.” 


7 The plaintiffs in Pacific Northwest Generating Cooperative were 
power companies that sought a total ban on all commercial fish harvests in 
the belief that such a ban would lessen the restrictions that had been 
imposed on power generation in order to protect listed species. To that end, 
the plaintiffs argued that the National Marine Fisheries Service in the 
Department of Commerce violated the Endangered Species Act by issuing a 
Section 7 incidental take statement for the taking of listed salmon in 
conjunction with the harvest of nonlisted salmon. The plaintiffs reasoned 
that because the purpose of the authorized action was to catch fish, the 
“take” of listed species was not “incidental” within the meaning of Section 
7(b)(4)(B), 16 U.S.C. 1536(b)(4)(B), and, therefore, that the federal approval 
of the fish harvest should be enjoined. 

8 Contrary to respondents’ suggestion (Br. in Opp. 17), there is no 
reason to believe that the Ninth Circuit will revisit the “harm” regulation’s 
validity in a pending case, Forest Conservation Council v. Rosboro Lumber 


8 


The circuit conflict created by the decision below should be 
resolved by this Court. Because the D.C. Circuit can exercise 
jurisdiction in a manner that overlaps with the geographic 
jurisdiction of other courts of appeals, the conflict presented 
here is immediately and unusually disruptive. See Pet. 22-23. 
In addition, that jurisdictional arrangement may frustrate 
further development of the issue in other courts of appeals. 

4. Finally, respondents suggest (Br. in Opp. 18) that the 
Court should not grant review because invalidation of the 
“harm” regulation would not havé any significant impact on 
endangered species or on the Section 10 permit program 
because, they assert, expense and delay have resulted in 
infrequent invocation of the permit process. Contrary to 
respondents’ assertion, however, the submission of 150 
applications for Section 10 permits (see Pet. 24 & n.22) 
evidences substantial voluntary participation, particularly 
since most of the applications have been submitted in recent 
years. Moreover, as we show in the petition (Pet. 24), 
voluntary compliance is also accomplished by special rules or 
by project modifications developed in consultation with the 
Fish and Wildlife Service to avoid altogether any incidental 
“take” of a listed species. 


Co., No. 94-35070. The principal issue in that case is whether the citizen 
suit provision, 16 U.S.C. 1540(g)(1)(A), authorizes a district court to enjoin 
completion of a project that would, if completed, “take” a listed species. 
The district court held that it did not have such authority, and that the suit 
had been prematurely filed. A secondary issue relates Lo the type of 
evidence required to establish a “take.” On appeal, the defendants- 
appellees have challenged the validity of the “harm” regulation and argued 
that the Ninth Circuit should follow the D.C. Circuit’s decision below. See 
Defendants-Appellees’ Br. 4-18. The plaintiffs-appellants have responded 
by arguing that the issue may not be raised for the first time on appeal and 
that neither the plaintiffs-appellants nor the Ninth Circuit is bound by the 
D.C. Circuit’s decision. See Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Reply Br. 1-6. The 
defendants-appellees did not request an en banc hearing, as would be 
required to overturn a prior Ninth Circuit panel holding. In this procedural 
posture, the Ninth Circuit should have no occasion to address the validity of 
the “harm” regulation. 


9 


Abandonment of the “harm” regulation would mark a 
fundamental change in the approach to species protection that 
has governed during the entire 20-year period that the 
Endangered Species Act has been in effect—an approach that 
was affirmed and implemented by Congress in the 1982 
amendments. Respondents do not deny that preservation of 
habitat is essential to the survival of most endangered species. 
Respondents therefore are wrong in suggesting that there is 
nothing remarkable or consequential in the court of appeals’ 
invalidation of the Secretary’s longstanding interpretation of 
the Act. 

For the foregoing reasons and those set forth in the 
petition, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 


Respectfully submitted. 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solicitor General 


DECEMBER 1994 


