oe 8 epee on OPN eee eee eee eee | ee A Se Po Se 
6 } re: ey 


SS) 


JUL 29 1994 f 


No. 93-1660 
OFFICE OF THE CLERK | 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 ; 


¢ 


i; 
3 
¢ 
é 
4 
: 


STATE OF ARIZONA, 


Petitioner, 
v. 
ISAAC EVANS, 
Respondent. 
o 


On Writ Of Certiorari To 
The Supreme Court Of Arizona 


S 


BRIEF OF PETITIONER 
® 


RICHARD M. RoMLEY 
Maricopa County Attorney 


GERALD R. Grant* 

Chief of Appeals Bureau 

301 West Jefferson 

Suite 800 

Phoenix, Arizona 85003 
(602) 506-5941 , 


Counsel for Petitioner 
* Counsel of Record 


COCHLE Lay Se Pees OD, Eee Sb aes 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342- 


y ’ 
pir dee, Sosie tne % 7 eee 
wi a ee oe ee, et Oe Oe ae 
é a ae < hae pape AA Fy ee ae? Br. | =~ 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Where evidence has been seized incident to an arrest 
based upon a police computer record of an open warrant 
that had actually been quashed 17 days earlier, does the 
exclusionary rule require suppression of the evidence 
regardless of whether police personnel or court personnel 


were responsible for the quashed warrant’s continued 
presence in the police computer record? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

CEST PURPCEEIEN «ccc ccncccsvccndivlenseuse i 
TAREE CF AUTRE Ue occ ccccccvccccunesneunuus ili 
oe ee 1 
pb wt MTT TT ete 1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED....... 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE......cccccccvssecceces 2 
A. The Arrest of Evans and Seizure of Evidence.. 2 
B. The Motion to Suppress ..........ccssecccces 3 
C. The Evidentiary Hearing ..................6. 3 
D. The Trial Judge’s Ruling................:.... 5 
Se FO! Serre 6 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT..................0005: 7 
ATE GTIGINS occ ccscccccesscsteessnseueeenneeee 7 


COLA oc cccvecsvesccéscavesuaeshenaeee 13 


ili 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Illinois v. Gates, 426 U.S. 213 (1983) ............... 8, 10 
Illinois v. Krull, 480 U.S. 340 (1987)................ 8, 10 
Massachusetts v. Sheppard, 468 U.S. 981 (1984)......... ) 
Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433 (1974) ............ 8, 10 
United States v. Calandra, 414 U.S. 338 (1974)...... 8, 10 
United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984)........ passim 
United States v. Peltier, 422 U.S. 531 (1975)............ ~ 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
ccc cceccees 1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 
STATUTES AND RULES 
United States Code 28 U.S.C. §1257(a) ............... 1 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Supreme Court of Arizona is 
reported at 177 Ariz. 201, 866 P.2d 869 (1994). (Appendix 
to the Petition [hereinafter Pet. App.] at 1a.) The opinion 
of the Arizona Court of Appeals is reported at 172 Ariz. 
314, 836 P.2d 1024 (Ct. App. 1992) (Pet. App. at 22a.) 


o 


JURISDICTION 


The opinion of the Supreme Court of Arizona was 
filed on January 13, 1994. The petition for writ of cer- 
tiorari was filed within 90 days of that judgment on April 
14, 1994, and was granted on May 31, 1994. The jurisdic- 
tion of this Court is properly invoked under 28 U.S.C. 
§1257(a). 


e 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 
United States Constitution, Amendment IV: 


The right of the people to be secure in their 
persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be 
violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon 
probable cause, supported by Oath or affirma- 
tion, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized. 


¢ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


A. The Arrest of Evans and Seizure of Evidence 


On January 5, 1991, at approximately 6:30 p.m., an 
officer of the Phoenix Police Department saw a car trav- 
elling the wrong way on the one-way street in front of the 
main police station. (Joint Appendix [hereinafter J.A.] at 
16-17.) The officer made a traffic stop of the car and spoke 
with the car’s driver, Respondent Evans. (/d. at 17-18.) 
After Evans told the officer that he had no driver's 
license because it had been suspended, the officer 
obtained Evans’ name and ran the name on the computer 
in his patrol car. (Id. at 18.) 


The computer search showed that Evans’ license had 
been suspended and that he had an outstanding misde- 
meanor warrant for his arrest. (Id. at 19.) The officer 
would not have arrested Evans for driving on a sus- 
pended license, but did arrest him because of the out- 
standing warrant. (Id. at 23-24.) While placing handcuffs 
on Evans, the officer saw him drop a handrolled cigarette 
to the ground. (Id. at 20.) After determining that the 
cigarette smelled as if it contained marijuana, the officer 
searched Evans’ car and found a baggie of marijuana 
under the passenger seat. (Id. at 21-22.) 


After the arrest, the officer contacted his I-Bureau 
about the warrant, and was told that the warrant was still 
good. (Id. at 22.) 


B. The Motion to Suppress 


Prior to his trial on the resulting charge of possession 
of marijuana, Evans filed a motion to suppress the mari- 
juana because “he was arrested in violation of the Fourth 
and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Consti- 
tution.” (J.A. at 2.) Evans alleged that the misdemeanor 
warrant had actually been quashed 17 days before his 
arrest, and argued that the marijuana was therefore the 
fruit of an unlawful arrest. (Id. at 4.) Evans blamed police 
negligence for the warrant’s presence in the computer 
system and argued that the “good faith” exception to the 
exclusionary rule recognized by this Court in United 
States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984), did not apply “because 
it was police error, not judicial error, which caused the 
invalid arrest.” (Id. at 4-5.) 


C. The Evidentiary Hearing 


On April 15, 1991, the trial court conducted an evi- 
dentiary hearing on the motion to suppress. At that hear- 
ing, the State presented testimony from the arresting 
officer. The State also presented testimony regarding the 
standard procedure for quashing a warrant and removing 
it from the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office computer 
system. 


The chief clerk of the East Phoenix Number One 
Justice Court brought her court’s records regarding the 
warrant on Evans. (J.A. at 15-16.) She testified that the 
warrant had been issued on December 13, 1990, after 
Evans had failed to appear in the justice court on the 
preceding day. (Id. at 28-29.) On December 19, 1990, 
Evans appeared before a pro tem judge, who released him 


on his own recognizance and quashed the warrant. (Id. at 
29.) 


The chief clerk also described the justice court’s stan- 
dard procedure for quashing a warrant: a clerk places a 
telephone call to the warrants section of the Maricopa 
County Sheriff’s Office, advises them that a warrant has 
been quashed, and makes a note on the justice court file 
stating that the call has been made and indicating the 
person at the Sheriff’s Office to whom the clerk has 
spoken. (Id. at 29, 33, 35.) Evans’ justice court file con- 
tained no note indicating that the Sheriff’s Office had 
been called about the quashing of the warrant. (Id. at 29, 
32.) 


The chief clerk acknowledged the possibility that a 
member of the clerk’s office had made the call to the 
Sheriff’s Office without making the required notation on 
the file, but concluded that in this case the call had not 
been made. (Id. at 29, 31-32.) She noted that Evans’ case 
was unusual because a pro tem judge had quashed the 
warrant and he had not made the same notation on the 
file regarding the quashing of the warrant that the justice 
of the peace normally made. (Id. at 32, 35.) After she 
learned that Evans’ warrant had remained in the Sheriff's 
Office computer system after the justice court had quas- 
hed it, the chief clerk conducted a search of the court 
files. (Id. at 37.) She discovered warrants in three other 
cases that had been quashed on the same day that Evans’ 
warrant had been quashed; those three other warrants, 
like Evans’, remained in the computer system and the 
corresponding justice court files, like Evans’, contained 
no notations indicating that the Sheriff’s Office had been 
informed. (Id.) 


The State also presented testimony from a records 
clerk with the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office. She out- 
lined the Sheriff's Office standard procedure when it 
receives a call that a warrant has been quashed: the date 
and time that the call was received, the name of the 
person making the call, and the court that the call is 
noted on the “recall warrants list”; the first, last and 
middle names of the person named in the warrant, his 
date of birth, and the warrant number and the date it was 
issued are obtained from the caller; the information 
received is compared with the information contained in 
the Sheriff’s Office active file to verify that the informa- 
tion received matches that in the file; notations are made 
in the active file; an entry on the computer is made to 
clear the warrant from the system; finally, a warrant 
check is run on the system to make sure the quashed 
warrant has been removed. (Id. at 39-40, 45.) 


The records clerk checked the Sheriff’s Office file 
regarding the warrant on Evans and found no record that 


a call was ever received quashing that warrant. (Id. at 
40-43.) 


D. The Trial Judge’s Ruling 


The trial judge found that it made no difference 
whether justice court personnel or law enforcement per- 
sonnel were to blame for the warrant’s continued pres- 
ence in the computer system. (/d. at 51-52.) He then 
granted the motion to suppress. (Id. at 53.) 


E. The Appeal 


The State appealed from the ruling granting the 
motion to suppress. On May 19, 1992, in a 2-1 decision, 
Division One of the Arizona Court of Appeals reversed. 
The court of appeals first distinguished an Arizona appel- 
late decision the trial judge had relied on by finding that 
in this case there was “no evidence that the arresting 
officers or the Phoenix Police Department were negligent 
in any way.” (Pet. App. at 31a.) It went on to state that the 
trial judge had apparently overgeneralized the rationale 
behind the exclusionary rule. (Id. at 32a.) After noting 
this Court’s repeated statements that the purpose of the 
exclusionary rule is to deter police misconduct, the court 
of appeals found that the police officers’ conduct was 
objectively reasonable under Leon, that the clerical error 
that caused the quashed warrant to remain in the com- 
puter system was outside the control of the Phoenix 
Police Department, and that the purpose of the exclusion- 
ary rule would not be served by suppressing the mari- 
juana. (Id. at 32a, 34a-35a.) 


Evans then filed a petition for review by the Arizona 
Supreme Court. The supreme court took review and on 
January 13, 1994, in a 4-1 decision, vacated the court of 
appeals’ decision and affirmed the suppression of the 
marijuana. The supreme court held that even if the 
responsibility for the computer error rested with the jus- 
tice court, “it does not follow that the exclusionary rule 
should be inapplicable to these facts.” (Id. at 5a.) The 
supreme court concluded that the exclusionary rule 
applied and required suppression of the marijuana. (Jd. at 
lla.) 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The exclusionary rule is not a personal constitutional 
right of the aggrieved party, but a judicially created rem- 
edy designed to safeguard Fourth Amendment rights 
generally through its deterrent effect. The primary pur- 
pose of the exclusionary rule is to deter future unlawful 
police misconduct, and its application is restricted to 
those situations where that purpose is effectively 
advanced. The police officer in this case acted in an 
objectively reasonable manner when he arrested respon- 
dent because a computer search informed him there was 
an outstanding warrant for respondent's arrest. Even 
though the warrant had actually been quashed, the war- 
rant’s continued presence in the computer was not the 
fault of police personnel, but of court personnel. There 
was no unlawful police misconduct to be deterred in this 
case. Therefore, the Arizona Supreme Court erred in 
applying the exclusionary rule to suppress the evidence 
seized pursuant to the arrest. 


¢ 


ARGUMENT 


The Fourth Amendment contains no provision 
expressly precluding the use of evidence obtained in 
violation of its commands. Thus, this Court has held that 
the exclusionary rule is not a personal constitutional right 
of the person whose Fourth Amendment rights have been 
violated, but a judicially created remedy designed to 
safeguard Fourth Amendment rights generally through its 
deterrent effect. United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. at 906; 


United States v. Calandra, 414 U.S. 338, 348 (1974). Accord- 
ingly, whether to apply the exclusionary rule in a particu- 
lar case is an issue separate from the question whether 
the Fourth Amendment rights of the party seeking to 
invoke the rule were violated by police conduct. Leon, 468 
U.S. at 906; Illinois v. Gates, 426 U.S. 213, 223 (1983). 


Applying the exclusionary rule cannot cure the inva- 
sion of a defendant’s rights he has already suffered. IIIi- 
nois v. Krull, 480 U.S. 340, 347 (1987). In addition, 
application of the rule has substantial costs, as it often 
deprives the truth seeking process of relevant and trust- 
worthy evidence. Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433, 450 
(1974). Further, indiscriminate application of the rule may 
well generate disrespect for the law and administration of 
justice. Leon, 468 U.S. at 908. Therefore, application of the 
rule is restricted to those cases where its remedial pur- 
pose will be most effectively served. Calandra, 414 U.S. at 
348. 


The primary purpose of the exclusionary rule is to 
deter future unlawful police misconduct. Id. at 347. Thus, 
evidence obtained from a search should be suppressed 
only if the law enforcement officer had knowledge, or 
may properly be charged with knowledge, that the search 
was unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment. 
United States v. Peltier, 422 U.S. 531, 542 (1975). 


The exclusionary rule is not designed to punish the 
errors of judges and magistrates. Leon, 468 U.S. at 916. 
Judges and magistrates are not members of the law 
enforcement team, and the “threat of exclusion thus can- 
not be expected significantly to deter them.” Id. at 917. 
Thus, where a judge, not a police officer, makes “the 


critical mistake” that leads to a Fourth Amendment viola- 
tion, the exclusionary rule should not be applied. Massa- 
chusetts v. Sheppard, 468 U.S. 981, 990 (1984). “Penalizing 
the officer for the magistrate’s error, rather than his own, 
cannot logically contribute to the deterrence of Fourth 
Amendment violations.” Leon, 468 U.S. at 921. 


In this case, the police officer’s check of the computer 
in his patrol car informed him that there was an outstand- 
ing warrant for Evans’ arrest. The officer, who had 
already seen Evans commit one violation of the law (driv- 
ing the wrong way on a one-way street) and had heard 
Evans admit a second violation (driving with a sus- 
pended driver’s license), arrested Evans based on the 
outstanding warrant. Evans did not tell the officer that 
the warrant had been quashed two weeks earlier. And, 
when the officer checked with his own police depart- 
ment’s I-Bureau after the arrest, he was again told that 
there was an outstanding warrant for Evans’ arrest. This 
officer “took every step that could reasonably be 
expected” of him. Sheppard, 468 U.S. at 989. He had no 
knowledge, and cannot properly be charged with knowl- 
edge, that the warrant had been quashed. The “critical 
mistake” that caused the Fourth Amendment violation in 
this case was made by justice court personnel who failed 
to have the quashed warrant removed from the computer 
system. Under these circumstances, the exclusionary rule 
should not be applied because doing so will not serve the 
rule’s primary purpose. 


In affirming the trial court’s decision to suppress the 
marijuana, the Arizona Supreme Court declined to follow 
the framework this Court has established for determining 
whether to apply the exclusionary rule. First, the Arizona 


10 


Supreme Court focused on the fact that Evans’ Fourth 
Amendment rights had been violated when he was 
arrested on a warrant that had been quashed two weeks 
earlier. That fact, however, was not at issue on appeal. 
Petitioner’s position throughout these proceedings has 
been that despite the Fourth Amendment violation, the 
exclusionary rule should not be applied. As this Court 
has held, whether a Fourth Amendment violation has 
occurred is a separate issue from whether the exclusion- 
ary rule should be applied. Leon, 468 U.S. at 906; Gates, 
426 U.S. at 223. 


Second, the Arizona Supreme Court found it “unnec- 
essary” to analyze the purposes served by the exclusion- 
ary rule. (Pet. App. at 4a, n. 1.) That position, however, 
contradicts this Court’s statements that application of the 
rule is restricted to those cases where its remedial pur- 
pose is most effectively served. Calandra, 414 U.S. at 348. 


Third, the Arizona Supreme Court described deter- 
rence of police misconduct as “but one of the reasons that 
have been advanced” to support use of the exclusionary 
rule. (Pet. App. at 4a, n. 1.) Deterrence of police miscon- 
duct, however, is the primary purpose of the exclusionary 
rule. Calandra, 414 U.S. at 347. The Arizona Supreme 
Court did not specify what other purposes of the exciu- 
sionary rule were advanced by its use in this case, and 
this Court’s decisions show that there are none. As noted 
above, curing the wrong suffered by the individual 
whose Fourth Amendment rights have been violated is 
not a purpose of the exclusionary rule. Krull, 480 U.S. at 
347. Protecting the courts from reliance on untrustworthy 
evidence such as coerced statements may be a valid pur- 
pose of the exclusionary rule. Tucker, 417 U.S. at 448. The 


11 


evidence suppressed in this case, however, was relevant 
and material and in no way untrustworthy. Thus, the 
Arizona Supreme Court erred in suggesting that some 
other purpose of the exclusionary rule was served by 
suppressing the evidence in this case. 


Fourth, the Arizona Supreme Court assumed that 
justice court personnel were responsible for the error that 
led to Evans’ unlawful arrest. (Pet. App. at 5a.) It thus 
held, contrary to this Court’s decision in Leon, that the 
exclusionary rule is designed to punish the errors of 
judges and magistrates. The fact that justice court 
employees and not the justice of the peace were respons- 
ible for the error is insufficient to distinguish this case 
from Leon. This Court stated in Leon that “there exists no 
evidence suggesting that judges and magistrates are 
inclined to ignore or subvert the Fourth Amendment or 
that lawlessness among these actors requires application 
of the extreme sanction of exclusion.” 468 U.S. at 916. 
There is likewise no evidence suggesting that employees 
of judges and magistrates are any more inclined to 
engage in the type of conduct that would merit applica- 
tion of the exclusionary rule. 


The Arizona Supreme Court sought to distinguish 
Leon by noting that the evidence seized in that case was 
obtained on the basis of a facially valid search warrant 
that was later invalidated, while noting that “no warrant 
at all was in existence at the time of [Evans’] arrest.” (Pet. 
App. at 6a.) This factual distinction is unimportant, how- 
ever. In both situations evidence was seized as a result of 
a Fourth Amendment violation. Neither violation is 
greater than the other and, in any event, application of 
the exclusionary rule turns not on the magnitude of the 


12 


violation but on whether excluding the evidence furthers 
the rule’s purpose. The critical factor in Leon was that the 
police officer’s conduct was objectively reasonable. This 
Court concluded that where an officer’s conduct is objec- 
tively reasonable, excluding the evidence does not further 
the ends of the exclusionary rule in any appreciable way. 
468 U.S. at 919-20. 


In this case, the arresting officer’s conduct was objec- 
tively reasonable. From the computer in his patrol car, the 
officer obtained information that there was a warrant for 
Evans’ arrest. That information is the sort that an officer 
on the streets must necessarily rely on in performing his 
duties. The officer had no reason to know that the war- 
rant was invalid: Evans did not protest and a later 
inquiry to his own police department’s I-Bureau con- 
firmed the warrant information. It was the justice court's 
responsibility to insure that the quashed warrant was 
removed from the computer system, and the evidence 
presented at the suppression hearing showed that the 
justice court did not meet its responsibility. Under these 
circumstances, the exclusionary rule should not be 
applied. 


13 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the Arizona Supreme Court should 


be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


RicHArRD M. ROMLEY 
Maricopa County Attorney 


GerALp R. Grant* 

Chief of Appeals Bureau 
301 West Jefferson 

Suite 800 

Phoenix, Arizona 85003 
(602) 506-5941 


Counsel for Petitioner 


* Counsel of Record 


