ala Ce ee ep A ee ee 


“\ Gupreme Court, U.S, 
() FILED 


| JUL 29 1994 


No. 93-1660 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
r 


STATE OF ARIZONA, 


Petitioner, 


ISAAC EVANS, 


Respondent. 
o 


On Writ Of Certiorari To 
The Supreme Court Of Arizona 


o 
JOINT APPENDIX 
° 
RicHARD M. ROMLEY Carot A. CARRIGAN* 


Maricopa County Attorney Deputy Maricopa County 


Public Defender 
GERALD R. Grant* 
’ Chief of Appeals Bureau 132 South Central Avenue 


Suite 6 
. 301 West Jefferson Phoenix, Arizona 85004 


Suite 800 
Phoenix, Arizona 85003 (602) 506-8217 
(602) 506-5941 Counsel for Respondent 


Counsel for Petitioner 


* Counsel of Record 


Petition For Certiorari Filed April 14, 1994 
Certiorari Granted May 31, 1994 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


y1- 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Relevant Docket Entries 
Motion to Suppress Evidence 
State’s Response to Motion to Suppress Evidence .. 


Reporter’s Transcript of Proceedings, April 15, 


Appellant’s Opening Brief 
Appellee’s Answering Brief 
Appellant’s Reply Brief 
Petition for Review 
Response to Petition for Review 
The following items have been omitted in printing 


this Joint Appendix because they appear on the following 
pages in the Appendix to the Petition for Writ of Cer- 
tiorari: 


inion of the Court of Appeals of Arizona, filed 
May 19, 1992 


Opinion of the Supreme Court of Arizona, filed 
January 13, 1994 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE 


ENTRY 


March 27, 1991 


April 15, 1991 


May 3, 1991 


May 19, 1992 


January 13, 1994 


Respondent filed motion to suppress 
all evidence seized as result of his 
arrest. 


After an evidentiary hearing, the 
trial court granted the motion to 
suppress. 


Petitioner filed notice of appeal from 
order granting motion to suppress. 


Arizona Court of Appeals issued 
opinion reversing the trial court's 
order granting motion to suppress. 


Arizona Supreme Court issued opin- 
ion vacating the Court of Appeals’ 
opinion and affirming the trial 
court’s order granting the motion to 
suppress. 


STEPHEN WHELIHAN 

State Bar No. 013448 

Deputy Public Defender 

132 South Central Avenue, Suite 6 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004 

(602) 495-8327 

Attorney for Defendant 


IN THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
IN AND FOR THE COUNTY OF MARICOPA 


STATE OF ARIZONA, No. CR 91-00513 


Plaintiff, 
== MOTION TO SUPPRESS 
V. EVIDENCE 
ISAAC EVANS, 
(Evidentiary Hearing and 
Defendant. 


Oral Argument Requested) 


(Assigned to the Honorable 
Thomas W. O'Toole — Div. 32) 


Nm ee ee ee ee ee eee” 


(Filed Mar. 27, 1991) 


ae 


COMES NOW the defendant, by and through under- 
signed counsel, and moves this Court to suppress any 
and all evidence seized or obtained as a result of the 
arrest of the defendant. It is defendant's contention that 
he was arrested in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution. This 
Motion is further supported by the attached Memoran- 
dum of Points and Authorities. 


Respectfully submitted this 26th day of March, 1991. 


DEAN W. TREBESCH 
MARICOPA COUNTY PUBLIC 
DEFENDER 


By /s/ Stephen Whelihan 
STEPHEN WHELIHAN 
Deputy Public Defender 


MEMORANDUM OF POINTS 
AND AUTHORITIES 


FACTUAL BACKGROUND: 


The following factual summary is based on Phoenix 
Police Departmental Report #10010363 as well as evi- 
dence to be adduced at the hearing on this motion. 


On January 5, 1991 at approximately 6:30 p.m., Phoe- 
nix Police Officers Sargent and Lumley stopped Isaac 
Evans for driving the wrong way down Washington Ave- 
nue, a one way street. Officer Sargent obtained identifica- 
tion from Mr. Evans and ran a computer check which 
indicated an outstanding warrant for his arrest, number 


. 9004145, for Failure to Appear in Central Phoenix Justice 


Court on a charge of Driving with a Suspended License. 
Officer Sargent then arrested Mr. Evans based on the 
warrant. 


While being handcuffed, Mr. Evans was ordered to 
open his fist and he allegedly dropped a marijuana ciga- 
rette which was seized as evidence. Police then searched 
the vehicle, and allegedly found a clear plastic bag con- 
taining marijuana under the passenger seat, which had 
been occupied by one Lois Ann Hornsby. Ms. Hornsby 


was arrested for Possession of Marijuana and a subse- 
quent search of her purse allegedly revealed marijuana 
seeds and cigarette rolling papers. 


On December 19, 1990, Isaac Evans had appeared in 
Central Phoenix Justice Court and Justice of the Peace 
Richard Ortiz had ordered that warrant number 904145 
be quashed. 


LEGAL ARGUMENT: 


Evidence obtained in a search incident to an invalid 
arrest is not admissible. State v. Chudy, 108 Ariz. 23, 492 
P.2d 402 (1972). In the instant case, the arrest was based 
on a warrant which no longer had any legal effect. There- 
fore the arrest was not valid. The evidence seized in this 
case was obtained as a direct result of the invalid arrest 
and must therefore be suppressed. 


In State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (App. 
1989) the defendant was stopped for a traffic violation 
and a records check showed an outstanding warrant. The 
defendant was arrested and a search of his pockets 
revealed narcotics. It was subsequently learned that the 
warrant had been quashed prior to the defendant's arrest. 
Suppression of the evidence by the trial court was upheld 
by the Court of Appeals. 


In Greene, the State’s appeal relied on United States v. 
Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 104 S.Ct. 3405, 82 L.Ed.2d 677 (1984), 
in which the “good faith” of the arresting officer in exe- 
cuting a search warrant which was subsequently found to 
be based on less than probable cause was held to justify 
the court’s refusal to apply the exclusionary rule. The 


Supreme Court reasoned that the purpose of the exclu- 
sionary rule, deterrence of police misconduct, is not 
served where the invalid search is based on judicial error. 
The Greene court found that the exclusionary rule does 
apply where the police department is responsible for not 
keeping its computer entries up to date. 


CONCLUSION: 


The arrest of Isaac Evans, which resulted in the sei- 
zure of evidence in this case, was invalid because it was 
based on a warrant which had been quashed. The “good 
faith” exception to the exclusionary rule is inapplicable in 
this case because it was police error, not judicial error, 
which caused the invalid arrest. Therefore, any and all 
evidence seized as a result of the invalid arrest must be 


suppressed. 


Respectfully submitted this 26th day of March, 1991. 


DEAN W. TREBESCH 
MARICOPA COUNTY PUBLIC 
DEFENDER 


By /s/ Stephen Whelihan 
STEPHEN WHELIHAN 
Deputy Public Defender 


Copy of the foregoing motion 
mailed/delivered this 26th 
day of March, 1991 to: 


HON. THOMAS W. O’TOOLE 
Judge of the Superior Court 


KIM N. STUART 
Deputy County Attorney 


By /s/ Stephen Whelihan 
STEPHEN WHELIHAN 
Deputy Public Defender 


a ee ee _— - —————<i/l 


NG I ts le Nn 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 


Kim N. Stuart 

Deputy County Attorney 
Bar ID #: 003695 

111 West Monroe, Suite 1800 
Phoenix, AZ 85003 
Telephone: 602 495-8422 
Attorney for Plaintiff 


IN THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
IN AND FOR THE COUNTY OF MARICOPA 


STATE OF ARIZONA, ) NO. CR 91-00513 
se ) 
Plaintitt, ) STATE’S RESPONSE TO 
VS. ) MOTION TO SUPPRESS 
ISAAC EVANS, , eee 
Defendant. ) (Assigned to the Honorable 
) Thomas W. O'Toole, Div. 30) 
) 
) (Filed Apr. 3, 1991) 
) 


COMES NOW, the State of Arizona, by and through 
undersigned counsel, and respectfully requests that 
Defendant’s Motion be denied based on the following 
Memorandum of Points and Authorities. 


Respectfully submitted this 3 day of April, 1991. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 


BY /s/ Kim N. Stuart 
Kim N. Stuart 
Deputy County Attorney 


MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES 
FACTS: 


The State adapts [sic] the facts set out in Defendant's 
Motion with the following additions: When stopped the 
Defendant was asked for his driver’s license. He 
responded that he didn’t have it because it was sus- 
pended. The computer check revealed the warrant and 
confirmed the fact that Defendant’s license was sus- 
pended. 


The warrant was issued for Failure to Appear on 
driving on a suspended license. It was issued on Decem- 
ber 13, 1990. The warrant was issued out of East Phoenix 
I Justice Court and quashed by the Justice of the Peace in 
Central Phoenix Justice Court. 


The standard procedure in quashing a warrant is for 
a clerk in the Justice Court to notify the Maricopa County 
Sheriff’s Office that the warrant has been quashed. The 
Sheriff's office then removes it from the computer. When 
the Justice Court notifies the Sheriff's office a notation is 
made in the file to that affect [sic] indicating who called 
and who at the Sheriff’s office was spoken to. In this case, 
there is no such notation indicating the Sheriff's office 
was not notified that the warrant was quashed. (See 
attached exhibit). The Sheriff's office has no record of 
being notified that the warrant was quashed. 


ARGUMENT: 


Defendant was arrested for both the warrant and for 
driving on a suspended license, which is a class one 


misdemeanor. A.R.S. §13-473. The fact that Officer Sar- 
gent articulated the arrest as being for the warrant and 
not for the suspended license in no way means that 
Defendant could not validly be arrested on the driving 
violation. The subjective state of mind of the officer is not 
controlling. The question of whether the arrest of Defen- 
dant is valid turns on an objective assessment of the 
officer’s action in light of the facts known to him at the 
time, not on his subjective motivation. Scott v. United 
States, 436 U.S. 128, 98 S.Ct. 1717, 55 L.Ed 2d 168 (1978). 


“{T]he fact that the officer does not have the State of 
mind which is hypothecated by the reasons which pro- 
vide the legal justification for the officer’s action does not 
invalidate the action taken as long as the circumstances, 
viewed objectively, justify that action.” Scott, supra at 138. 
Clearly Defendant was subject to arrest (and was in fact 
arrested) for driving on a suspended license. The arrest 
therefore was valid and the evidence resulting from the 
search incident to the arrest is admissible. See United 
States v. Rambo, 789 F.2d 1289 (1986). 


In any event, the officer acted in good faith in arrest- 


- ing the Defendant pursuant to a warrant that appeared to 


be valid. A.R.S. §13-3925 provides that evidence shall not 
be suppressed if “the Court determines that the evidence 
was seized by a peace officer as a result of a good faith 
mistake or technical violation.” Here, the officer acted 
upon a warrant which he believed to be valid. This is 
both a “good faith mistake” under §13-3925(c)(1) since if 
the warrant was valid it would constitute probable cause 
to arrest and a “technical violation” under §13-3925(c)(2) 
since the officer relied on a warrant which was later 
invalidated due to a good faith mistake. 


10 


In this case the warrant was issued on December 13, 
1990, quashed on December 19, 1990 and the arrest 
occurred on January 5, 1991. This is a total of 23 days 
from issuance and only 17 days from quashing. This all 
took place during the holiday season when things are 
very hectic, people are on vacation, and due to the holi- 
days the number of actual working days is less. It 
appears the Justice Court was tardy in relaying the infor- 
mation that the warrant was quashed to the Sheriff's 
office. Under the circumstances existing here, it was rea- 
sonable for the officer to have relied on the warrant. 


State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (App. 1989) 
cited by the Defendant does not deal with the Arizona 
good faith statute. In addition, in Greene there was a 
delay of eight months between the quashing of the war- 
rant and the arrest. The decision is Greene turns on the 
Court's finding that the police department (negligently or 
deliberately) caused the warrant to still be in the com- 
puter. Applying the exclusionary rule would, (the Court 
felt) deter the police department from failing to keep its 
computer entries up to date. 


Here there is evidence that it was not the doing of the 
Phoenix Police Department that the warrant was still in 
the computer and the delay was only 17 days during the 
holiday season. Suppressing the evidence in this case 
would in no way deter police misconduct. 


“(T]he rationale for the exclusionary rule is that by 
making the evidence obtained inadmissible, the police are 
not rewarded for violating a defendant’s constitutional 
rights, and that such conduct will be deterred in the 
future.” State v. Nahee, 155 Ariz. 114, 116, 745 P.2d 172 


ee ER ee A A gyn Sl 


11 


(App. 1987). Suppressing the evidence in this case will 
not further the purpose of the exclusionary rule. 


“If you were to look only at the actions of the arrest- 
ing officer of the South Tucson Police Department, the 
conclusion would be that the ends of the exclusionary 
rule would not be advanced by holding the evidence 
inadmissible. However, under the facts of this case one 
must look beyond his actions and focus on the actions of 
the South Tucson Police Department.” (Emphasis added) 
Greene, supra at 384-385. Greene is sufficiently distinguish- 
able from the case at bar that this court has no need to 
look beyond the actions of Officer Sargent. 


Based on the foregoing, Defendant’s Motion should 
be denied. 


Respectfully submitted this 3 day of April, 1991. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 


BY /s/ Kim N. Stuart 
Kim N. Stuart 
Deputy County Attorney 


12 


Copy of the foregoing 
mailed/delivered this 
3 day of April, 1991, 

to: 


The Honorable Thomas W. O’Toole 
Judge of the Superior Court 


Stephen Whelihan 
Deputy Public Defender 
132 South Central 
Phoenix, AZ 85004 
Defense Attorney 


BY /s/ Kim N. Stuart 
Kim N. Stuart 
Deputy County Attorney 


KS:jd 
4.3.7 


ano pn Be ELLY) Gro -Yeveoyy7 FY oS~b! =7/ 


WAITS aLvd 


YD-8b/Lb/9v/SbTPO-06 -UL *HYSEWNN 3SVD Uno 


*SUSEGWNN NOILWLID 


. >aNOHd ¥UOM >3NOHd 3WOH 
>dIz >ILWLS 7ALIO 

[USaWNN LNANLUVdY 

> Ssaudaav Lagzuss 
SNVAT D¥VSI *dWYN 

LNIUd ASW3Id 
UVGONSTVD JI4aVal 
zee - _ ares 


14 


IN THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
IN AND FOR THE COUNTY OF MARICOPA 


STATE OF ARIZONA, 
Plaintiff, 
vs. 
ISAAC EVANS, 
Defendant. 


No. CR91-00513 


ee 


Phoenix, Arizona 
April 15, 1991 


BEFORE: The Honorable I. SYLVAN BROWN, Judge 


REPORTER’S TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 


Evidentiary Hearing: Motion to Suppress 


MICHAEL N. VACCA 
Official Court Reporter 


Prepared for Appeal 


15 


[p. 4] Phoenix, Arizona 
April 15, 1991 
10:27 a.m. 


THE COURT: CR91-00513, State of Arizona 
versus Isaac Evans. This is the time regularly set for the 
evidentiary hearing on the defendant’s Motion to Sup- 
press. 


Is the State ready? 


MR. STUART: Yes, Your Honor. Kim Stuart for 
the State. 


THE COURT: Defense? 


MR. WHELIHAN: Yes, Your Honor. Steven 
Whelihan appearing on behalf of the defendant, who is 
present and out of custody. 


THE COURT: You may proceed. 


MR. STUART: Thank you, Your Honor. I would 
call Officer Sargent. 


BRYAN, SARGENT, called as a witness herein, hav- 


ing been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as 
follows: 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Would you state your name, please? 
[p. 5] A. Bryan Thomas Sargent. 


Q. What is your occupation? 


16 


Police Officer, City of Phoenix. 

How long have you been so employed? 
Four and-a-half years. 

What is your present assignment? 


Patrol officer. 


(“ODO > O + O > 


Let me draw your attention to January 5th of 
1991. What was your assignment at that time? 


Patrol still. 


Were you on duty on that day about 6:30 p.m.? 


Yes, I was. 


Oo > 0 > 


Did you have occasion to be in the area of 620 
West Washington? 


Yes, | was. 
Is that in Phoenix, Maricopa County, Arizona? 
Yes. 


While there, what were you doing there? 


2. & 


I was turning in paperwork. That is the main 
police station. | was turning in paperwork there for 
another arrest. 


Q. Where were you located? 
A. We were parked right in front there. 


[p. 6] Q. You were parked in a vehicle? 


A. Yes. 


By 


17 


Q. Was there anyone with you? 
A. Another officer, Lumley, was with me. 


Q. While you were there, did you observe some- 
thing that drew your attention? 


A. Yes. 
Q. What was that? 


A. We observed a vehicle traveling on the wrong 
way of a one-way street. 


Q. Washington is a one-way street? 
Yes. 
One-way going west? 
Westbound. 


A 
Q 
A 
Q. This vehicle was going eastbound? 
A. Yes. 

Q 


What did you do? 


> 


We activated our overhead lights and made a 
U-turn to stop this vehicle. 


Q. Did the vehicle stop? 

Yes. 

Any problems in the stop? 
No. 


Did you approach the driver? 


> OP 0 > 


Yes. We approached each other. 


18 


[p. 7] Q. Is the driver present in the courtroom 
today? 


A. Yes, he is. 
Q. Would you point him out, please? 
A. He is sitting at the other table, in the brown suit. 


THE COURT: Let the record indicate that the 
witness has indicated the defendant. 


MR. STUART: Thank you, Your Honor. 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Did you - as you approached the driver, the 
defendant, did you ask him for a driver's license? 


A. Yes, I did. 
Q. What did he say? 


A. He said he didn’t have one because he didn’t 
have it because it is suspended. 


Q. Did you proceed to get some information, some 
identifying information from him? 


A. Yes, I did. He didn’t have any I.D., so I took his 
name. 


Q. Did you have occasion, then, to run that name in 
your computer? 


A. Yes, I did. 
Q. And that is contained within your police vehicle? 


[p. 8] A. Yes, it is. 


19 


Did you get a response to your inquiry? 


Yes. 


OP? 0 


What did that indicate? 


A. The one response I got from M.V.D. was that his 
license was suspended. 


Q. Did you make any other inquiries? 


A. Yes. We also checked him for warrants, and he 
did have a warrant, misdemeanor warrant. 


Q. At that time, did you know what that misde- 
meanor warrant was for? 


A. No. 


Q. After you received that information, what did 
you do? 


A. I went back to Mr. Evans, and I advised him that 
he was under arrest for the warrant. 


Q. And what action did you take at that time? 


A. I escorted him over to my police car, where we 
searched him and handcuffed him. 


Q. Prior to your handcuffing, did you observe him 
make any - do anything with his hands? 


A. He had had his hands in his front pocket, I think, 
most of the time. And then when I approached him and 
told him he was under arrest for the warrant, he had 
taken his hand out of his pocket. 


[p- 9] Q. Did you have any trouble placing the 
handcuffs on the defendant? 


20 


A. Yes, I did. 
Q. Can you describe what that was? 


A. Mr. Evans is a muscular individual, and he was 
having a little trouble getting his hand behind his back. 
He had his left hand clenched in a fist, which was making 
it more difficult for me to turn his hand to get the - cuff 


him. 


I asked him to relax his hand so I could put hand- 
cuffs on. 


Q. Did he in fact do that? 
A. He finally did after two requests. 


Q. And did you observe anything happen when he 
relaxed his hand? 


A. As soon as he opened his hand, a rolled cigarette 
fell to the ground from his hand. 


Q. You mean like a handrolled cigarette? 
A. Yes. 
Q. What did you do at that time? 


A. Well, I put the cuffs on him, and then I had him 
take a seat in the back seat of the patrol car. 


Q. Did you take any action, or have any action 
taken with respect to this handrolled cigarette? 


A. Yes. Officer Lumley recovered the [p. 10] ciga- 
rette. 


Q. Did you look at the cigarette? 


21 


A. Yes, I did. 


Q. Did you reach a conclusion as to what was con- 
tained in the cigarette? 


A. Yes, I did. 
Q. What was that? 


A. The cigarette smelled like it possibly contained 
marijuana. 


Q. Did you then seize that cigarette? 
A. Yes. 


! Q. Did you have occasion then to search the vehi- 
cle? 


A. Yes, we did. 


Q. And would this have been pursuant to the 
arrest? 


A. Yes. 


Q. Let me ask you this: Did you also place the 
defendant under arrest for the driving on suspended 
license that you observed? 


MR. WHELIHAN: Objection. Leading. 
THE COURT: Sustained. 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Did you have occasion to search the vehicle? 


A. Yes. 


[p. 11] Q. What was the basis for searching the 
vehicle? 


22 


A. Incident to the arrest. 
Q. Was there anything found in the vehicle? 


A. Yes. We found a baggie of a large quantity for 
usable amount of green leafy substance underneath the 
passenger seat. We believed it to be marijuana. 


Q. Was there a passenger in the vehicle? 


A. Yes, there was. 


Q. Prior to the search, had you asked her to step 
out? 


Yes, I had. 
Did Officer Lumley search her person? 
Yes, she did. 


Q. Did she find some items of contraband in her 
purse? 


A. Yes, she did. 
Q. What was that? 


> O > 


A. She found a package of cigarettes, rolling papers, 


’ and some marijuana residue. 


Q. Going back to Mr. - excuse me, to the arrest of 
the defendant, did you have occasion at some time after 
that you had arrested him to call to confirm the warrant? 


A. Yes, we did. 
[p. 12] Q. And what happened on that call? 


A. Well, we contacted our I-Bureau, because it was 
a Phoenix warrant, and we were advised that the warrant 
was still good. 


23 


Q. Did you also arrest the defendant for driving on 
a suspended license? 


A. Yes, we did. 
MR. WHELIHAN: Objection. 
THE COURT: Oh, the objection is sustained. 


Counsel, you asked a question that way; it was objec- 
ted to and sustained. That is not right to ask him. 


MR. STUART: It was objected to as leading, and 
that is not a leading question. 


THE COURT: It is a leading question. You could 
have asked him what else he arrested him for. He already 
testified he arrested him based on the warrant, and for no 
other reason. And if you keep asking him enough, maybe 
he’ll agree with you. 


MR. STUART: All right. 


THE COURT: The objection is sustained, and 
the answer is stricken. 


BY MR. STUART: 
Q. What else did you arrest him for, if anything? 


[p- 13] A. We arrested him for the suspended 
driver’s license and for possession of marijuana. 


Q. During - 


THE COURT: Do you normally arrest people 
for driving on a suspended license, or do you normally 
write them a citation? 


THE WITNESS: Your Honor, usually I write 
them a citation. 


24 


THE COURT: Right. 


MR. STUART: That was my next question, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: Very good. 


BY MR. STUART: 


Q. In this case, with respect to the defendant, if he 
had not had that warrant, would you have arrested him 
for driving on a suspended license? 


A. Probably not. 


MR. STUART: I have nothing further at this 
time, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: You may examine. 
MR. WHELIHAN: Thank you, Judge. 


[p. 14] CROSS-EXAMINATION 


BY MR. WHELIHAN: 


Q. You testified that you probably would not have 
arrested the defendant but for the warrant. Is that right? 


A. Yes. 


Q. And usually when you stop someone and find 
out that they are driving on a suspended license, you 
would issue a citation. 


A. I would, yes. 


Q. And your decision as to whether you would take 
such a person into custody depends on their attitude 


towards you? 


25 


A. Sometimes, yes. 


Q. In this case, Mr. Evans was very cooperative 
with you, wasn’t he? 


A. Yes, he was. 


Q. So if it hadn’t been for the warrant, you would 
have let him go, wouldn’t you? 


THE COURT: Counsel, that is asked and 
answered. He already said he would not have arrested 
him but for the warrant. 


MR. WHELIHAN: That is all I have. 


MR. STUART: Nothing further from this wit- 
ness, Your Honor. 


[p. 15] THE COURT: Thank you very much. You 
may step down. 


(Witness excused.) 


MR. STUART: Your Honor, I would like to call 
Frances Crossman. 


FRANCES CROSSMAN, called as a witness herein, 
having »een first duly sworn, was examined and testified 
as follows: 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Would you state your name, please? 


A. Frances Crossman. 


26 


Q. What is your occupation? 


A. I’m the chief clerk of the East Phoenix Number 
One Justice Court. 


Q. How long have you been the chief clerk over 
there? 


A. Eight years there. 


Q. Did you work over there prior to becoming chief 
clerk? 


[p. 16] A. No. 


Q. Have you worked in the Justice Court system 
prior to that? 


A. Yes. I was at the Buckeye Justice Court as chief 
clerk for four years prior to that. 


Q. And were you employed as chief clerk at East 
Phoenix One during the month of December and January 
of 1990 and 1991? 


A. Yes, I was. 


Q. Did you bring some records to court today at my 
request? 


A. Yes, I did. 
Q. Do they concern Mr. Isaac Evans? 
A. Yes, they do. 


Q. Do they indicate a bench warrant being issued 
for Mr. Evans? 


A. Yes, it does. 


27 


MR. WHELIHAN: Judge, I think I object here, 
on the fouridation. I don’t know what records she’s talk- 
ing about. 


THE COURT: Well, I take it — 


MR. WHELIHAN: Whether there is a proper 
foundation for this coming in. 


THE COURT: Have it marked. I guess you 
should establish the foundation, counsel. 


[p. 17] MR. STUART: Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: We can have them copied and 
give her back the originals. 


THE WITNESS: I did bring copies, if you want. 


THE COURT: Counsel, she said she brought 
copies. 


BY MR. STUART: 
Q. How many copies did you bring? 
A. Just the one set, here. 


‘MR. STUART: Any objection to just marking 
the copies so we don’t have to make copies of the origi- 
nals and give them back? 


MR. WHELIHAN: No. That is fine. 
BY MR. STUART: 
Q. What records did you bring with you? 
A. I brought the entire file. 
Q. Of Mr. Evans? 


28 


A. Right. I only copied the pertinent part about the 


issuance of the warrant. ; 


Q. When you say the file, what file are you talking 
about? 


A. We havea file with four separate traffic tickets in 
the file. 


MR. WHELIHAN: Objection. This is irrelevant 
as to what the file is all about. 


[p. 18] THE COURT: Counsel, there is no jury 
here. That is the file she brought. The objection is over- 
ruled. 


BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Why don’t you tell us, while defense counsel is 
looking at the records, how these records come to be? 
How they start - how a file starts? 


A. Basically, a file starts when we get the LA. 
papers, initial appearance papers, the citation, and the 
DR from the officer. We make up a file at that time. The 


I.A. court gives us a date for the defendant to appear. 


Q. Is that date noted in the record? 


A. Yes, it is. He was to appear on December 12th of 
1990. 


Q. Do your records indicate whether or not he did 
appear? 

A. He did not appear, and the judge made a nota- 
tion that he was in custody in El Mirage and wanted us to 
check the jail to make sure that he was out of custody 
prior to issuing a bench warrant. 


29 


Q. Was that done? 


A. Yes, it was. He was not in custody. He was 
released on December 5th. 


Q. Was a bench warrant issued? 


[p. 19] A. A bench warrant was issued on the next 
day. It was signed on the next day. 


Q. Does your file indicate an appearance made by 
the defendant sometime after the issuance of the war- 
rant? 


A. Yes. On December 19th, the defendant appeared 
and saw a pro tem judge, who released him O.R. at that 
time. 


Q. Does the file indicate a notation that the warrant 
should have been quashed? \ 


A. Yes. It says, “Defendant appeared; quash war- 
rant and release O.R.; set for pretrial.” 


Q. What is your procedure when you are going to 
quash a warrant? 


A. We call the jail and advise them, or the Warrant 
Section, and advise them to quash the warrant, note on 
there that you have done it and who you talked to. 


Q. In reviewing the records that you brought today, 
does it indicate that was ever done? 


A. It was not done. 


Q. The Sheriff's office was not notified that this 
warrant should have been quashed? 


30 


A. That’s correct. 


Q. Does your - 


[p. 20] THE COURT: Is that any less State 
action, counsel? Just out of curiosity. | mean, you know. 


MR. STUART: It is still State action, Your 
Honor, but it is a difference. 


THE COURT: Thank you. 
MR. STUART: It is a different agency. 


THE COURT: Still State action. You agree with 
that. 


MR. STUART: It is an agency of the State, yes. 
THE COURT: Thank you. 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Does your file indicate again the next time that 
you received some kind of contact with Mr. Evans? 


A. On February - excuse me, January 7th, we got 


LA. papers stating he had been arrested under our war- 


rant. 


We immediately called the jail and told them that he 
had been released on our charges, faxed them a release 
order with his same pretrial date on it, and told them to 
release him on our charges. 


Q. Is there any particular person who should be 
making these notations in the file, or is it just whoever 
happens to pick it up that particular day? 


31 


A. Generally, there are three clerks that work in our 
traffic area. Any one of the three could have [p. 21] done 
it. Or should have done it. . 


Q. And they would make the notation at the time 
that they were to make this call - 


A. Right. 


Q. And there is no indication that that call was 
made? 


A. It was not done. 


MR. STUART: I have nothing further at this 
time. 


THE COURT: You may examine. 
MR. WHELIHAN: Thank you, Judge. 


THE COURT: I have one question, if you don’t 
mind, before you examine. 


MR. WHELIHAN: Go ahead. 


THE COURT: How can you tell that the call was 
not made as opposed to the call having been made and 
somebody not making the notation? 


THE WITNESS: Generally - 


THE COURT: No. No. No. How can you tell 
from these records whether or not the call was not made, 
or whether the call was made and somebody forgot to 
write down the notation you normally make? 


I want to know how you can tell that from the record. 


THE WITNESS: Well, he was arrested on it. 


32 


[p. 22] THE COURT: No. No. How can you tell 
from the record whether or not the call was made or 
somebody failed to make the notation? 


THE WITNESS: You really can’t. 


THE COURT: So your answer is you don’t 
know if they called. 


THE WITNESS: I don’t know that they called. 
There is no notation that they called. 


THE COURT: You may examine. 
Q. Thank you, Judge. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. WHELIHAN: 


Q. You said there are three clerks working for the 
Justice of the Peace whose responsibility it would be to 
make this call? 


A. That’s correct. 
Q. Would that be including you? 
A. No. Three. I do not make the calls anymore. 


Q. So among those three, how is it determined 
which one actually gets the responsibility for making the 
call on a particular case? 


A. It varies by, you know, who is working, who [p. 
23] is in the courtroom, who is doing plea agreements. 
Whoever is free generally makes the call immediately. 


This notation is unusual because it was a pro tem, 
and the clerk didn’t see it, so she didn’t make it. 


33 


Q. So Justice of the Peace would make the decision, 
he’d make a notation in the file, and then he’d hand the 
file to one of the clerks? 


A. Right. We usually get them back en masse, four 
or five files at a time. Sometimes we have 30 people in the 
courtroom all at one time, and as files are completed, we 
will get four or five back at a time from the judge. 


Q. So then that clerk will take those four or five 
files and look through them to to [sic] see what has to be 
done? 


A. Right. 


Q. And then that clerk is supposed to immediately 
call the Sheriff's office to notify them that the warrant has 
been quashed? 


A. That’s correct. 


Q. Does it ever happen that the clerk will not be 
able to reach the Sheriff's office by telephone? 


A. No. 


Q. Is there any procedure for checking to make [p. 
24] sure that all - that these calls have been made? 


A. They are supposed to double-check files before 
they file them away. 


Q. That would be the same clerk responsible for 
looking at the file to begin with? 


A. Right. They do calendar; they did do all the 
other things they were supposed to do, but not that one 
portion of it. 


34 


Q. Since this case has come up in recent weeks, has 
your office received telephone calls from the Sheriff's 
office regarding this? 


A. Not from the Sheriff’s office, no. 
Q. From some other agency? 


A. The County Attorney asked for information on 
it. 


Q. Did the Phoenix police call your agency regard- 
ing this? 


A. No, they have not. 


MR. WHELIHAN: That is all I have, Your 


Honor. 
MR. STUART: I have a - 
THE COURT: Did you offer Exhibit 1, counsel? 
MR. STUART: Excuse me? 
THE COURT: Were you going to offer Exhibit 
1? 


MR. STUART: I am, Your Honor. To make 
things better, I will offer Exhibit 1 in evidence at this 
point. 


[p. 25] THE COURT: Any objection, counsel? 
MR. WHELIHAN: No, Judge. 


THE COURT: Exhibit 1 will be admitted. 


35 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Is it normal procedure, standard practice in your 
office, that when the judge issues a warrant quashed, that 
a call be made, and that call be notated in the file? 


A. Yes, it is. 
Q. Are your clerks trained to do that? 


A. Yes. Could I clarify something to explain how it 
happened? 


©. Sure. 


A. We just recently had a change of judge. Our 
judge was defeated in election. So right at this time, we 
had pro tems in, not our regular judge. On December 
12th is our old judge’s writing. He always made his 
notations at the very bottom: “Prepare warrant; quash 
warrant.” 


He would write in great big letters, so he would, you 
know — it would come to your attention. 


[p. 26] So we had a pro tem that wrote it small in the 
middle of the thing, setting it for pretrial. That is why the 
Clerk missed it. 


MR. WHELIHAN: Objection. This is all spec- 
ulation on the part of the witness. 


THE COURT: Sustained. 


MR. STUART: I have no further questions, Your 
Honor. 


36 


THE COURT: Anything further? May this wit- 
ness be excused? 


MR. WHELIHAN: Just recross. I just wanted to 
ask something I believe was raised, which is having to do 
with the training of the clerks. 


RECROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. WHELIHAN: 


Q. What are the names of the three clerks that 
would have been responsible on December 19, or would 
have been employed by the Justice of the Peace December 
19th? 


A. Would have been Trudy Hunter, Mary Ellen 
Munguia and Janice Daniels were the three clerks at that 
time. 


Q. How long has Trudy been working? 


A. Trudy is assistant supervisor, and she’s [p. 27] 
been there four years. 


Q. And how long has Mary Ellen been working 
there? 


A. She’s worked there almost four years, also. 
Q. And how long has Janice been working? 


A. Janice was a little over a year as a transfer from 
Scottsdale Justice Court, where she worked a year. 


It probably would have been Mary Ellen or Trudy 
that should have quashed it. Janice was mostly inputting 
tickets and doing additional work. 


37 


Q. In your eight years as a chief clerk with the 
Justice of the Peace, have there been other occasions 
where a warrant was quashed but the police were not 
notified? 


A. That does happen on rare occasions. 


Q. And when you say rare occasions, about how 
many times in your eight years as chief clerk? 


A. In my particular court, they would be like maybe 
one every three or four years. 


Q. When something like this happens, is anything 
done by your office to correct that problem? 


A. Well, when this one happened, we searched all 
the files to make sure that there were no other ones in 
there, which there were three other ones on that same [p. 
28] day that it happened. Fortunately, they weren’t all 
arrested. 


MR. WHELIHAN: That is all I have. Thank you. 
THE COURT: Anything further, Mr. Stuart? 
MR. STUART: No, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: May this witness be excused from 
further attendance? 


MR. STUART: Yes. 
MR. WHELIHAN: Yes, 


THE COURT: You may step down. You are 
excused from further attendance. 


(Witness excused.) 


38 


MR. STUART: Your Honor, I would like to call 
Emily Luna. 


EMILY LUNA, 


called as a witness herein, having been first duly sworn, 
was examined and testified as follows: 


[p. 29] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. Could you state your name, please? 
Emily Luna. 

What is your occupation? 

Sheriff’s records clerk. 

And where do you work? 

At the Sheriff's office. 


How long have you worked there? 


> O > 0 > © > 


It will be two years in September. 


Q. Are you assigned to any particular - you said the 
Records Department. But is that broken down into any 
littler departments? 


A. Yes. 

Q. And where do you work? 

A. Well, we rotate, so it depends. 
Q 


Where are you working now? 


39 


A. | am working in O.1.C., Operations Information 


Center. 


Q. And would you have been working there in 
December and January — December of ‘90 and January of 
‘91? 


A. Yes. 


[p. 30] Q. Are you familiar with the procedures in 
the Sheriff's office for - what you do when a call comes in 
quashing a warrant? 


A. Yes. 
Q. What are those procedures? What do you do? 


A. The call comes in through the court clerk of 
where the warrant is issued out of. We have recall war- 
rants list, which is when that call comes in, we go and 
write down there. We get out the sheet. We go and put 
the date that we received the call, the time, the person 
that is calling the quash in, and the court that the quash is 
from. We ask the last name, first name, middle name of 
the subject that the warrant is on, his date of birth, the 
warrant number and the date that it was issued. 


Q. And this would all be written down on a record 
somewhere? 


A. It is called a warrant recall list. 


Q. After that information is taken, what is done to 
recall the warrant? 


A. We pull the active file out, and we pull the 
jacket, verify that that is the right information, the right 
warrant that we have pulled out. 


40 


On the active card, we go ahead and put the date that 
the call was received, by whom, and what court [p. 31] 
called it in. We go ahead and clear it out of the system. 


Once it is cleared, we go ahead and run a warrant 
check to make sure that it has been cleared. And we date 
it and put our A number and stamp it cancelled. 


Q. Did you have occasion to check records of the 
Sheriff’s office, the records that you referred to, with 
respect to a person named Isaac Evans? 


A. Did L, myself? 
Were records checked on Isaac Evans? 
Yes. 


Do you have those records with you? 


> O > 0 


Yes. 


Q. Do you know whether they reflect the — you 
heard the testimony from Frances Crossman when you 
were in court? 


A. Yes. 


Q. With respect to that warrant that the testimony 
was where a warrant was issued on December 13, 19___ 


MR. WHELIHAN: I'm going to object to this. | 
don’t know which records he’s referring to. There was a 
reference to the checking the records. 


THE COURT: I don’t know what records you 
are referring to, either, counsel. I think maybe you ought 


41 


[p. 32] to have them marked if they exist so counsel will 
get an opportunity to look at them, too, before she testi- 
fies from them. 


BY MR. STUART: 
Q. Did you bring copies, or are these the originals? 
A. Those are copies. 


Q. Let me show you what has been marked State’s 
Exhibit 2 for identification. These records, what are they? 


A. It is called a warrant recall list. And these are the 
quashes that we called — got called on to have the warrant 
quashed. 


Q. And this is the recall list that you talked about? 
A. Yes. 


Q. Let me show you that list. What are the dates 
contained on that list? 


A. Through December 18 —- through December 20. 


Q. Is there notation on that list that a quash was 
called in on Isaac Evans? 


A. No. 


MR. WHELIHAN: I’m going to object and move 
to strike on the basis that she’s testifying to hearsay. 


THE COURT: Yeah. The Exhibit is not in [p. 33] 
evidence. Sustained. 


You should have objected first, counsel. 


MR. STUART: Excuse me? 


42 


THE COURT: She’s testifying from an exhibit 
not in evidence, but, no, as to just what the dates were, is 
that what you are objecting to? 


MR. WHELIHAN: No. 
THE COURT: The last question - 


MR. WHELIHAN: The last question, I object 
and move to strike. 


THE COURT: The dates come in, but the last 
question doesn’t until it gets into evidence. 


MR.STUART: Your Honor, at this time, | would 
move Exhibit 2 into evidence. 


THE COURT: Do you have any objection? 


MR. WHELIHAN: I’m not sure that a proper 
foundation has been laid. 


THE COURT: Yeah. They are records kept in the 
ordinary course of business in the Sheriff's office. She 
said she uses that list routinely and makes it up on a 
daily basis. 


The objection is overruled. Exhibit 2 may be admit- 
ted. 


Now you can ask your question. 
MR. STUART: Thank you, Your Honor. 
[p. 34) BY MR. STUART: 


Q. With respect to Exhibit 2, does that indicate that 
a call was ever received quashing the warrant on Isaac 
Evans? 


43 


A. No. 


MR. STUART: Your Honor, I have nothing fur- 
ther of this witness. 


THE COURT: You may examine. 
CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. WHELIHAN: 


Q. Miss Luna, based on just looking at the records, 
you are not able to say whether the call was received and 
the person receiving the call failed to write it down, just 
from looking at the records, are you? 


A. No. I'm pretty sure we wouldn't have received 


Q. Based on the regular practice? 
A. Right. 


Q. But you don’t know whether in this case the call 
was received and the clerk failed to make a notation, do 
you? 


A. No. 


Q. Do you know who would have answered the [p. 
35] phone December 19th or December 20th? 


A. No. Well, it is just that we rotate shifts, and I am 
not sure who was working on that day. 


MR. WHELIHAN: That is all I have. 


MR. STUART: I don’t believe I have any other 
questions, Your Honor. 


44 


MR. WHELIHAN: I’m sorry. If | may? 
THE COURT: Did you forget something? 
MR. WHELIHAN: Yes. 
THE COURT: Go ahead. 

BY MR. WHELIHAN: 


Q. I just wanted to clarify some of your testimony 
on direct. 


When the call is received, a notation is made on the 
recall warrant list, and then you said that the warrant is 
pulled out. Can you explain what you mean by that? 


A. Well, the in file. 


Q. So this is a piece of paper that you actually pull 
out of a file? 


A. It is a jacket. The jacket is pulled. 


Q. And then you make notations on a card that is 
inside the jacket? 


A. No. The card is actually in a different file, so we 
have the jacket against the wall, and then [p. 36] the 
active file is in the file drawer. 


Q. After going to the jacket and then going to this 
card that we are referring to, then the procedure is to 
clear out the system. Is that what you said? 


A. Clear the warrant out of the system. 
Q. And what does that involve? 


A. You have to actually - do you want the format. 


45 


Q. On a computer, you make an entry onto a com- 
puter that removes it from the data bank of the computer. 
Is that right? 


A. Yes. 
Q. And then you run a check to see whether - 


A. You run it through the computer again to make 
sure it shows cleared. 


Q. Is there a procedure for police officers to call to 
confirm whether the warrant has been quashed? 


A. Yes. 

Q. Whether a warrant is still — 

A. Yes. 

Q. That would be to call your records department? 
A. Yes. 

Q. And then you would then check? 


A. We go ahead and check the active file, and [p. 37] 
if there was one, then we would go ahead and pull the 
jacket from the file. 


MR. WHELIHAN: No further questions. 
MR. STUART: Your Honor, if I might? 
THE COURT: Certainly. 
REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. STUART: 


Q. In this case, if someone had called to check the 
warrant on Isaac Evans, they would have found the war- 
rant to be active. Is that correct? 


46 


A. Yes. 


MR. STUART: I have nothing further, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: May this witness be excused from 
turther attendance? 


MR. STUART: Yes. Your Honor. 
MR. WHELIHAN: Thank you. 


THE COURT: Thank you. You may step down. 
You are excused. 


THE WITNESS: Thank you. 


(Witness excused.) 


[p. 38] MR. STUART: Your Honor, the State has 
no further evidence on this, on the motion. 


THE COURT: Defense? 


MR. WHELIHAN: We will not be introducing 
any further evidence, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: It is your motion to suppress, 
counsel. 


MR. WHELIHAN: Thank you, Judge. 


The defense is moving to suppress this evidence 
because it was obtained as a result of an invalid arrest. 
The testimony has shown that the warrant was quashed 
on December 19th, and that the only reason Officer Ser- 
geant arrested Mr. Evans was that warrant. Since that 
warrant was invalid, the arrest is invalid, and the fruits of 


47 


the arrest, the marijuana cigarette and the other mari- 
juana found in the car, are fruit of the poisonous tree of 
the invalid arrest. Therefore, they should be suppressed. 


The State's response to the defense’s position, | think, 
can be divided basically into two arguments. In the first 
argument, they say well, the subjective state of mind of 
the police officer doesn’t matter. 


THE COURT: That is not really an issue in the 
case. The arrest was made on the warrant. That is clear 
[p. 39] from the evidence. We don’t have that issue. 


MR. WHELIHAN: So I take it that the first 
argument that the State makes may be put aside. 


THE COURT: That's correct. 


MR. WHELIHAN: Then I take it that the issue 
is whether the good faith exception to the exclusionary 
rule applies. 


Our position is that this is all State action, and that 
the exclusionary - the purposes of the exclusionary rule 
would be served here by making the clerks for the court, 
or the clerk for the Sheriff's office, whoever is responsible 
for this mistake, to be more careful about making sure 
that warrants are removed from the records, and saving 
citizens from unwarranted intrusions on their right to 
move around. 


In the case of State versus Greene, the defendant was 
arrested on a warrant that had been quashed eight 
months before. The State finds a distinction in that case in 
that here there was only 17 days that had passed since the 
warrant was quashed. : 


48 


There was testimony that in order to get the word 
out, it was merely a matter of making a phone call and 
making an entry into the computer. This is the computer 
age. We don’t need weeks of delay in order to get the 
word out. 


[p. 40] There is also — the State also argues that this 
was during the holiday season, and I guess that somehow 
excuses it. This may explain what happened, but it 
doesn’t excuse it. 


THE COURT: Mr. Stuart? 
MR. STUART: Thank you, Your Honor. 


If I might, | would like to make one point on the first 
part of my response. 


THE COURT: You certainly may. 


MR. STUART: I think it is a valid response. If 
an officer arrests - walks up to somebody and says, “You 
are under arrest for disorderly conduct,” and arrests him, 
searches him and finds something, it turns out really 
there was no disorderly conduct that would sustain an 
arrest, but in fact the guy was validly trespassing and the 
officer could have arrested on the trespassing, the courts 
would look to the objective circumstances, see that there 
could have been a valid arrest for trespassing, if you will, 
and uphold that search based on the objective circum- 
stances and not on what the officer had in his head, and 
the officer was mistaken in what he articulated, but there 
was a valid arrest. 


THE COURT: Mr. Stuart, the fact is that the 
police officers do not arrest for driving on suspended 


49 


license. This officer testified that he ordinarily does [p. 
41] not arrest. 


MR. STUART: I understand that, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: And in this case, he would not 
have arrested him for driving on a suspended license. So 
let’s get to the issue of the warrant. That is what he 
arrested him on. 


MR. STUART: I am moving on. He could have 
arrested — 


THE COURT: There is no question, he could 
have arrested him for driving the wrong way on a one- 
way street, probably. I don’t know whether that is a 
criminal or civil traffic violation anymore, but, you know, 
you can arrest people for lots of things. The fact is he was 
arrested on the warrant, and there is no doubt that is 
what he was arrested for. 


MR. STUART: That's correct. Let me move on to 
the good faith. 


| think the State has made the case here that distin- 
guishes this case from State versus Greene. The Court is 
aware in Greene that the case turns on the fact that 
essentially the court assumed it was the South Tucson 
Police Department’s fault that this warrant wasn't 
quashed. They say something to the effect there is no 
evidence one way or the other, but we're going to go 
ahead and assume that that is the case, and it is going [p. 
42] to serve the purpose of the exclusionary rule to sup- 
press the evidence in that case, and that is going to teach 
the police department a lesson, essentially, that they are 
going to have to keep these up to date. 


50 


In this case, the State has presented evidence that it 
was not the police department's doing, nor was it the 
Sheriff's department doing, but it was the doing of the 
justice court. Through their negligence, or whatever term 
you want to use, they didn’t pick it up; they didn’t notify 
the Sheriff’s office, who then couldn't take it out of the 
computer. 


The Officer did what he had to do; what he’s 
required by law to do when he finds a warrant. As far as 
he knew, it was a valid warrant. 


If you read the court notes in the Greene case, that 
they even say that; that the Officer’s action would fall 
within the good faith exception other than the fact that 
the police agency, itself, they found, was the one who 
didn’t take it out. 


In this case, it is not the police agency; it is the justice 
court. It is not going to serve the ends of the exclusionary 
rule to suppress the case here. It makes no difference to 
the justice court. They are not going to change their 
practice. It is not going to change the practice of the 
police department in this [p. 43] case, because they are 
acting on a valid warrant, or a warrant that to them was 
valid. They could not do any more than they did to find 
out what had happened. 


You know, all the cases on the exclusionary rule, the 
case that the State has stated, Nahee, the Green case, 
itself, indicates what the purpose is. And the purpose is 
not going to be served here. It is not going to deter any 
kind of police conduct to suppress the evidence in this 
case. The police did what they should have done. The 
police did what they had to do here. And it was the fault, 


51 


if vou will, of the Justice Court for not entering that. And 
suppressing the evidence here is not going to affect the 
Justice Court at all. 


The State would submit, based on its argument and 
the motion, that — or its response, that the motion should 


be denied. 


THE COURT: It is my understanding, Mr. 
Stuart, that it is State action that triggers the entire issue 
of motions to suppress. And whether that State action is 
the police, the Sheriff, the Court, or anybody else. You 
make a distinction, it being different parts of State action. 


MR. STUART: I do. It is a different situation 
because it is the exclusionary rule at work here. And the 
good faith doctrine. It is not - it is not the [p. 44] typical 
State action. 


If you look at the Greene case — 
THE COURT: 1 looked at it very carefully. 
MR. STUART: They make it clear - 


THE COURT: Well, they make it clear that what 
they are trying to do is deter negligence; in that case, to 
deter the negligence of the Tucson — South Tucson Police 
Department, or whatever. And in this case, perhaps the 
negligence of the Justice Court, or the negligence of the 
Sheriff’s office. But it is still the negligence of the State. 


See, the problem is I think the Greene case is really 
not that good. I think the police officer is bound to arrest. 
| think that is his duty. I think he would be derelict in his 
duty if he failed to arrest. 


uv 
to 


MR. STUART: That's correct. 


THE COURT: There is no question in my mind 
about it. But unfortunately, they didn’t empower me to 
overrule the Court of Appeals. And, you know, the dis- 
tinction between 17 days and eight months is a distinc- 
tion without a difference. The fact is if it were 24 hours, 
you might be able to find some reason. 


The fact is the Court of Appeals has held - in my 
opinion, I would not have held the same way - but the 
Court of Appeals has held that when you arrest on an [p. 
45] invalid warrant which was quashed, and should have 
been taken out of the computer, that the evidence seized 
as a result of that arrest has to be quashed. 


I think the police did exactly what they had to do. 
But the Court of Appeals doesn’t. And perhaps Division 
One of the Court of Appeals may feel differently about it 
than Division Two. But I’m bound by Division Two's 
decisions also. And their decision says it has to be 
quashed. It has to be suppressed. 


MR. STUART: I understand. But the State’s con- 
tention, I’m sure the Court understands - 


THE COURT: I understand. 


MR. STUART: This doesn’t fall within the ambit 
of Greene, because it wasn’t the police department's fault. 
And we have proved that. 


THE COURT: I understand. But it is the State’s 
fault. I can’t find a distinction between State action, 
whether it happens to be the police department or not. 


53 


You know, I told you, I would have held differently. I 
can’t overrule the Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court, 
apparently, as far as I can determine, there are no other 
cases decided by Division One on this same issue. 


MR. STUART: I have not found one on this 
particular point. 


[p. 46] THE COURT: Right. Neither have I. 
Motion to Suppress is granted. 


MR. STUART: Your Honor, in light of that, 
obviously, the State is not going to be prepared to pro- 
ceed to trial. 


THE COURT: I take it you would like to dismiss 
without prejudice? 


MR. STUART: That's correct, Your Honor. We 
are contemplating appealing to see if Division One will 
disagree. 


Thank you, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Any objection to the motion to 
dismiss without prejudice? 


MR. WHELIHAN: No, Judge. I would ask that 
it would be with prejudice. 


THE COURT: Yeah. No, I think the State has an 
absolute right to appeal that issue. 


It will be ordered granting the State’s motion to 
dismiss without prejudice. 


MR. STUART: Thank you, Your Honor. 


54 


THE COURT: Court will stand at recess. 


[p. 47] I Michael N. Vacca, do hereby certify that the 
foregoing pages constitute a full accurate typewritten 
record of my stenographic notes taken at said time and 
place, all done to the best of my skill and ability. 


DATED this 22nd day of May, 1991 


/s/ Michael N. Vacca 
Official Court Reporter 


55 


IN THE COURT OF APPEALS 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
DIVISION ONE 


THE STATE OF ARIZONA,) 
) No. 1 CA-CR 91-663 


) 
Vs. ) Maricopa County Superior 
ISAAC EVANS ) Court No. CR 91-00513 


Appellant, 


Appellee. 


_— “~~ ~~” 


APPELLANT’S OPENING BRIEF 
(Filed Jun. 28, 1991) 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 


Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 
State Bar No. 004978 


111 West Monroe Street 
Suite 1800 
Phoenix, Arizona 85003 


Attorneys for Appellant 
Phone: (602) 261-5941 


56 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
TABLE OF CASES AND AUTHORITIES............ ii 
SEAS GI BOM Gir co cc cseeesivecscesenes 1 
ARGUMENT 
THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION IN 
GRANTING THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS....... 3 
EE io. an cnn 650s 66s ncte teneneeeseenses 5 
we we eG TTT TTT eee rie 6 


TABLE OF CASES AND AUTHORITIES 


CASES PAGE 
Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433, 94 S.Ct. 2537, 41 
BF GF SPST ESE Pe TTT eee eee 3 


State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (Ct. 
App. 1989) ......cccccccccccsccsccccsscccssescsecs 3-5 


State v. Nahee, 155 Ariz. 114, 745 P.2d 172 (Ct. App. 
SOU i045 daadssedswawswe scour bddad gee Necen pees cus 3 


STATUTES AND AUTHORITIES 


Arizona Revised Statute, §12-120.21(A)(1)............. 3 
Arizona Revised Statute, §13-3925...............45. 4,5 
Arizona Revised Statute, §13-4031.......... SPE r POF 3 
Arizona Revised Statute, §13-4033...............5555 3 


Ate, Geet: AGG. GB i oc cc cccccccvcsstetededsccscsen 3 


57 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The State charged appellee with possession of mari- 
juana, a class 6 felony. (Instruments, Item No. 15.) It later 
added an allegation that appellee had five prior felony 
convictions. (/d., Item No. 19.) 


On March 27, 1991, appellee filed a motion to sup- 
press the marijuana, arguing that it was the fruit of an 
invalid arrest. (Id., Item No. 28.) At the evidentiary hear- 
ing on the motion, Officer Bryan Sargent testified that he 
had stopped appellee for driving the wrong way on a 
one-way street. (R.T. of Apr. 15, 1991, at 6.) When the 
officer asked for appellee’s driver’s license, appellee 
responded that he did not have one because it had been 
suspended. (Id., at 7.) Officer Sargent then obtained 
appellee’s name and ran a computer check on it. (/d.) 


The computer showed that appellee’s license was 
suspended and that there was a misdemeanor warrant for 
his arrest. (Id., at 8.) After checking with the I-Bureau and 
being told that the warrant was still valid, Officer Sargent 
told appellee he was under arrest and began to handcuff 
him. (Id., at 8, 12.) Officer Sargent testified that he would 
not have arrested appellee had it not been for the war- 
rant. (Id., at 13.) Appellee’s left hand was clenched, mak- 
ing it difficult to get the handcuffs on, so the officer asked 
him to relax his hand. (Id., at 9.) As appellee opened his 
hand, a cigarette fell to the ground. (/d.) Officer Sargent’s 
partner picked the cigarette up and the officers deter- 
mined that it was a marijuana cigarette. (/d., at 9-10.) 


Officer Sargent then searched appellee’s car and 
found a baggie of marijuana under the passenger seat. 
(Id., at 10-11.) He also found rolling papers and marijuana 


58 


residue in the purse of the woman who had been sitting 
in the passenger seat. (/d., at 11.) 


Frances Crossman, the chief clerk for the East Phoe- 
nix Justice Court, testified that the warrant had been 
issued on December 12, 1990, after appellee failed to 
appear on several traffic tickets. (Id., at 18-19.) On Decem- 
ber 19, 1990, however, appellee had appeared before a pro 
tem judge and the warrant had been quashed. (Id., at 19.) 
Normally, the court clerk then calls the Sheriff’s Office to 
tell them the warrant had been quashed. (/d.) There was 
no indication in appellee’s justice court file that the Sher- 
iff’s Office had been notified of the quashed warrant. (Id., 
at 19, 22.) After the clerk’s office learned that the quash- 
ing of appellee’s warrant had not been communicated to 
the Sheriff’s Office, they checked other warrants quashed 
on the same day as appellee’s and found three others 
where the Sheriff's Office had not been notified. (/d., at 
27-28.) The records clerk from the Sheriff's Office con- 
firmed that there was no record of a call from the justice 
court quashing appellee’s warrant. (Id. at 34.) 


At the end of the hearing, the trial court granted the 
motion to suppress. (/d., at 45-46.) It then granted the 
State’s motion to dismiss the case without prejudice. (/d.) 


The State filed a timely notice of appeal. (Instru- 
ments, Item No. 34.) This Court has jurisdiction pursuant 
to Ariz. Const. Art. 6, §9, and A.R.S. §§ 12-120.21(A)(1), 
13-4031 and -4033. 


a 


59 


ARGUMENT 


THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION IN 
GRANTING THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS. 


The trial court based its ruling on the theory that the 
marijuana was the fruit of an unlawful arrest of appellee 
even though the officer had no knowledge that the arrest 
warrant had been quashed. Although it disagreed with 
the case, the trial court felt that State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 
383, 783 P.2d 829 (Ct. App. 1989), required suppression of 
the marijuana. Appellant submits that the Greene decision 
does not control here, and that the exclusionary rule does 
not require suppression of the marijuana. 


The purpose of the exclusionary rule is to deter 
future police conduct by precluding evidence obtained as 
a result of police violations of a defendant's constitu- 
tional rights. Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433, 94 S.Ct. 
2537, 41 L.Ed.2d 182 (1974). Thus, in applying the rule, it 
is important to focus upon whose conduct is involved. 
State v. Nahee, 155 Ariz. 114, 745 P.2d 172 (Ct. App. 1987). 


Here, there is no police misconduct to be deterred by 
applying the exclusionary rule. The arrest occurred a 
little more than two weeks after the warrant had been 
quashed. Before Officer Sargent arrested appellee on the 
warrant, he contacted the I-Bureau and was told that the 
warrant was still valid. The evidence shows that the 
justice court clerk’s office had failed to inform law 
enforcement authorities that the warrant had been 
quashed. No negligence or misconduct was attributable 
to the police department. Thus, when Officer Sargent 
arrested appellee, he was acting on a good faith belief 


60 


that the warrant was valid. See A.R.S. §13-3925. Accord- 
ingly, the trial court should not have suppressed the 
marijuana. 


The Greene decision does not require a different 
result. After a police officer stopped Greene for a traffic 
violation, a records check showed an outstanding warrant 
from the City of Tucson. The officer then arrested Greene 
and found narcotics in his pocket during a search inci- 
dent to that arrest. The police later discovered that the 
city court had quashed the warrant eight months before 
Greene’s arrest. Division Two of the Court of Appeals 
made the following statements in explaining its decision 
to affirm the trial court’s order suppressing the narcotics: 


If police misconduct, whether it be negli- 
gent or deliberate, caused or contributed to the 
arrest notation being in the computer system, 
the police department would be responsible for 
not keeping its computer entries up to date. No 
evidence was presented to the trial court estab- 
lishing that the police department was blame- 
less in having the arrest warrant notation in its 
computer system. 


State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. at 384, 783 P.2d at 830. The court 
concluded that, under these circumstances, application of 
the exclusionary rule would tend to deter the police 
department from deliberately or negligently failing to 
keep its records up to date. 


In this case, unlike Greene, the State presented evi- 
dence showing that the justice court clerk’s office, not the 
police department, was responsible for not removing 
appellee’s warrant from the system. The police depart- 
ment can hardly be termed negligent for failing to 


61 


remove a less than 3-week-old warrant when it had 
received no notice from the justice court that the warrant 
had been quashed. Since there is no police misconduct to 
deter by application of the exclusionary rule, the trial 
court abused its discretion in granting the motion to 
suppress. | 


CONCLUSION 


The evidence established that the police had no rea- 
son to know that the arrest warrant tor appellee had been 
quashed. The arrest of appellee was based on a good faith 
belief that the arrest warrant was valid. Therefore, based 
upon A.R.S. §13-3925 and the rationale underlying the 
exclusionary rule, the trial court abused its discretion in 
suppressing the evidentiary fruits of that arrest. 


RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED this 28th day of June, 
1991. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY 
ATTORNEY 


By /s/ Gerald R. Grant 
Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 


[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


62 


IN THE COURT OF APPEALS 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
DIVISION ONE 


STATE OF ARIZONA, _ ) 
) No. 1 CA-CR 91-663 
Appellant, | 
Maricopa County Superior 
. ) Court No. CR-91-00513 
ISAAC EVANS, 
Appellee. ) 
) 
) 


APPELLEE’S ANSWERING BRIEF 


DEAN W. TREBESCH 
MARICOPA COUNTY PUBLIC 
DEFENDER 


JAMES H. KEMPER 

Deputy Public Defender 

Attorney for Appellee 

132 South Central, Suite 6 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004 
Telephone (602) 261-7398 

State Bar Membership No. 002291 


63 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE...................... 1 
I eo ei ere ec Bs Jeo 3 
THE TRIAL COURT, IN GRANTING EVANS’ 
MOTION TO SUPPRESS, DID NOT ABUSE ITS 
DISCRETION. 
Ne 6 oi 4 oes vv Nndvebudsarcohen fie 4 
TABLE OF CITATIONS 
Page 


State ex rel. Collins v. Superior Court, 132 Ariz. 
oe eS 3 


State v. Gerlaugh, 134 Ariz. 164, 654 P.2d 800 
(1982), Supplemented, 135 Ariz. 89, 659 P.2d 642 


cain eR RT EE OE a Pe ee cn pe 3 
State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (App. 
a CNR te hha Codgdeke ai wesaw alee. cece i, 3, 4 


64 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Evans generally accepts the state’s presentation of 
the case, with three exceptions. 


The state asserts that Officer Sargent checked, with 
the I-Bureau, the validity of the warrant before he hand- 
cuffed and arrested Evans. (Opening Brief at p. 1, hereaf- 
ter OB.) This is contrary to the record. On direct- 
examination Sargent made it reasonably clear that he 
arrested Evans, and handcuffed him too, before he 
checked with the I-Bureau. (R.T. 8, lines 13-19, April 15, 
1991.) Later, still on direct, Sargent made this explicit. (/d. 
at 11, lines 21-25.) 


Secondly, the state asserts that “the quashing of 
appellee’s warrant had not been communicated to the 
Sheriff’s Office.” (OB, p. 2.) But this is only one inference 
that may reasonably be drawn from the record. More 
importantly, it is not the inference this Court is required 
to proceed on. The other inference is that the call was 
made but the justice court failed to make a note of it. The 
trial judge very quickly understood that this was the 


_ alternate, and equally reasonable, inference that could be 


drawn; because he realized it he forced the justice court 
clerk to concede that she did not know whether the call 
had been made or not. (R.T. 22, lines 1-8, April 15, 1991.) 


Thirdly, the state asserts the justice court found, for 
the same day, three other cases, “where the Sheriff's 
Office had not been notified.” (OB, p. 2.) Again, this is 
only one inference. All the clerk’s office could be sure it 
found was that there were three other cases where no 
notation was made. (R.T. 27-28, April 15, 1991.) 


65 


Finally, with respect to the Statement of the Case in 
the Opening Brief the reader will observe that Evans, it is 
alleged, “had five prior felony convictions.” (OB, p. 1.) 
Why does the state tell us this since it has absolutely 
nothing to do with the issue on appeal? Does the state 
wish to have the case decided on the basis that Evans is a 
bad guy? Perhaps the state will tell us in its reply brief. 


ARGUMENT 


THE TRIAL COURT, IN GRANTING EVANS’ 
MOTION TO SUPPRESS, DID NOT 
ABUSE ITS DISCRETION. 


The trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress must 
be upheld unless it is shown that he clearly abused his 
discretion. State ex rel. Collins v. Superior Court, 132 Ariz. 
180, 644 P.2d 1266 (1982). Here there is no showing of any 
abuse at all. 


This case, like many cases, turns upon how one views 
the record. The rule is that, on appeal, the facts must be 
viewed in that light which will sustain the ruling of the 
trial court on the motion to suppress. State v. Gerlaugh, 
134 Ariz. 164, 654 P.2d 800 (1982), Supplemented, 135 
Ariz. 89, 659 P.2d 642 (1983). Evans pointed out earlier in 
this brief that there are two inferences, equally reason- 
able, that can be drawn from this record. One is that the 
justice court failed to call the sheriff about the quashed 
warrant. The other is that the justice court did call the 
sheriff, but forgot to make a note of it. Between these 
inferences, the latter is the one that will sustain the trial 
court’s ruling. This Court is therefore required to take it 


66 


as a fact that the justice court called the sheriff and told 
him that the warrant had been quashed. Gerlaugh. 


Given that fact, State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 
829 (App. 1989) is on all fours with this case and should 
control its outcome unless this Court wishes to disagree 
with its Division Two brethren. 


CONCLUSION 


On the basis of State v. Greene the appellee asks that 
the trial court be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


DEAN W. TREBESCH 
MARICOPA COUNTY 
PUBLIC DEFENDER 


By /s/ James H. Kemper 
JAMES H. KEMPER 
Deputy Public Defender 
Attorney for Appellee 


[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


67 


IN THE COURT OF APPEALS 


STATE OF ARIZONA 
DIVISION ONE 


THE STATE OF ARIZONA,) 


Appellant, 
VS. 

ISAAC EVANS, 
Appellee. 


) No. 1 CA-CR 91-663 


) 


eee ee ee” 


APPELLANT’S REPLY BRIEF 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY 
ATTORNEY 


Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 
State Bar No. 004978 


111 West Monroe Street 
Suite 1800 
Phoenix, Arizona 85003 


Attorneys for Appellant 
Phone: (602) 261-5941 


Maricopa County Superior 
Court No. CR 91-00513 


68 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
TABLE OF CASES AND AUTHORITIES............ ii 
ARGUMENT 
THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION IN 
GRANTING THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS....... l 
ee cc ess essoescceccesces 2 
ee 3 
TABLE OF CASES AND AUTHORITIES 
CASES PAGE 
State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (Ct. 
App. 1989)... 2. ccc ccccccccc cc rcseescesseccecvees 2 
STATUTES AND AUTHORITIES 
Arizona Revised Statute, §13-3925.................55. 2 


69 


ARGUMENT 


THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION IN 
GRANTING THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS. 


The question presented here is whether the exclu- 
sionary rule requires the suppression of evidence 
obtained following an arrest, where that arrest was based 
on an outstanding warrant that was later found to have 
been quashed. Appellant submits that the purpose of the 
exclusionary rule (to deter future police misconduct) is 
not served by applying it in this case. 


The record shows that Officer Sargent saw appellee 
commit a traffic offense: driving the wrong way on a one- 
way street. When the officer stopped appellee for that 
offense, appellee admitted he was guilty of another 
offense: driving on a suspended license. The officer then 
ran a computer check and confirmed that appellee's 
license was suspended and also learned that there was a 
misdemeanor warrant for appellee’s arrest. He also 
checked with the I-Bureau and was told that the warrant 
was still valid. (R.T. of Apr. 15, 1991, at 6-8.) Based upon 
this record, there is no police misconduct to deter by 
applying the exclusionary rule. Officer Sargent did every- 
thing that can be expected of an arresting officer. 


Appellee, however, relying on State v. Greene, 162 
Ariz. 383, 783 P.2d 829 (Ct. App. 1989), argues that the 
police department failed to keep its computer entries of 
outstanding warrants up to date, and that future miscon- 
duct of this sort will be deterred by application of the 
exclusionary rule. The facts in this case are distinguish- 
able from those in Greene. Appellee’s arrest occurred less 
than 3 weeks after the warrant had been quashed, not 


70 


more than 8 months as in Greene. Also, the prosecutor, 
unlike the prosecutor in Greene, presented evidence sup- 
porting the conclusion that the police department was 
blameless in having the warrant in its computer system. 


Further, appellant submits that Greene is not well- 
reasoned. The rationale behind the exclusionary rule is 
stretched a bit thin when the rule is applied to deter 
clerical workers in the police department rather than 
police officers in the field. The situation in this case 
comes within the provisions of A.R.S. §13-3925: a police 
officer making an arrest based on a good faith belief that 
the arrest warrant was valid. Therefore, the trial court 


erred in granting the motion to suppress. 


CONCLUSION 


The evidence established that the police had no rea- 
son to know that the arrest warrant for appellee had been 
quashed. The arrest of appellee was based on a good faith 
belief that the arrest warrant was valid. Therefore, based 
upon A.R.S. §13-3925 and the rationale underlying the 
exclusionary rule, the trial court abused its discretion in 
suppressing the evidentiary fruits of that arrest. 


RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED this 5th day of August, 
1991. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY 
ATTORNEY 


By /s/ Gerald R. Grant 
Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 


(Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


71 


JAMES H. KEMPER 

Deputy Public Defender 

132 South Central, Suite 6 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004 
Telephone (602) 506-7398 

State Bar Membership No. 002291 
Attorney for Appellee/Petitioner 


IN THE COURT OF APPEALS 
STATE OF ARIZONA 
DIVISION ONE 


STATE OF ARIZONA 
Appellant/Respondent, 


No. 1 CA-CR 
91-663 


Maricopa County 


v. 
Superior Court 

ISAAC EVANS, No. CR-91-00513 
Appellee / Petitioner. PETITION FOR 


eee eee eee eee 


REVIEW 


\ 
' 


Isaac Evans, through counsel undersigned, asks for 


review by the Arizona Supreme Court. Rule 31.19, 
A.R.Crim.P., 17 A.R.S. 


I. Synopsis Of The Decision Of The Court Of Appeals. 


The petitioner’s motion to suppress physical evi- 
dence, marijuana, was granted in the Superior Court for 
Maricopa County. The Court of Appeals, in a published 
opinion, decided that the Superior Court had abused its 
discretion and reversed by a two to one vote, Judge 
Claborne dissenting. The opinion is attached. 


72 


II. Issues Decided By The Court Of Appeals. 


The only issue presented to and decided by the Court 
of Appeals was whether the trial court abused its discre- 
tion in granting the motion to suppress. 


III. Material Facts. 


On January 5, 1991, at about 6:30 in the evening, 
Officers Sergent and Lumley of the Phoenix Police 
Department were sitting in a marked patrol car finishing 
up some paperwork when they saw a car going the 
wrong way on a one-way street. It is not difficult to see 
how this caught their attention since they were parked 
directly in front of the main police station. They pulled 
the car over. 


This petitioner, Isaac Evans, was the driver. The two 
policemen got Evans’ name, punched it in their computer, 
found there a misdemeanor warrant for Evans’ arrest, 
arrested him, and then searched Evans and the car. In 
Evans’ hand the officers found a marijuana cigarette. In 
the car, under the passenger seat, the officers found a 
baggie of marijuana. 


It turned out that the warrant was invalid. It had 
been quashed, 17 days before, in the justice court from 
which it issued. The normal procedure when this hap- 
pens is that any one of three clerks will call the warrant 
section of the Sheriff's Office to say that the warrant 
should be taken out of the computer because it has been 
quashed. Whichever clerk does this, in the normal pro- 
cedure, will note in the justice court file that she has done 
it. In this case the justice court file bore no such notation. 


73 


None of the three clerks testified. No one could say the 
call had not been made. 


The normal procedure at the warrant division of the 
Sheriff’s Office is this. That division maintains something 
called a “warrant recall list.” When a call comes in from a 
justice court that a warrant has been quashed the infor- 
mation is written on the “warrant recall list.” Then the 
necessary entries are made to remove the warrant from 
the computer. A check is run to be sure the warrant has in 
fact been removed. 


The “warrant recall list” had no entry that the Evans 


warrant was to be quashed. But no one could say the call 
had not come in. 


IV. Why The Petition Should Be Granted. 


There are two reasons why this petition should be 
granted. 


A. The majority of the Court of Appeals is in con- 
flict with a critical principle of appellate review, the prin- 
ciple that, on appeal, the evidence must be viewed in the 
light which will sustain the ruling of the trial court. State 
v. Gerlaugh, 134 Ariz. 164, 654 P.2d 800 (1982). It is diffi- 
cult to understand this since the majority cited, and there- 
fore paid lip service to this principle. (Slip op. p. 4.) 


The majority followed this by pointing out that there 
were two inferences that could be drawn from the evi- 
dence presented at the hearing on the motion to suppress. 
(Slip op. p. 4, n.1.) Those inferences, equally reasonable, 
were that the call to remove the warrant had not been 


74 


made or that the call had been made, but not memori- 
alized. The inference that would support the decision of 
the trial court was the latter, but the Court of Appeals 
majority adopted the former. In so doing it misapplied, 
while paying homage to, one of the cardinal mechanical 
principles that controls the way appeals are decided. 


The Court of Appeals is a mere error-correction 
court. This Court is, by contrast, this state’s law-articula- 
tion court. In this capacity it speaks to the substance of a 
wide variety of issues, from homicide to summary judg- 
ment, from the rule making power of the Corporation 
Commission to the termination of parental rights. 


But this Court has failed, for the most part, to spend 
much time addressing the mechanical principles by 
which all these substantive issues are decided on appeal. 
For example, the vast majority, one has to think, of Ari- 
zona appellate issues are decided under the abuse of 
discretion standard. Yet this Court's best exegesis of this 
standard of review is buried in a footnote. State v. Chap- 
ple, 135 Ariz. 281, 297, 660 P.2d 1208, 1224 (1983). Foot- 
note 18 to Chapple is a wonderful footnote indeed. But the 
cardinal mechanical principles of appellate review should 
not be found in footnotes. They should be set forth boldly 
and clearly in the body of opinions. This Court should 
grant review in this case so that, in the body of a pub- 
lished opinion, it can explain exactly what it means and 
how it works to view the facts in that light which will 
sustain the ruling of the trial court. 


B. The majority also held that, regardless of any- 
thing else, the trial court should not have granted the 
motion to suppress because of Arizona's “good faith 


75 


exception statute,” A.R.S. § 13-3925. (Slip op. pp. 8-9.) 
This holding, by two members of a Division One panel, is 
in irreconcilable conflict with the dissent (Slip op. pp. 
10-11), with another panel (unanimous) of the same court, 
State v. Peterson, 94 Ariz. Adv. Rep. 58 (1991, Petition for 
Review filed October 18, 1991), and with Division Two of 
the same court (unanimous). State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 
783 P.2d 829 (1989). This Court should grant review to 
resolve this conflict. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons advanced Evans asks for review of this 


case. RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED this 26 day of May, 
1992. 


DEAN W. TREBESCH 
MARICOPA COUNTY PUBLIC DEFENDER 


By /s/ James H. Kemper 
JAMES H. KEMPER 
Deputy Public Defender 


Copy of the foregoing petition 
delivered this 26 day 
of May, 1992, to: 


GERALD R. GRANT 
Deputy County Attorney 


By /s/ James H. Kemper 
JAMES H. KEMPER 
Deputy Public Defender 


76 


MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 
RICHARD M. ROMLEY 


Gerald R. Grant 

Deputy County Attorney 
State Bar No. 004978 

301 West Jefferson Suite 800 
Phoenix, Arizona 85003 
Attorneys for Appellant 
Telephone: (602) 506-5941 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE 
STATE OF ARIZONA 


STATE OF ARIZONA, ) No. 
) 
Agpenem. ) Court of Appeals 
VS. ) No. 1 CA-CR 91-663 
) 
Pa reer ) Maricopa County Superior 
Appellee. ) Court No. CR 91-00513 
) 
) RESPONSE TO 
) PETITION FOR REVIEW 
) 
) (Received June 25, 1992) 


The State asks this Court to deny the petition for 
review. Reasons supporting this request are set forth in 
the following memorandum. 


Respectfully submitted this 25th day of June, 1992. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY 
ATTORNEY 


77 


BY /s/ Gerald R. Grant 
Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 


MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES 


Police officers arrested appellee on an outstanding 
misdemeanor warrant. As one officer was handcuffing 
him, appellee dropped a marijuana cigarette. The officer 
then searched appellee’s car and found a baggie of mari- 
juana under the passenger seat. 


Appellee later moved to suppress the marijuana, 
arguing that it was the fruit of an unlawful arrest. At the 
suppression hearing, the State presented evidence that 
the misdemeanor warrant had been issued by the East 
Phoenix Justice Court a little more than three weeks 
before the marijuana seizure. The warrant had been 
quashed, however, a week after it was issued. The normal 
procedure in this situation is that the justice court clerk 
calls the Sheriff’s Office, notifies that office that the war- 
rant has been quashed, and makes a note in the justice 
court file that the call has been made. There was no notice 
in appellee's justice court file that the Sheriff’s Office had 
been notified of the quashed warrant. The records clerk 
from the Sheriff's Office testified that there was no record 
of a call from the justice court regarding the quashing of 
appellee’s warrant. The trial court granted the motion to 
suppress, finding that State v. Greene, 162 Ariz. 383, 783 
P.2d 829 (Ct. App. 1989), required suppression of the 
marijuana. | 


78 


The State appealed from this decision. On May 19, 
1992, the court of appeals filed an opinion reversing the 
trial court’s decision. 


The State first asks this Court to deny review because 
the exclusionary rule does not require suppression of the 
marijuana. The purpose of the exclusionary rule is to 
deter future police misconduct. Michigan v. Tucker, 417 
U.S. 433, 94 S.Ct. 2537, 41 L.Ed.2d 182 (1974). The police 
officers in this case did everything that can reasonably be 
expected of them. Before arresting appellee, the officer 
contacted his I-Bureau and was told that the warrant was 
still valid. The State presented evidence strongly suggest- 
ing that the justice court clerk’s office had failed to 
inform law enforcement authorities that the warrant had 
been quashed. Under these circumstances, there was no 
police misconduct to be deterred in the future by applica- 
tion of the exclusionary rule. 


Second, appellee argues that the court of appeals 
failed to view the evidence in the light most favorable to 
sustain the trial court’s ruling. This argument is based on 
the premise that there were two equally reasonable infer- 
ences to be drawn from the evidence: one, that the clerk’s 
office had not called the Sheriff’s Office, and two, that the 
call had been made but not memorialized. The State 
disagrees that these inferences are equally reasonable. 
Neither the clerk’s office nor the Sheriff’s Office had any 
record of the call, and the clerk’s office files also con- 
tained no records that the Sheriff’s Office had been con- 


_tacted regarding three other warrants quashed on the 


same day as appellee’s. Based on this evidence, the more 
reasonable inference is that the call was not made and 


79 


therefore the trial court clearly abused its discretion in 
suppressing the evidence. 


Third, appellee argues that this Court should grant 
review to resolve a conflict between divisions of the court 
of appeals regarding the applicability of Arizona’s “good 
faith exception” statute. Appellee claims that State v. 
Peterson, 94 Ariz. Adv. Rep. 58 (Ct. App., Sep. 5, 1991), 
and State v. Greene, are in conflict with the opinion in this 
case. Peterson and Greene are distinguishable on their 
facts. In Peterson the quashed warrant was 5 years old. 
Also, in neither of those cases did the State present evi- 
dence to show that the presence of a quashed warrant in 
the police department’s computer files was not the result 
of police negligence. In this case, the State presented 
evidence showing that the justice court clerk’s office 
failed to notify police that the warrant had been quashed. 
Therefore, the decision in this case is not in conflict with 
Peterson or Greene. 


In conclusion, appellee has failed to show that the 
court of appeals erred in deciding this case. Therefore, 
the State asks this Court to deny the petition for review. 


Respectfully submitted this 25th day of June, 1992. 


RICHARD M. ROMLEY 
MARICOPA COUNTY ATTORNEY 


By /s/ Gerald R. Grant 
Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 


80 


Copy of the foregoing 
mailed/delivered this 
25th day of June, 1992, 
to: 


James H. Kemper 
Deputy Public Defender 
132 S. Central, Suite 6 
Phoenix, AZ 85004 
Attorney for Appellee 


BY /s/ Gerald R. Grant 
Gerald R. Grant 
Deputy County Attorney 


