(4) FILED 
No. 94-925 IAN A 1895 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited| States —_—"~_ 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS AUTHORITY, 
ET AL., PETITIONERS 


v. 


JOHN W. HECHINGER, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


DREw S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


FRANK W. HUNGER 
Assistant Attorney General 


WILLIAM KANTER 
ScoTT R. MCINTOSH 
Attorneys 


Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f) (Supp. IV 1992), which 
provides for a Board of Review that consists of members 
proposed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
and the President pro tempore of the Senate and that has 
power to oversee and postpone actions of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, violates 
the separation of powers doctrine and this Court’s 
decision in Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Authority v. Citizens for Abatement of Aircraft Noise, 
Inc., 501 U.S. 252 (1991). 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
IE IN ccdss siles sce cd GiadnadedivasundviedSodenbececanedaracos 1 
i sitciths sala eddies Li dad pub suthcbnnuadecsedecaerdaceasene 1 
anid tess habbbiekciseisrenesadicedetcabovscsnbsbbdensedectoiosece 2 
IT TiRhddaaiseclshclebuhenelsdexsvavedtevicssveclasedsactcvisicceceoneses 9 
ic 17 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U.S. 678 (1987) ........ 14 
Ameron, Inc. v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, 
809 F.2d 979 (3d Cir. 1986), cert. dismissed, 488 U.S. 918 
NE Rien Sieh dis acpiicehcahddtiiabcddunbnoebcccncdvevseceorouesoose 15 
Blodgett v. Holden, 275 U.S. 142 (1927) .....cccccceecceeeeeeeeeeee 17 
Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986) 00... eeeecesceees 12 
INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1988) ......ccescccseseeeseeseeees 11, 14 
Lear Siegler, Inc. v. Lehman, 842 F.2d 1102 (1988), 
withdrawn in part, 893 F.2d 205 (9th Cir. 1989) ........... 15 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority v. Citizens 
for Abatement of Aircraft Noise, Inc., 501 U.S. 252 
I A icediiied tahasunrschedbubnhasendecsoccrorsecdens 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12, 13 
Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926) .................000. 12 
Constitution and statutes: 
U.S. Const 
Till indus cahuabschdbbsencnevetnciveueseqs 4, 5, 10, 18, 14 
aia ios sie sscncpnecepapundevereone 12 
§ 2, Cl. 2 (Appointments Clause) ................cc0c0c0eceeeeee 7 
Competition in Contracting Act of 1984, 31 U.S.C. 3551 
ood esanddnwendecsoncerionencecseees 15 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Act Amendments of 
1991, Pub. L. No. 102-240, Tit. VII, 105 Stat. 2197 ......... 5 
49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f) (Supp. IV 1992) ..........00..... 5 


(IIT) 


Statutes—Continued:: 


App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 


49 
49 
49 
49 
49 
49 
49 


U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 


IV 


2456(f (2)(C) (Supp. IV 1992) ........ 
2456(f )(4)(B) (Supp. IV 1992) ........ 
2456(f)(4)(B)(i) (Supp. IV 1992) .... 
2456(f )(4)(B)(ii) (Supp. IV 1992) ... 
2456(f )(4\(C) (Supp. IV 1992) ........ 
2456(f)(4)(D) (Supp. IV 1992) ........ 
2456(f )(4)(D)(ii) (Supp. IV 1992) ... 


Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986, 
49 USC. ABD. BEBE OF BOG, cicecctcsiacerecionssssseccsscessesscessses 


49 
49 
49 
49 
49 
49 


U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 
U.S.C. 


App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 
App. 


28 U.S.C. 2403(a) 


BONG EY CUNY cocecciscsesesesasscsessoess 
2456(f)(4)(A) (1988) veccccccsesseesseeeeees 
2456(f )(4)(B) (1988) ...cececeseseeceeeeeees 
2456(f)(4)(D) (1988) ceeccccssescessseeeees 
ca asecxasicnien 
ONT SINE echoes ccciessssedessdccven 


POUUUUUOUE CEOS OCCOSSCCCCOS SCC CECE 


mwoNw WS & W& 


~] So 


Gn the Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-925 


METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS AUTHORITY, 
ET AL., PETITIONERS 


Vv. 


JOHN W. HECHINGER, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-19a) is 
reported at 36 F.3d 97. The opinion of the district court 
(Pet. App. 22a-38a) is reported at 845 F. Supp. 902. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on 
September 27, 1994. The petition for a writ of certiorari 
was filed on November 22, 1994. The jurisdiction of this 
Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


STATEMENT 


This case involves the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Act of 1986 (Transfer Act), 49 U.S.C. App. 2451 
et seq., as amended. In Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority v. Citizens for Abatement of 
Aircraft Noise, Inc., 501 U.S. 252 (1991) (CAAN), this 
Court held that the Transfer Act violated constitutional 
separation of powers principles. In response to this 
Court’s decision, Congress amended the Act in several 
respects in 1991. The court of appeals has now held that 
the Act as amended remains unconstitutional. 

1. The 1986 Transfer Act provided for the federal 
government to lease National Airport and Dulles Inter- 
national Airport to the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports Authority (Authority), an independent regional 
authority created through a compact between Virginia 
and the District of Columbia. The Act conditioned the 
leases on the creation of a nine-member Board of Review. 
The Act originally provided for the Board to consist of 
Members of Congress, all but one of whom were to be 
members of congressional committees responsible for air 
transportation matters. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(1) (1988). 
The Act required the Authority to submit to the Board a 
number of significant operational decisions, such as the 
adoption of an annual budget and any change in hours of 
operation. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(4)(A) and (B), 2456(g¢) 
(1988). If the Board disapproved any of the proposed 
actions, the Authority was prohibited from carrying it 
out. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(4)(D) (1988). 

In CAAN, a civie organization and two individuals 
brought suit against the Authority, contending that the 
Transfer Act’s provisions relating to the Board of 
Review were unconstitutional. This Court agreed. 501 
U.S. at 265-277. 


3 


The Court first considered the contention that the 
Board “neither exercises federal power nor acts as an 
agent of Congress” (501 U.S. at 265), and hence that the 
Board’s role did not implicate separation of powers 
principles at all. Based on its review of “the origin and 
structure of the Board” (ibid.), the Court rejected that 
argument. It observed that the federal government “has 
a strong and continuing interest in the efficient 
operation of the airports, which are vital to the smooth 
conduct of Government business, especially to the work 
of Congress.” Jd. at 266. Indeed, the decision to create 
the Board of Review, whose structure and powers Con- 
gress mandated in detail, was prompted by Congress’s 
recognition of this federal interest. Jbid. Not only did 
Congress require the creation of the Board as a 
condition of the airport leases, but it included in the 
Transfer Act a so-called “drop-dead” clause, under which 
the Authority would “have no authority to perform any 
of the actions” subject to Board review if the Board itself 
were invalidated by a court. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(h) 
(1988). Finally, membership on the Board was limited to 
federal officials, specifically Members of Congress. 501 
U.S. at 266-267. 

Although the Transfer Act provided that the members 
of the Board were to serve “in their individual capacities, 
as representatives of users” of the airports, 49 U.S.C. 
App. 2456(f)(1) (1988), the Court concluded that the Board 
nonetheless remained “a congressional agent exercising 
federal authority.” 501 U.S. at 267. The Court noted 
that the Act did not require Board members to be users 
of the airports, but instead required them to be members 
- of congressional committees having jurisdiction over 
transportation issues. Jbid. Moreover, Congress “also 
exercise[d] substantial power over the appointment and 
removal” of Board members. /d. at 268. Although the 


4 


Board’s members were appointed by the Authority, all 
appointments were required to come from lists provided 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the 
President pro tempore of the Senate. 49 U.S.C. App. 
2456(f)(1) (1988). “Significantly, appointments must be 
made from the lists, and there is no requirement that the 
lists contain more recommendations than the number of 
Board openings.” 501 U.S. at 268. If displeased with the 
performance of members of the Board, moreover, the 
congressional leadership could remove them from the 
Board by changing their committee assignments. /d. at 
269. The Court summarized (ibid.): 


We thus confront an entity created at the initiative 
of. Congress, the powers of which Congress has 
delineated, the purpose of which is to protect an 
acknowledged federal interest, and membership in 
which is restricted to congressional officials. Such 
an entity necessarily exercises sufficient federal 
power as an agent of Congress to mandate 
separation-of-powers scrutiny. 


After concluding that the Board was acting as an 
agent of Congress, the Court turned to the limitations 
imposed by separation of powers principles. 501 U.S. at 
271-277. The Court identified two “basic and related con- 
straints.” /d. at 274. First, Congress may not exercise 
executive or judicial power at all; second, Congress may 
exercise legislative power only through the procedures 
specified in Article I. /bid. The Court concluded that 
the role of the Board of Review necessarily offended one 
or the other of those constraints. If the power exercised 
by the Board was executive, “the Constitution does not 
permit an agent of Congress to exercise it.” Id. at 276. 
If, on the other hand, the Board’s power was viewed as 
legislative, “Congress must exercise it in conformity 


5 


with the bicameralism and presentment requirements” 
of Article I. /bid- The Court therefore found it unneces- 
sary to decide whether the Board’s role was executive or 
legislative; in either case, the Court concluded, the 
Board’s power would be “constitutionally impermis- 
sible.” Ibid. 

2. In response to this Court’s decision in CAAN, Con- 
gress enacted the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Act Amendments of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-240, Tit. VII, 
~105 Stat. 2197 (1991 Amendments) (Pet. App. 69a-79a). 
The 1991 Amendments preserve the Board of Review, and 
the Authority remains subject to the “drop-dead” pro- 
vision (see page 3, supra) if the Board is invalidated. In 
several respects, however, the 1991 Amendments altered 
the provisions of the Transfer Act relating to the Board. 

The first change concerns the composition of the 
Board. The basic process of appointing Board members 
is unchanged: The Authority still must select members 
from lists prepared by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives and the President pro tempore of the 
Senate, and the lists need not contain more names than 
the number of vacancies. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(1) (Supp. 
IV 1992). However, the 1991 Amendments eliminated the 
requirement that Board members be Members of Con- 
gress, substituting three new membership criteria. 
First, members must “have experience in aviation 
matters and in addressing the needs of airport users”; 
second, they must be “frequent users” of National and 
Dulles Airports; finally, they must be registered voters 
of a State other than Maryland, Virginia, or the District 
of Columbia. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(2)(C) (Supp. IV 1992). 
Of the nine members appointed to the Board on the basis 
of those criteria following the 1991 Amendments, all but 
one were Members of Congress who served on 


6 


committees having jurisdiction over air transportation. 
Pet. App. 8a, 217a-218a. 

The Board continues to oversee major operational 
decisions by the Authority, but the 1991 Amendments 
changed the process by which the Board’s oversight role 
is exercised. In place of the veto power struck down in 
CAAN, the 1991 Amendments substituted a two-stage 
review process. At the first stage, the Authority must 
submit to the Board the same kinds of proposed actions 
that were subject to the Board’s veto power under the 
original Act, along with several additional categories of 
actions added by the 1991 Amendments. See 49 U.S.C. 
App. 2456(f)(4)(B) (Supp. IV 1992). The Board is given 30 
calendar days or ten legislative days, whichever is 
longer, to make “recommendations” to the Authority 
regarding proposed actions. 49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(4)(C) 
(Supp. IV 1992). 

If the Authority accepts a Board recommendation, or if 
the Board makes no recommendation, the proposed action 
may go into effect immediately. However, if the 
Authority does not adopt the Board’s recommendation, 
the proposed action is subject to a second stage of review: 
The Authority must submit to Congress a detailed 
description of the proposed action, the Board’s recom- 
mendation, and the Authority’s response. 49 U.S.C. App. 
2456(f)(4)(D) (Supp. IV 1992). Congress is then given 60 
legislative days to consider whether to enact a joint 
resolution of disapproval, and the Authority must defer 
the proposed action until the end of that period. 49 
U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(4)(D)(ii) (Supp. IV 1992). In practice, 
a period of 60 legislative days lasts at least three months 
and may extend for as long as six months. Pet. App. 220a. 

3. The plaintiffs in CAAN again brought suit to 
challenge the constitutionality of the Transfer Act, as 
amended. Respondents argued, inter alia, that the 1991 


7 


Amendments did not cure the constitutional deficiencies 
identified by this Court in CAAN. The district court 
entered summary judgment in favor of respondents, 
holding that the amended Transfer Act violates 
separation of powers principles, and that the Act’s 
procedures for selecting Board members violate the 
Appointments Clause. Pet. App. 22a-38a. 

The court of appeals affirmed on separation of powers 
grounds and did not reach the other constitutional issues 
presented by the case. Pet. App. la-19a.' The court first 
addressed the question whether, in light of the 1991 
Amendments, the Board remains an agent of Congress. 
Id. at 6a-10a. The court noted that “[tJhe new Board and 
its powers continue to be the creation of Congress, the 
drop-dead provision remains in place, and the federal 
interest in the efficient operation of the two airports 
continues unchanged.” Jd. at 7a. The court acknowl- 
edged that the 1991 Amendments had eliminated the 
explicit requirement that the Board consist of Members 
of Congress, but it concluded that Congress still 
“intended the Board to serve, and * * * it does serve, as 
|[Congress’s] agent.” Jd. at 10a. 

The court reasoned that, “as a practical matter, 
relatively few individuals other than members or alumni 
of th[ej [congressional transportation] committees will 


1 Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 2403(a), the United States intervened 
in the court of appeals to address the constitutionality of the 
amended Act. In CAAN, the United States had argued that the 
original Act was constitutional on the theory that “the Board of 
Review exercises state, and not federal, power,” U.S. Br. at 12 
(No. 90-906), and that the Members of Congress designated to 
serve “in their individual capacities” had “special and distinct 
individual concerns that justify that designation,” id. at 13. In 
light of this Court’s decision in CAAN, the United States argued in 
the court of appeals that the amended Act is unconstitutional. 


8 


be able to meet” the membership requirements 
established by the 1991 Amendments. Pet. App. 8a. The 
court also found it telling that the time limits for Board 
action were framed in terms of “legislative days,” which 
“exclu[ded| * * * days on which Representatives and 
Senators may be expected to be out of town.” Id. at 9a. 
Finally, the court noted that Congress retained effective 
control of the composition of the Board through its 
ability to nominate members and to confine the Auth- 
ority to the lists of nominees submitted by the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives and the President pro 
tempore of the Senate. Jd. at 9a-10a. 

After concluding that the Board remains an agent of 
Congress, the court of appeals turned to the question 
whether the Board exercises federal power. Pet. App. 
10a-19a. Petitioners argued that the elimination of the 
Board’s veto power effectively confined the Board to a 
purely advisory role of the sort in which Congress or its 
agents may engage without offending separation of 
powers principles. /d. at 10a. The court of appeals 
concluded, however, that, under the 1991 Amendments, 
the Board retains “the power to coerce the Airports 
Authority to comply with any recommendation.” Jd. at 
17a (internal quotation marks omitted). 

Although the court of appeals identified several 
features of the 1991 Amendments in support of this 
conclusion, it emphasized that “[w]hat tips the balance 
* * * is the Board’s power to delay and perhaps overturn 
critical decisions [of the Authority] by requiring their 
referral to Congress.” Pet. App. 17a. The court pointed 
out that the protracted statutory waiting period would 
pose potentially intolerable costs on the Authority if it 
refused to accede to the Board’s recommendations. /d. at 
15a, 17a. The impact of delay is especially acute, the 
court noted, because many of the decisions that are 


9 


subject to review by the Board are highly time-sensitive, 
so that delay “can result in millions of dollars of 
additional costs and can adversely affect the public 
safety.” Jd. at 15a. As a result, “(t]he mere existence of 
this power to delay provides the [Authority] with an 
enormous incentive to avoid confrontations by tailoring 
their decisions to suit the Board’s pleasure.” /d. at 18a. 
Petitioners argued that the review mechanisms in the 
1991 Amendments, including congressional review of the 
Authority’s decisions not to adopt Board recommen- 
dations, are simply a variation on conventional “report- 
and-wait” statutes, under which agencies are required to 
report proposed actions to Congress and defer imple- 
mentation pending congressional consideration of a joint 
resolution of disapproval. Pet. App. 12a. The court of 
appeals pointed out, however, that conventional report- 
and-wait statutes provide for automatic referral of 
specified agency decisions to Congress, and thus have a 
neutral effect on agency decisionmaking. Jbid. In 
contrast, the 1991 Amendments leave an agent of 
Congress with discretion whether to trigger the 
congressional review process, and that discretion 
provides an avenue for congressional leverage that is not 
provided by ordinary report-and-wait statutes. /bid. 


DISCUSSION 


The court of appeals correctly held that the Transfer 
Act, as amended, violates constitutional separation of 
powers principles. We nevertheless believe that the 
petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Although the court of appeals’ holding follows logically 
from this Court’s decision in CAAN, we cannot say that 
the changes effected by the 1991 Amendments are so 
clearly without corstitutional significance as to rebut 
the weighty presumption that a court of appeals’ decision 


10 


invalidating an Act of Congress should be reviewed by 
this Court. 

1. The threshold issue, here as in CAAN, is whether 
the Board of Review “exercises * * * federal power as 
an agent of Congress,” 501 U.S. at 269, thereby 
subjecting it to the limitations imposed on Congress by 
separation of powers principles and Article I. Peti- 
tioners do not appear to dispute that any power exercised 
by the Board is that of the federal government.’ Instead, 
they challenge the court of appeals’ conclusion that the 
Board acts as an agent of Congress. Pet. 21-28. Peti- 
tioners’ arguments on this score are without merit. 

Petitioners place primary reliance on the fact that the 
Transfer Act, as amended, no longer limits Board mem- 
bership to Members of Congress. Pet. 22-23. But as the 
court of appeals pointed out, the new membership 
criteria have proved effective in preserving dominant 
congressional representation on the Board. However 
“neutral” (Pet. 23) the criteria may appear in the 
abstract, the court of appeals was correct in concluding 
that the statutory qualifications will be met by 
“relatively few individuals other than members or 
alumni” of congressional air transportation committees. 
Pet. App. 8a. Moreover, Congress retains control over 
the actual composition of the Board by requiring the 
Authority to select Board members from lists prepared 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the 
President pro tempore of the Senate. Viewed in combi- 


2 Petitioners do argue that the Board lacks any “power” at all 
for separation of powers purposes. Pet. 14-21. We address that 
argument below. See pages 13-17, infra. Petitioners do not 
appear to dispute that, if the Board exercises power in a con- 
stitutionally significant sense, the power is that of the federal 
government. 


11 


nation, the membership criteria and the selection 
process reflect a continuing effort by Congress to use 
the Board as a vehicle for congressional influence on the 
Authority’s decisions. 

Petitioners argue that Congress is free to establish an 
appointment process in which appointments are made 
from lists prepared by Congress. Pet. 24-25. That 
argument is difficult to square with INS v. Chadha, 
462 U.S. 919 (1983). There, this Court held that 
congressional “action that ha[s] the purpose and effect of 
altering the legal rights, duties, and relations of persons 
* * * outside the Legislative Branch,” id. at 952, can be 
taken (subject to the exceptions enumerated in the 
Constitution) only through the passage of a law, see id. 
at 956-957. Congress’s formulation and transmittal of 
lists of acceptable Board members appears to be such an 
action, because the Authority (which is outside the 
Legislative Branch) is barred from selecting as a Board 
member any person not on the lists. 

The court of appeals did not, however, rely solely on 
the requirement that appointees be drawn from con- 
gressional lists to determine the Board’s membership is 
unconstitutional. It simply held that Congress’s 
insistence on controlling the membership of the Board 
through the use of lists, when combined with the indicia 
present in CAAN and membership criteria that are 
tilted in favor of Members of Congress, indicated that 
Congress continues to view the Board as its agent. 

Finally, petitioners assert that “the dispositive 
factor” in characterizing the relationship between the 
Board and Congress is the presence or absence of the 
removal power, and that the 1991 Amendments therefore 
break the link between the Board and Congress by 
eliminating Congress’s removal authority. Pet. 26-27. 
But there is no reason in law or logic why this should be 


12 


so. To be sure, removal power may be a significant tool 
for ensuring that an agent carries out his principal’s 
wishes.’ But it is hardly the only tool for doing so. Here, 
the membership criteria and the selection process 
combine to make it likely that, even in the absence of a 
formal removal power, the Board will reflect Congress’s 
underlying interests and wishes.‘ 

In challenging the court of appeals’ conclusion about 
the status and role of the Board, petitioners assess each 
component of the statutory scheme in isolation, trying to 
show that no single component is sufficient to establish 
the Board as an agent of Congress. The teaching of 
CAAN, however, is that an assessment of the Board’s 
status and role also requires attention to the cumulative 
effect of the statutory scheme. See 501 U.S. at 266 
(“[s]everal factors combine” to subject Board to separa- 
tion of powers review). When the components of the 
amended Transfer Act are viewed cumulatively, rather 


3 At the same time, the existence of removal power may be 
more theoretical than real. The original Transfer Act did not 
provide a direct mechanism for Congress to remove Board 
members. Instead, Congress could accomplish that result by 
stripping members of the committee assignments required by the 
Act as a condition for Board membership. Although the Act 
therefore theoretically vested Congress with the power of removal 
(CAAN, 501 U.S. at 269), removing Board members by unilaterally 
changing committee assignments was, at best, an extremely 
unwieldy method of exercising control. The elimination of this 
mechanism by the 1991 Amendments is unlikely to alter the 
practical relationship between Congress and the Board. 


4 Petitioners point to the line of cases from Myers v. United 
States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926), to Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 
(1986), that addresses the scope of the President’s power under 
Article II to remove executive officers. Pet. 26-27. But those 
decisions do not hold, as petitioners suggest, that the presence or 
absence of removal power determines the status of an official. 


13 


than in isolation, the conclusion that Congress is con- 
tinuing to employ the Board as its agent is apparent. 

2. CAAN holds that Congress may not exercise 
executive power over the Authority at all, and may not 
exercise legislative power over the Authority except 
through the lawmaking procedures mandated by Article 
I. 501 U.S. at 276. Petitioners argue that, even if the 
Board is an agent of Congress, the elimination of the 
Board’s veto power renders those constitutional restric- 
tions inapplicable. Pet. 14-21. Petitioners argue that the 
1991 Amendments transformed the Board into a purely 
advisory body, and that separation of powers principles 
impose no limitations on Congress’s ability to offer 
advice, either directly or through an agent, to the 
Authority. 

The court of appeals correctly rejected that argument. 
See Pet. App. 10a-19a. By giving the Board discretionary 
power to trigger congressional review of the Authority’s 
major decisions, and by requiring the Authority to defer 
action for as long as six calendar months (see page 6, 
supra) if it is unwilling to abide by the Board’s wishes, 
Congress effectively gave the Board the power to control 
the Authority’s principal operational! decisions. Given 
the time-sensitive nature of matters like the adoption of 
an annual budget (49 U.S.C. App. 2456(f)(4)(B)(i) (Supp. 
IV 1992)) or the authorization of bonds (49 U.S.C. App. 
2456(f)(4)(B)(ii) (Supp. IV 1992)), the Board’s power of 
delay effectively compels the Authority to accede to the 
Board’s wishes. 

Petitioners argue at length that the Constitution 
permits Congress to engage in “advice” and “influence” 
without resorting to the lawmaking procedures of 
Article I (Pet. 14-16), and that the court of appeals “has 
adopted the position that an agent of Congress may not 
play even an informational or advisory role in the 


14 


decisionmaking process of an executive body” (Pet. 21). 
But the court of appeals held nothing of the sort. To the 
contrary, the court expressly acknowledged and accepted 
“the difference between [legislative] persuasion and 
coercion.” Pet. App. 16a. It concluded that the amended 
Transfer Act crosses the line from persuasion to coer- 
cion, by allowing an agent of Congress to impose 
potentially extended and costly delays on major decisions 
of the Authority if the agent disagrees with those 
decisions. Jd. at 17a (amended Act “gives the Board of 
Review the power to coerce the Airports Authority to 
comply with any recommendation”) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). 

Petitioners also assert that the two-stage review 
mechanism created by the 1991 Amendments is consti- 
tutionally indistinguishable from “report-and-wait” 
statutes, whose propriety is well established. Pet. 15-16; 
see, e.g., Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U.S. 678, 
689-690 & n.12 (1987); Chadha, 462 U.S. at 935 n.9. That 
contention is without merit. Under “report-and-wait” 
statutes, the category of agency actions whose 
implementation is delayed is defined by the statute itself. 
Such statutes are consistent with the principle that 
congressional actions “altering the legal rights, duties, 
and relations of persons * * * outside the Legislative 
Branch,” Chadha, 462 U.S. at 952, must be effected 
through the passage of legislation. Under the amended 
Transfer Act, by contrast, an agent of Congress 
determines which of the Authority’s actions will and will 
not be subject to delay, thus permitting Congress to 
alter legal rights and duties without complying with 
the bicameralism and presentment requirements of 
Article I. 

As the court of appeals pointed out (Pet. App. 12a), 
moreover, this distinction has significant practical 


15 


effects. Report-and-wait statutes do not affect the 
outcome of administrative decisionmaking, because they 
require specified categories of administrative decisions 
to be presented for congressional review automatically, 
without regard to the specific outcome of those 
decisions. But the amended Transfer Act, by giving an 
agent of Congress discretion to trigger congressional 
review on a case-by-case basis, reserves the congres- 
sional review process for decisions with which the Board 
disagrees. If the Authority yields to the Board’s views, 
it may act immediately; if it resists, it must wait a 
potentially prohibitive length of time. The Act thus 
gives the Board, as Congress’s agent, a form of control 
over the actual content of the Authority’s decisions that 
is qualitatively different from that created by report- 
and-wait statutes. 

Finally, petitioners argue (Pet. 17-20) that the 
decision of the court of appeals conflicts with Ameron, 
Inc. v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, 809 F.2d 
979 (3d Cir. 1986), cert. dismissed on motion of parties, 
488 U.S. 918 (1988), and Lear Siegler, Inc. v. Lehman, 842 
F.2d 1102 (1988), withdrawn in part on other grounds, 893 
F.2d 205 (9th Cir. 1989) (en banc). Under the statute 
upheld in Ameron and Lear Siegler—the Competition in 
Contracting Act of 1984 (CICA), 31 U.S.C. 3551 et seq.— 
if a disappointed government contract bidder files a 
protest with the Comptroller General, the award of the 
protested contract is automatically stayed pending an 
investigation by the Comptroller General. The 
Comptroller General can take up to 90 days to complete 
his investigation, but he can lift the stay earlier if he 
finds the protest frivolous or facially invalid. The CICA 
expressly allows the procuring agency to override the 
stay, regardless of the status of the Comptroller 
General’s investigation, if the agency determines that 


16 


“urgent and compelling circumstances” require a 
prompt award. See Pet. App. 13a (describing the CICA). 

As explained in the briefs for the petitioner in this 
Court in Ameron, we disagree with the holdings in 
Ameron and Lear Siegler that the challenged provisions 
of the CICA are constitutional, since they give an agent 
of Congress (the Comptroller General) the power to 
control the timing of a contract entered into by an 
Executive agency. Moreover, as the court of appeals 
explained (Pet App. 13a-15a), the statutory provisions at 
issue here are distinguishable because the amended 
Transfer Act vests the Board with significantly greater 
control over the Authority than the CICA gives the 
Comptroller General over procuring agencies. See Pet. 
App. 14a-l5a. First, the Board is not dependent on 
requests from non-governmental third parties to trigger 
its review powers; it may review on its own initiative any 
of the decisions specified in the amended Transfer Act. 
Second, the amended Transfer Act does not permit the 
Authority to override the Board by pretermitting the 
review process. If the Authority disagrees with the 
Board’s recommendations, it must wait until the lengthy 
process of congressional review has run its course, even 
if (as often will be the case) the resulting delay will 
effectively block the proposed action. 

Petitioners attempt to minimize the differences 
between the two statutory schemes (Pet. 20), but their 
efforts are unavailing. It is hardly “irrelevant” to the 
scope of the Board’s authority (7bid.) that the Board is 
free to act on its own initiative rather than being 
dependent on a request from a private party. And while 
the amended Transfer Act unquestionably does “specify 
precisely the areas subject to review and recom- 
mendation” (ibid.), the decisions that it specifies are the 
most important ones that the Authority can make, and 


17 


they are highly time-sensitive as well. Thus, the fact 
that Congress has “limited” the Board’s oversight to 
matters such as annual budgets, bonding decisions, and 
hours of airport operations hardly provides the kind of 
safety valve contained in the stay override provision of 
the CICA. 

3. Although we agree with the court of appeals that 
the role of the Board of Review under the amended 
Transfer Act is unconstitutional, we believe that the 
petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Invalidating an Act of Congress on constitutional 
grounds is “the gravest and most delicate duty that [a 
court] is called on to perform,” Blodgett v. Holden, 275 
U.S. 142, 147-148 (1927) (Holmes, J.), and when a lower 
court finds it necessary to perform that duty, review by 
this Court is ordinarily called for. Although we believe 
that the 1991 Amendments to the Transfer Act fail to 
cure the defects identified in CAAN and to render the 
Act constitutional, we do not believe that the inadequacy 
of the Amendments is so clearly beyond dispute as to 
eliminate the need for this Court’s review. 


CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted. 


DREw S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


FRANK W. HUNGER 
Assistant Attorney General 


WILLIAM KANTER 
ScoTT R. MCINTOSH 
Attorneys 


JANUARY 1995 


