~ 
Supreme Court, U.S. 
FILED 
94 
431 SEP = 9 1994 
NoQ@Mtt UF (HE CLERK 
In the Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 
JAMES D. RYDER, PETITIONER 
Vv. 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPONDENT 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
MILITARY APPEALS 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
ALLEN LOTZ 
Lieutenant Commander, U.S. 
Coast Guard 
Commandant (G-L-5) 
U.S. Coast Guard 
2100 2nd Street, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20593-0001 
(202) 267-0115 
Attorney for Petitioner 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
May the de facto appointment rationale be relied upon 
to affirm the acts of civilians improperly appointed to 
serve as military appellate judges by the Judge Advocate 
General of an Armed Force, who is not authorized to 
make appointments under the Appointments Clause of the 
Constitution, when those acts include affirming criminal 
convictions on direct appeal? 
(i) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
ee 8 PPP 
ere Te eT er er rere 
| 
PPP 
See 
Pe 
C er er er 
ieee 
2 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND STATUTES 
See foes ds 
0k 
6 oe oe dae 
ee 
ee 
eee 
2 
STATE peers OF Bite CARE 2c ccc cccccescccoues 
2 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........... 
Y 
ee 
rey one oe ee Ane rene noe 
16 
APPENDIX A (CMA Decision)..................... 
la 
APPENDIX B(CGCMR Decision) .................. 
lla 
APPENDIX C (CGCMR Decision on reconsideration) . 
. 
23a 
APPENDIX D (Relevant Statutory Provisions) ........ 
26a 

iil 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Page 
Andrade 
v. 
Lauer, 
729 F.2d 
1475 
(D.C. 
Cir. 
Ue 
Ore ree er ere eee eee Cee $s, i233 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) ........-..-. 
7, 10 
Dettinger v. United States, 
7 M.J. 216 (C.M.A. 
CU 
a Rear 
ree te eee eee 
3 
Federal Election Comm’n v. NRA Political Victory 
Fund, 6 F.3d 821 (D.C. Cir. 1993), cert. granted, 
No. 93-1151, 129 L. Ed. 2d 832 (1994) ....... 9, 13, 14 
Freytag v. Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 111 S. Ct. 
EE 
eee 
ee 
eee eee ee ee 
10, 11 
Glidden Co. v. Zdanok, 370 U.S. 530 (1962) ...... 
12, 14 
McDowell v. United States, 159 U.S. 596 (1895) ... 
14 
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988) .......... 
12 
Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe 
ee oe. i ae. |, 
> | ene 
12, 14 
Ryan v. 
Tinsley, 316 F.2d 430 (10th Cir.), cert. 
eS He Ge SE pe |) Sere ee 
1] 
Solorio v. United States, 483 U.S. 435 (1987) ..... 
5 
United States v. Carpenter, 37 M.J. 291 (C.M.A.), 
cert. pending, No. 93-676, 62 U.S.L.W. 3411 
a 
ods cla 
k 
a a's oe 644 Ree 
a 58 
88 
eo passim 
United States v. Cole, 31 M.J. 270 (C.M.A. 1990) .. 
3 
United States ex rel. Doss v. Lindsley, 
148 F.2d 
22 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 325 U.S. 858 (1945) .. 
1] 
United States v. Kovac, 36 M.J. 521 (C.G.C.M.R. 
RSIS 
a 
4 
ee 
ee 
ee 
7 
United States v. Maharajh, 28 M.J. 797 
C8 
8 
Ee re 
ere. ee eee 
5 
United States 
v. 
Ohrt, 
28 M.J. 
301 (C.M.A. 
aE on 
ee eee 
5 
United States v. Prive, 35 M.J. 569 (C.G.C.M.R. 
1992), aff'd, 39 M.J. 28 (C.M.A.), cert. pending, 
No. 93-966, 62 U.S.L.W. 3429 (1993) ......... 
13 

iv 
Cases -- Continued: 
Page 
United States v. Senior, 36 M.J. 1016(C.G.C.M.R. 
POCA 
ae Vadeueekl cnewhee 
ee aeaee eee as ee 
8 
United States v. Woodley, 751 F.2d 1008 (9th Cir. 
1985) (en banc), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 
1048 
SS 
Kad oa cures be 
a maa 
w SRE 
Ke dk kiko 
12 
Ex parte Ward, 173 U.S. 452 (1899) ............. 
1] 
Weiss v. United States, 
1148S. Ct. 752 (1994) ...... passim 
Constitutional Provisions: 
Se ee RE 
ee ie A ee 
10 
Statutes: 
Art. 1(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 801(1) .......0.... 
4 
ee 
Mt eS oe 
eee 
4 
ome 
A&R 
ee 
|) 
5 
ee ee 
ee 
re 
4 
At. GG, WS, FOUL. OO 
6 cc 
vec uees 3, 4, 3,8 
An. 67a, WOM, 10U S.C. § Gb7e.... 
.. 6... cees. 
2 
Art. 142, UCAS, 10 U.S.C. § Sé2e .. 2... 
cea 
3 
Be cs 
Eo 
5 Cn 
Ss PRE ake] 
2 
Se an 
I 
vc 
ovo 
coe exo Ke eae 
ee 
3 
' 
ae ya 
ree 
8 
Other Authorities: 
73 Am. Jur. 2d Statutes § 257 (1974) ............ 
82 C.J.S. Statutes § 369 (1953) ................. 

In the Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 
No. 94- 
JAMES D. RYDER, PETITIONER 
v. 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPONDENT 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
MILITARY APPEALS 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
The petitioner, James D. Ryder, respectfully prays that 
a writ of certiorari issue to review the judgment and opin- 
ion of the United States Court of Military Appeals entered 
in this proceeding. 
OPINIONS BELOW 
The decision of the United States Court of Military Ap- 
peals, United States v. Ryder, 39 M.J. 454 (C.M.A. 1994) 
is reprinted as Appendix A at App. la. The opinion of the 
United States Coast Guard Court of Military Review, 
United States v. Ryder, 34 M.J. 1077 (C.G.C.M.R. 1992), 
is reprinted as Appendix B at App. Ila. The further deci- 
sion of the United States Coast Guard Court of Military 
Review on reconsideration, United States v. Ryder, 34 
M.J. 1259 (C.G.C.M.R. 1992), is reprinted as Appendix C 
at App. 23a. 
(1) 

JURISDICTION 
The decision of the Court of Military Appeals was 
issued on 23 June 1994. The jurisdiction of this Court is 
invoked under 
Article 67a of the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. § 867a (Supp. II 1990) and 28 
U.S.C. § 1259(3)(Supp. II 1990). 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND 
STATUTES INVOLVED 
The Appointments Clause, U.S. Const. Art. II, § 2, Cl. 
2, provides: 
The President 
. 
. 
. shall nominate, and by and with 
the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint 
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, 
Judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers 
of the United States, whose Appointments are not 
herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be 
established by Law; but the Congress may by Law 
vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as 
they think proper, 
in the President alone, in the 
Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments. 
The relevant provision of the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, Article 66, 10 U.S.C. § 866, is set forth in Appen- 
dix D at App. 26a. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Petitioner was a Boatswain’s Mate Second Class (pay 
grade E-5), U.S. Coast Guard, at the time of his court- 
martial. He was tried by a general court-martial composed 
of officer and enlisted members. Contrary to his pleas, he 
was convicted of various drug-related violations of the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). His approved 
sentence consists of confinement for three years, forfei- 
ture of $699 per month for thirty-six months, reduction 

3 
io the lowest enlisted grade (E-1), and a dishonorable 
discharge. Both the Coast Guard Court of Military Review 
and the U.S. Court of Military Appeals affirmed his con- 
viction and sentence. App. Ila, 23a, la. 
The legal background of this issue is critical to a full 
understanding of this petition. Under Article I of the Con- 
stitution, Congress has established a three-tier system of 
military courts. At the top is the Court of Military Ap- 
peals, which has five civilian judges appointed by the 
President with the advice and consent of the Senate for 
fixed terms of office. Art. 142, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 942 
(1988). The appointments of the Court of Military Ap- 
peals judges are not at issue here. 
Below the Court of Military Appeals are four Courts of 
Military Review; one each for the Army, Air Force, Navy- 
Marine Corps, and Coast Guard. Absent waiver by an ac- 
cused, the Courts of Military Review are required to 
review all cases in which a death sentence, confinement for 
one year or more, a dismissal, or a dishonorable or bad- 
conduct discharge is part of the approved sentence. Art. 
66(b), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 866(b) (1988). Courts of 
Military Review exercise all of the traditional powers of 
appellate courts, including those under the All Writs Act. 
28 U.S.C. § 1651(a); see Dettinger v. United States, 7 M.J. 
216 (C.M.A. 1979). Additionally, these courts exercise an 
“awesome, plenary, de novo power of review[.]” United 
States v. Cole, 31 M.J. 270, 272 (C.M.A. 1990). Thus, a 
court of military review “may affirm only such findings of 
gulity and the sentence as it finds correct in law and fact 
_... [I]t may weigh the evidence, judge the credibility of 
witnesses, 
and 
determine 
controverted 
questions 
of 
fact[.]” Art. 66(c), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866(c) (1988). 
Military appellate judges are selected and assigned to the 
Court of Military Review by the judge Advocate General 
of the Service. Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 886(a). The 

4 
Judge Advocate General is the official for each service 
who is responsible for the overall supervision of military 
justice matters. See Art. 6(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 806(a) 
(1988). In this case, the Judge Advocate General of the 
Coast Guard is the General Counsel of the Department of 
Transportation. 
Art. 
1(1), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 801(1) 
(1988). The 
Judge Advocate General is neither the Presi- 
dent, the head of a department, or a court of law; accord- 
ingly, the appointment to judicial service in the Armed 
Forces by the 
Judge Advocate General does not satisfy the 
Appointments Clause. See Weiss v. United States, 114 S. 
Ct. 752 (1994). However, with respect to military judges 
who are commissioned officers, the prior appointment by 
the President and confirmation by the Senate as a military 
officer does satisfy the Appointments Clause. /d. 
The Coast Guard Court of Military Review, which 
: 
reviewed this case, presently consists of five appellate 
i 
military judges, two of whom are civilians (Chief Judge 
Baum and Judge Bridgman) and three of whom are Coast 
Guard commissioned 
officers. These judges were ap- 
| 
pointed by the Judge Advocate General. United States v. 
Carpenter, 37 M.J. 291, 294 (C.M.A.), cert. pending, No. 
93-676, 62 U.S.L.W. 3411 (1993); Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 866(a) (1988). The Courts of Military Review are 
typically divided into three-member panels to hear cases; 
petitioner’s case was reviewed by such a three-member 
panel which included both Chief Judge Baum and Judge 
Bridgman. App. 12a, 24a. 
Courts-martial are presided over by military judges who 
are military officers. Art. 26, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 826 
(1988). A court-martial can try any offense committed by 
a member of the armed services; the sole requirement for 
court-martial jurisdiction over the accused is that the ac- 
cused was on active duty in the military at the time of the 
Le
RE
SH
LF, 
TG 
HM 
a 

5 
offense. Solorio v. United States, 483 U.S. 435 (1987). A 
general court-martial (the type at which petitioner was 
tried) may impose sentences that include death, imprison- 
ment for life or a term of years, total forfeiture of pay and 
allowances, and a dishonorable or bad-conduct discharge 
(or a dismissal if the accused is an officer). Art. 
18, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 818 (1988). A bad-conduct or dis- 
honorable discharge carries a permanent stigma, and it 
can have an adverse impact on civilian job opportunities, 
as well as on certain government-provided benefits. See 
United States v. Ohrt, 28 M.J. 301 (C.M.A. 1989); United 
States 
v. Maharajh, 
28 M.J. 797 (A.F.C.M.R. 
1989) 
(Lewis, J., concurring). 
All military trial judges and most appellate military 
judges are commissioned officers and lawyers on active 
duty in their services. In Weiss, this Court held that the 
commissioned officers, having already been appointed by 
the President as officers, did not need to be separately ap- 
pointed as judges to be properly appointed under the Ap- 
pointments Clause. Weiss, 114S. Ct. at 760. However, the 
Court specifically declined to apply that conclusion to the 
appointment of civilians to service courts of military 
review. Weiss, 114 S. Ct. at 757 fn. 4. The Court noted 
that 
the “constitutionality 
of the provision allowing 
civilians to be assigned to Courts of Military Review, 
without being appointed pursuant to the Appointments 
Clause, obviously presents a quite different question. See 
Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866(a). It is not at issue 
here.” Id. 
This case involved 
trial by a general court-martial 
presided over by military judges who were commissioned 
officers. The case was, in due course, reviewed in the 
Coast Guard Court of Military Review by a panel of 
judges consisting of one commissioned officer and two 
civilians. The issue of the appointment of the military trial 

6 
and Court of Military review judges to perform judicial 
duties was raised before the Court of Military Review and 
the Court of Military Appeals. The Court of Military Ap- 
peals exercised its discretionary jurisdiction to consider 
petitioner’s claim that the manner in which the trial and 
appellate military judges in his case were appointed 
violated the Appointments Clause of the Constitution. 
The court’s decision addressed that issue in a footnote 
only, relying on its previous decision in United States v. 
Carpenter, 37 M.J. 291 (C.M.A.), cert. pending, No. 
93-676, 62 U.S.L.W. 3411 (1993), and this Court’s deci- 
sion in Weiss v. United States, 114 S. Ct. 752 (1994) to re- 
ject petitioner’s contentions. App. 2a. 
The Court of Military Appeals’ consideration of the 
issue Of the appointment of civilian Court of Military 
Review judges produced four published opinions by the 
judges, though all judges voted to affirm that case. United 
States v. Carpenter, supra. 
Judge Gierke, joined by Judge 
Cox, authored the opinion of the court. Relying on the 
Court of Military Appeals decision in Weiss,' he first con- 
cluded that the military judge who tried Carpenter’s case 
and two of the three Coast Guard Court of Military 
Review judges (the two who were commissioned officers 
on active duty) who reviewed the case were appointed con- 
sistently with the Appointments Clause. Carpenter, 37 
M.J. at 293. However, with respect to the third member of 
the Court of Military Review panel in the Carpenter case, 
Chief Judge Baum, who is a civilian, the Weiss decision 
was not controlling. 
The Government argued at the Court of Military Ap- 
peals in Carpenter that Chief Judge Baum’s (and, by im- 
plication, Judge Bridgman’s) appointment to the Court of 
' Carpenter was decided by the Court of Military Appeals before 
this Court’s decision in Weiss. 

7 
Military Review by the Judge Advocate General was a 
proper appointment because the 
Judge Advocate General 
was acting by delegation from the Secretary of Transpor- 
tation, the head of a department. The court rejected that 
argument, holding that the appointment power is not dele- 
gable. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 294. 
The Government next argued that, as a retired military 
officer, Chief Judge Baum? was not a civilian, but remain- 
ed a commissioned officer whose appointment as such 
made a separate appointment as a court of military review 
judge unnecessary in accordance with the Weiss decision. 
The court also rejected that contention. The court noted 
that Chief Judge Baum was employed and serving in a 
civilian, not a military, billet, he had not been recalled to 
active duty, and that judicial duties are not germane to the 
duties of a retired officer, because a retired officer has no 
duties. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 295. Judge Bridgman also is 
employed and serving in a civilian billet, and has not been 
recalled to active duty to perform his judicial duties. 
The court then correctly concluded that Chief Judge 
Baum’s (and, by implication, Judge Bridgman’s) appoint- 
ment 
to the court of military review was defective. 
Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 295. However, it afforded de facto 
validity to the acts of the Chief Judge, relying on Buckley 
v. 
Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976), and a January 15, 1993, 
memorandum of the Secretary of Transportation purpor- 
ting to appoint the judges of the Coast Guard Court of 
Military 
Review, 
including 
Chief 
Judge 
Baum.’ 
Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 295 and 294 fn. 1. 
2 Judge Bridgman is also a retired military officer. See United 
States v. Kovac, 36 M.J. 521, 525 (C.G.C.M.R. 1992). 
3 On January 
15, 1993, the then-Secretary of Transportation, 
Andrew Card, signed 
a memorandum purporting to appoint the 
judges of the Coast Guard Court of Military Review, including Chief 

Judge Baum and Judge Bridgman. Because this action occurred well 
after the decisions of that court in this case, it is not at issue here. In 
any event, however, the effect of the Secretary’s action is in question. 
The 
Court 
of Military 
Appeals 
apparently 
believed 
that 
the 
Secretary’s memorandum cured any Appointments Clause problems 
for the judges named. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 294 fn. 1. However, the 
court’s comment on this matter is not conclusive. That specific issue 
was not briefed in Carpenter. Any comment on the matter was simply 
dicta, because the Secretary’s memorandum was signed nearly a year 
after the Court of Military Review issued its opinion in the case. See 
United States v. Carpenter, 34M.J. 681 (C.G.C.M.R. 1992). Further- 
more, petitioner contends that the memorandum of the Secretary is of 
no effect. The Secretary of Transportation has no explicit authority 
under the law to appoint the judges of the Court of Military Review. 
The Uniform Code of Military Justice authorizes the Judge Advocate 
General of each service to appoint the judges of the service Court of 
Military Review, not the Secretary. Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(a); but see United States v. Senior, 36 M.J. 1016 (C.G.C.M.R. 
1993). The legal provision which generally permits the Secretary to ap- 
point officers of the Department of Transportation should not be ap- 
plied to support the Secretary’s action. See 49 U.S.C. § 323(a). It isa 
well-settled 
rule of statutory interpretation and application that, 
where two statutory provisions deal with the same subject, one is 
general in its application and the other specific, and the two provisions 
are in conflict, the specific statutory provision is to be applied. 82 
C.J.S. Statutes § 369 (1953); 73 Am. Jur. 2d Statutes § 257 (1974). 
That is exactly the situation involved here. The two statutes in ques- 
tion are Art. 66(a), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 866(a), and 49 U.S.C. 
§ 323{a). Both statutory provisions concern, at least in part, the ap- 
pointment of officers of the United States within the Department of 
Transportation. One provision is general and one specific in terms of 
appointment of officers. Article 66(a), UCM, is specific in that it ad- 
dresses only the appointment of the judges of the Courts of Military 
Review; 49 U.S.C. § 323(a) is general in that it addresses the appoint- 
ment powers of the Secretary generally, Department 
— wide. The two 
provisions are in conflict. In Art. 66(a), UCMJ, Congress directed the 
service 
Judge Advocate General to appoint the judges of the service 
Court of Military Review. In 49 U.S.C. § 323(a), Congress authorized 
the Secretary of Transportation to appoint officers of the Department 
generally, not specifically naming any particular officers or positions. 
Therefore, it is clear that the rules of statutory interpretation and ap- 

9 
Chief Judge Sullivan concurred based on the de facto 
appointment rationale. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 300. Judge 
Crawford concurred in the result with respect to the Ap- 
pointments Clause issue, relying on her separate opinion 
in Weiss. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 300. Judge Wiss also con- 
curred in the result with respect to the Appointments 
Clause issue, also relying on the de facto appointment ra- 
tionale. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 300-301. 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 
This petition raises an issue important to the military 
justice system. With respect to the question presented, a 
related issue has been previously raised to and decided by 
this Court in Weiss v. United States, 114S. Ct. 752 (1994). 
This Court has also agreed to decide another related issue 
in Federal Election Comm’n 
v. NRA Political Victory 
Fund, 6 F.3d 821 (D.C. Cir. 1993), cert. granted, No. 
93-1151, 129 L. Ed. 2d 832 (1994). This petition, however, 
presents an issue not directly addressed in this Court’s 
decision in Weiss—the appointment by the Judge Ad- 
vocate General of an Armed Force of civilians to serve as 
military appellate judges on the service Court of Military 
Review, and the remedy available to an appellant who 
raises this issue during the direct appeal of his case. This 
petition seeks to ensure that the separation of powers re- 
quirements and protections embodied in the Appoint- 
ments Clause are available to those tried by courts-martial 
whose cases 
are reviewed by the Courts of Military 
Review. 
plication require that the specific provision, Art. 66(a), UCMJ, be 
given effect over the general provision, 49 U.S.C. § 323(a). Thus, 
Congress gave the power to appoint the judges of the Coast Guard 
Court of Military Review to the Judge Advocate General, and not to 
the Secretary. 

10 
The Appointments Clause precludes Congress from 
placing the power to appoint inferior officers in anyone 
other than the President alone, the Courts of Law, or the 
Heads of Departments. U.S. Const. Art. II, § 2, Cl. 2; 
Freytag v. Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 111 S. Ct. 2631, 
2642 (1991). Military judges, who exercise extraordinary 
authority and discretion, are Officers of the United States 
and are subject to the Appointments Clause. Weiss v. 
United States, 114 S. Ct. 752, 757 (1994). 
After this Court’s decision in Weiss, the only question 
remaining with respect to the appointment of military 
judges is the appointment of civilians as appellate military 
judges on the service Courts of Military Review. After the 
Court of Military Appeals’ decision in Carpenter, the only 
question is whether the de facto appointment rationale, 
coupled with an after-the-fact appointment by the service 
Secretary, can be relied upon to affirm the acts of civilians 
appointed to serve as military appellate judges by the 
Judge Advocate General. 
The Court of Military Appeals upheld Carpenter’s con- 
viction and sentence, despite the improper appointment of 
Chief Judge Baum of the Coast Guard Court of Military 
Review, a civilian, by relying on the de facto appointment 
rationale. Carpenter, 37 M.J. at 295. In reaching that 
result, however, the court devoted only a single sentence to 
discussing the issue, and cited only one case, Buckley v. 
Valeo, 424 U.S. 1. (1976). However, Buckley was an ac- 
tion seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to enjoin the 
operation 
of the statutory 
provisions concerning 
the 
Federal Election Commission, not a direct appeal of a 
criminal conviction, and does not support the action of the 
lower court. 
The de facto officer doctrine was developed to limit the 
circumstances in which government actions can be chal- 
lenged by attacking the title of the officeholder responsible 
———— 

1] 
for the action. The principal harm that the doctrine was 
intended to prevent arises when the attack occurs long 
after the appointment is made, and the defect is of a 
technical nature that could have and would have been 
readily cured had it been called to the government’s atten- 
tion in a timely fashion. The de facto appointment ra- 
tionale has been applied to limit the consequences of im- 
proper appointments of officeholders, particularly when 
many innocent third parties would be harmed by their 
reliance on the acts of the improperly appointed official, 
as in Buckley. The doctrine is clearly not simple. See An- 
drade v. Lauer, 729 F.2d 1475, 1496-1501 (D.C. Cir. 
1984). It has apparently never been applied in a case like 
this. If it is to be extended to these circumstances, it should 
be done by this Court, with a full discussion of the matter. 
Most of the cases in which the de facto officer doctrine 
has been applied are civil cases, not criminal, and the 
criminal cases have most often involved collateral attacks 
on state criminal convictions in federal court. See United 
States ex rel. Doss v. Lindsley, 148 F.2d 22 (7th Cir.), cert. 
denied, 325 U.S. 858 (1945); Ryan v. Tinsley, 316 F.2d 430 
(10th Cir.), cert. denied, 375 U.S. 17 (1963); see also Ex 
parte Ward, 173 U.S. 452, 454 (1899) (doctrine used in 
criminal case to defeat collateral attack on validity of 
judge’s title to office). 
The inapplicability of the doctrine to this case can be 
seen most easily by examining those cases in which it was 
not applied, but where the doctrine would have provided 
an easy way to dispose of the case had it been relevant. 
Thus, in Freytag v. Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 111 S. 
Ct. 2631 (1991), this Court could have avoided deciding 
the question of whether the Tax Court was a Court of Law 
or a Department under the Appointments Clause since the 
special trial judges there were clearly at least de facto of- 

12 
ficers. Similarly, in Morrison 
v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 
(1988), determination of the constitutionality of the in- 
dependent counsel would have been unnecessary since the 
doctrine, had it been applicable, would have sufficed to 
allow the independent counsel to enforce a grand jury sub- 
poena, which was the specific action challenged there. In 
Glidden Co. v. Zdanok, 370 U.S. 530 (1962), which in- 
volved both civil and criminal cases, if the de facto officer 
doctrine were available, the Court would have been able to 
decide the cases on narrower grounds. See Id. at 534. 
Finally, in United States v. Woodley, 751 F.2d 1008 (9th 
Cir. 1985) (en banc), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1048 (1986), 
the court of appeals in a direct criminal appeal upheld a 
recess appointment of a district judge in the face of a claim 
that the appointment was inconsistent with Article III, yet 
none of the opinions even mentioned the de facto officer 
doctrine. 
| 
It is possible that all of the Justices, judges, and counsel 
involved in all of these and other cases, such as Northern 
Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co., 458 U.S. 
:
50 (1982), simply overlooked the de facto officer doctrine, 
but that seems unlikely. However, the failure to rely upon 
the doctrine_in any of those cases is best explained by its 
inapplicability either to a direct attack on a statutory 
scheme or, as here, when a judge or prosecutor directly in- 
volved in a case has allegedly been appointed in violation 
of the Constitution. 
Two decisions of the District of Columbia Circuit of the 
U.S. Court of Appeals in which the de facto officer doc- 
trine was discussed are instructive. Andrade v. Lauer, 729 
F.2d 1475 (D.C. Cir. 1984), involved a challenge by cur- 
rent and former federal employees to actions of federal of- 
ficials (a reduction in force). One of the bases of the 
challenge was that the officials had not been properly ap- 
pointed. In response, those officials argued that the de 
OO 

13 
facto officer doctrine precluded any challenge of the ac- 
tions of the officials on that ground. Andrade, 729 F.2d at 
1496. The Court of Appeals noted that application of the 
doctrine in that case would apparently leave the plaintiffs 
without any remedy. /d. at 1497. The court rejected any 
interpretation of the doctrine “that would likely make it 
impossible for these plaintiffs to bring their assumedly 
substantial constitutional claim and would render legal 
norms concerning appointment and eligibility to hold of- 
fice unenforceable.” Jd. at 1498. The court then placed 
two requirements on litigants challenging government ac- 
tions on the ground that the officials taking those actions 
had not been properly appointed: first, the litigant must 
raise the challenge at or near the time the action is taken; 
second, the litigant must show that the agency involved 
had reasonable notice of the alleged defect. Jd. at 1499. 
Applying the analysis of Andrade to petitioner’s case 
would seem to preclude reliance on the de facto officer 
doctrine to affirm his conviction. If the doctrine is ap- 
plied, it leaves him without a remedy for the violation of 
his right to have his court-martial reviewed by a Court of 
Military Review composed of military appellate judges 
who have been properly appointed. He raised the appoint- 
ment issue while his case was being reviewed by the Court 
of Military Review. App. 24a. The court was on notice of 
the alleged defect because it had previously been raised as 
an issue in another case. App. 25a; United States v. Prive, 
35 M.J. 569 (C.G.C.M.R. 
1992), aff'd, 39 M.J. 
28 
(C.M.A.), cert. pending, No. 93-966, 62 U.S.L.W. 3429 
(1993). 
The other recent case in which the District of Columbia 
Circuit discussed the de facto officer doctrine is Federal 
Election Comm’n v. NRA Political Victory Fund, 6 F.3d 
821 (D.C. Cir. 1993), cert. granted, No. 93-1151, 129 L. 
Ed. 2d 832 (1994). There, an issue concerning the constitu- 
tionality of the composition of the Federal Election Com- 

14 
mission was raised as a defense to the action of the Com- 
mission in a civil enforcement action. /d. at 822. The 
Commission argued that the issue was not justiciable 
because the de facto appointment doctrine would prevent 
the NRA from obtaining a remedy based on that issue in 
any event. /d. at 828. The court rejected an application of 
the doctrine that would deny the NRA releif. Jd. The court 
noted that this Court, in Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. 
Marathon Pipe Line Co., 458 U.S. 50 (1982), when it 
found that the scheme by which bankruptcy judges were 
appointed was unconstitutional, provided relief to the par- 
ty who challenged the scheme even though the opinion was 
to act prospectively only. FEC v. NRA, 6 F.3d at 828. 
The only federal criminal case found in which the doc- 
trine was relied on to sustain a conviction on direct appeal 
is McDowell v. United States, 159 U.S. 596 (1895). Not 
only was the doctrine merely an alternative basis for af- 
firming the conviction, but the facts of McDowell are very 
different from this case. The defect alleged in McDowell 
was that proper procedures had not been followed in ar- 
ranging for an assignment of a duly appointed federal 
judge from one district to sit in another district. The judge 
in question had not presided over the defendant’s trial, nor 
was he present when the grand jury had returned the in- 
dictment. 
Rather, 
the only defect 
was 
that 
he was 
presiding when the grand jury was first sworn and im- 
paneled, and even then a properly appointed judge may 
have re-sworn the grand jurors before the indictment was 
handed down. 
Under those circumstances, 
this Court 
refused to overturn defendant’s conviction for what was at 
worst a highly technical violation of a statute. In addition, 
the fact that McDowell was cited in Glidden, 370 U.S. at 
535-36, makes it very unlikely that the de facto officer 
doctrine was overlooked in Glidden. 

15 
It would be particularly harsh to apply the doctrine in a 
criminal case involving a structural defect of constitu- 
tional dimensions, since it is unlikely that anyone could 
ever challenge the practice before being adversely affected 
by some act of that officer. Indeed, if the doctrine were 
relevant in a case like this, it would always be deter- 
minative of any question concerning appointment to of- 
fice, precluding a ruling on the merits of the constitutional 
claim because to do otherwise would be to render an ad- 
visory opinion. In other words, the use of the de 
facto of- 
ficer doctrine as it was applied by the Court of Military 
Appeals in Carpenter, supra, and in this case, would effec- 
tively remove all such claims from judicial review and 
thereby allow Congress or the Executive to violate the ex- 
plicit provisions of the Appointments Clause with im- 
punity, because the de facto officer doctrine would always 
prevent a court from setting aside the challenged action. 

16 
CONCLUSION 
The validity of the appointment of civilians as military 
appellate judges under the Appointments Clause 
is a 
significant constitutional question which this Court should 
address. As it did in Weiss, this Court should grant review 
to resolve this issue as promptly as possible. 
For the reasons stated, petitioner prays that this Court 
grant review of the question presented in order to bring the 
military 
court-martial 
system 
into 
line 
with 
the 
re- 
quirements of the Appointments Clause. 
Respectfully submitted, 
ALLEN LOTZ 
Lieutenant Commander, U.S. 
Coast Guard 
Commandant (G-L-5) 
U.S. Coast Guard 
2100 2nd Street, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20593-0001 
(202) 267-0115 
Attorney for Petitioner 

APPENDIX A 
U.S. COURT OF MILITARY APPEALS 
No. 68,449/CG 
CMR No. 947 
UNITED STATES, APPELLEE 
JAMES D. RYDER, BOATSWAIN’S MATE SECOND CLASS, 
U.S. Coast GUARD, APPELLANT 
Argued October 7, 1993 
Decided June 23, 1994 
39 M.J. 454 
For 
Appellant: 
Lieutenant 
Commander 
Allen 
Lotz 
(argued). 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Garland M. Walker (argued). 
Military Judges: Thomas W. Snook, Philip F. Roberts 
(USN), Douglas A. Smith. 
(1a) 
niece 

2a 
Opinion of the Court 
Wiss, Judge: 
Appellant entered uniform pleas of not guilty to an ex- 
tensive laundry 
list of drug-related allegations 
at his 
general court-martial comprised of officer and enlisted 
members. Succeeding in some instances, he nonetheless 
was convicted of using marijuana (11 specifications), 
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) (3 specifications), and 
cocaine; distributing LSD; and soliciting Coast Guard per- 
sonnel to use and to distribute LSD (one specification 
each), in violation of Articles 112a and 134, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. §§ 912a and 934, re- 
spectively. The court-martial sentenced him to a dishonor- 
able discharge, confinement 
for 5 years, forfeiture of 
$699.00 pay per month for 60 months, and reduction to 
|
the lowest enlisted grade. 
|
The convening authority reduced the period of confine- 
ment to 3 years and of forfeitures to 36 months but in all 
other respects approved the trial results. The Court of 
Military Review set aside the finding of one of the uses of 
marijuana as not supported by the evidence; the court, 
however, 
affirmed 
the remaining 
findings 
and 
the 
sentence. 34 M.J. 1077, 1082 (1992). 
On appellant’s petition, we granted review to consider 
whether “improperly introduced and admitted evidence 
resulted in appellant’s wrongful conviction.”! Appeilant’s 
complaint of evidentiary error actually involves three 
distinct aspects of the evidence, none of which was the ob- 
ject of a timely objection at trial. For the reasons dis- 
' Additionally, we granted appellant’s petition on two issues which 
now have been decided against him. See Weiss v. United States, ___ 
US. 
_, 114 S.Ct. 752 (1994); United States v. Carpenter, 37 M.J. 
291 (C.M.A.), cert. pending, No. 93-676, 62 U.S.L.W. 3411 (1993). 
' 

3a 
cussed, infra, we decide that none of the three was plain 
error that resulted in “appellant’s wrongful conviction.” 
See United States v. Toro, 37 M.J. 313 (C.M.A. 1993); 
United States v. Fisher, 21 M.J. 327 (C.M.A. 1988). 
Without defense objection, Dr. Ray Liu, the Govern- 
ment’s expert toxicologist, testified that urine samples taken 
from appellant on January 4, 23, and 30, and March 3, 
1989, each contained the metabolite for marijuana called 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Trial counsel offered this 
evidence to corroborate testimony of government witnesses 
that they had seen appellant smoke marijuana on January 6 
and 7 and on February 15, 1989, and testimony of witnesses 
that appellant had bragged about being able to beat 
urinalyses. 
For the first time on appeal, appellant has urged that Dr. 
Liu’s testimony was inadmissible because, in each instance, 
the urinalysis reflected a measure of THC below that which 
Coast Guard regulations treat as “positive” for its presence. 
He now 
relies upon our decision in United States 
v. 
Arguello, 29 M.J. 198 (C.M.A. 1989), as the legal basis of 
his contention. We hold that admission of this testimony 
was not plain error so as to overcome appellant’s failure to 
object at trial. See Mil.R.Evid. 103(a){1) and (d), Manual 
for Courts-Martial, United States, 1984. 
A 
Presence of THC in urine is measured in nanograms per 
milliliter (ng/ml). The laboratory that tested appellant’s 
four urine samples reported detection of THC at the levels 
of 11.14, 7.58, 5.8, and 7.76 ng/ml, respectively. To put 
appellant’s complaint into perspective, it is necessary here 
to give some attention to certain Coast Guard regulatory 
provisions. 

4a 
Article 
20-C-3b(2)(a) 
of 
Coast 
Guard 
Personnel 
Manual, Commandant Instruction M1000.6A, Change | 
(21 July 1988), instructs that “urine samples which test 
positive for” a drug “in a screening test will be” confirmed 
by “using 
gas 
chromatography/mass 
spectrometry 
(GC/MS) technology.” The provision continues: 
A cutoff level has been established for each drug 
which will ensure the reliability of any finding that the 
drug is present in the sample. A laboratory finding by 
GC/MS that the drug is present at or above the cutoff 
level will be reported as “confirmed positive” and is 
evidence of drug abuse. 
For the presence of THC, the “cutoff level” that is “evi- 
dence of drug abuse” is 50 ng/ml, see Art. 20-C-3c(4), 
while a “confirmed positive” below that level only “is evi- 
dence that THC is present in the member’s system and re- 
quires investigation,” see Art. 20-C-4c. In fact, 4c then ex- 
pressly states: 
It [a reading below 50 ng/ml] is not sufficient to es- 
tablish a drug incident unless there is additional evi- 
dence indicating intentional use of drugs, in which 
case the test result may be used as corroborating evi- 
dence to establish a drug incident. 
Consistent with this language, Article 20-C-5b reads: 
The absence of a positive urinalysis test result, or a 
test result below 50 ng/ml for THC, does not pre- 
clude taking disciplinary 
or administrative action 
based on other evidence. 
In sum, these provisions contemplate that a confirmed 
positive reading of THC at a level of 50 ng/ml or higher 
will, itself, support a conclusion 
of drug abuse, while a 
reading of lower than 50 ng/ml only is evidence of drug 
presence which does not alone support a conclusion of 

Sa 
drug abuse, but which may be used to corroborate other 
evidence of intentional drug use. This scheme reflects a 
sliding-scale of reliability of urinalysis results that is the 
concern of Article 20-C-3b(2)(a), quoted earlier. See also 
United States v. Arguello, 29 M.J. at 204 (purpose of re- 
quiring minimum ng/ml levels to report “positive” result 
“is to protect the servicemember from adverse action 
based on unreliable scientific testing”). 
The Government seeks to distinguish this case from 
Arguello on the basis that the regulation in that case did not 
have the second prong that the regulation here has. The 
Government urges that, under the regulation in issue in 
Arguello, the question of “positive” was black or white: If 
test results were above a prescribed level, the report was 
“positive”; and if they were below (or nonexistent), it was 
“negative.” The misstep in Arguello, 
the Government 
points out, was that the prosecution tried to transform a 
report that was “negative” under the regulation into one 
that was “positive” by providing expert testimony that the 
reading nonetheless did reliably show presence of the drug. 
The Court of Military Review expressed this same rationale 
in rebuffing appellant’s claim of error. 34 M.J. at 1079. 
The distinction may not be quite so clear, however, in 
light of yet another Coast Guard regulatory provision, 
which the Court of Military Review did not expressly con- 
sider. Paragraph 6d of Commandant Instruction 5355.1A 
(24 February 1988) stipulates: 
Samples confirmed positive by GC/MS for THC will 
be reported'in NG/ML, if the level detected is between 
° 
20 and 49 NG/ML. THC results at or above 50 NG/ 
ML and all other drugs will be reported as “confirmed 
positive” only, indicating that the drug concentration 
level equals or exceeds the GC/MS minimum detection 
level specified for Coast Guard samples. 
. . . 

6a 
A possible inference from this paragraph is that a reading 
below 20 ng/ml is not to be reported “positive” at all. In 
fact, as the court below acknowledged, Dr. Liu himself 
“testified that the procedure established by laboratory con- 
tract with the Coast Guard provides that results of GC/MS 
testing showing THC metabolites below 15 nanograms are 
reported as negative.” 34 M.J. at 1079 (emphasis added). 
It is unnecessary here, however, for us to authoritatively 
interpret the Coast Guard regulations set out earlier and in 
the process to resolve the different views of the parties. In 
the absence of timely objection at trial, appellant has 
waived any appellate complaint unless admission of the 
evidence was plain error. Mil.R.Evid. 103(a)(1) and (d). We 
said in Fisher: “In order to constitute plain error, the error 
must not only be obvious and substantial, it must also have 
‘had an unfair prejudicial impact on the jury’s delibera- 
tions.’ ” 21 M.J. at 328. Without deciding whether Arguello 
controls this case, it fairly may be argued that any error 
here was not obvious and substantial, since the regulations 
in question are not so clear-cut as was the regulation in 
Arguello and since this trial occurred before our decision in 
Arguello. 
In any event, we are fully satisfied that any error did not 
operate to appellant’s substantial prejudice. Art. 59(a), 
UCM J., 10 USC § 859(a). Besides the fact that this evi- 
dence was only corroborative, rather than primary, appel- 
lant 
forthrightly attacked 
the reliability of such low 
readings. Most importantly, however, appellant actually 
embraced the test results as an offensive weapon to demon- 
strate that appellant had not used LSD or cocaine during 
the relevant period, as the Government had charged. Under 
similar circumstances in Toro, we concluded: “Admission 

Ta 
of the [evidence in question] was clearly part of the de- 
fense strategy, and it did not affect a substantial right of 
appellant.” 37 M.J. at 317. We reach the same conclusion 
here. 
Dr. Sandra Jo Counts testified as an expert witness for 
the prosecution concerning the effects of LSD. Appellant 
asserts for the first time on appeal that her testimony 
“served both as a polygraph for subsequent government 
witnesses, and as a vehicle to introduce prior consistent 
statements of those witnesses.” Final Brief at 7. We hold 
that admission of Dr. Counts’ testimony was not plain er- 
ror. See United States v. Fisher, 21 M.J. 327. 
In part pertinent to this appeal, Dr. Counts stated that 
she had interviewed four persons who had described to her 
their use with appellant on certain occasions of a sub- 
stance that appellant had furnished. Subsequently in the 
trial, all four persons testified as government witnesses 
and gave similar accounts to the court-martial. She opined 
that, assuming the witnesses were “reliable,” the substance 
that they had taken was LSD. When asked whether she 
had “any reasonable or significant doubt about that con- 
clusion,” she said: 
Well, only that I didn’t see it. So, 1 am going on the 
word of what people told me. But if these people are 
reliable and I had no reason to think that they weren’t 
being at the time, then I would still conclude that it 
was LSD. 
(Emphasis added.) 
This Court repeatedly has denounced use of an expert 
witness as a human lie detector to vouch for the credibility 
of another witness or the accused. E.g., United States v. 
Partyka, 30 M.J. 242 (C.M.A. 1990); United States vy. 

8a 
Farrar, 28 M.J. 387 (C.M.A. 1989); United States v. Ar- 
ruza, 26 M.J. 234 (C.M.A. 1988), cert. denied 489 U.S. 
1011, 103 L.Ed.2d 183, 109 S.Ct. 1120 (1989); United 
States v. Petersen, 24 M.J. 283 (C.M.A. 1987); United 
States v. Cameron, 21 M.J. 59 (C.M.A. 1985). The char- 
acter of Dr. Counts’ statement regarding the credibility of 
her interviewees is substantially the same as the character 
of the testimony in issue in United States v. Partyka, supra 
at 246: 
“I assume that when a patient comes to me, that they 
are telling the truth, and J assume that unless I have 
some reason to believe otherwise I have had no reason 
to believe otherwise.” 
(Emphasis added.) This Court condemned this testimony 
in Partyka, even to the point of holding it to be plain er- 
ror. Id. at 247. 
Here, however, the circumstances are different. 
Dr. 
Counts’ statement arguably was not a continuing voucher 
for the witnesses’ credibility, as was the case in Partyka; 
instead, in substance she might be heard simply to have ac- 
cepted their reliability at face value for purposes of their 
interveiw. In this light, any error was not obvious and 
substantial. 
Further, each of these witnesses later testified for them- 
selves and thereby offered the members their own oppor- 
tunity to judge the witnesses’ credibility. We believe that, 
based on the full record, Dr. Counts’ testimony did not 
have an unfair prejudicial impact on the members’ delib- 
erations either by vouching for the witnesses’ credibility or 
by improperly bolstering their credibility with hearsay 
statements, see Mil.R.Evid. 801(d)(1)(B); see also United 
States v. Neeley, 25 M.J. 105, 106-08 (C.M.A. 1987) (re- 
garding danger of “smuggling hearsay” evidence via expert 
testimony and danger of prejudice inconsequential when 

9a 
declarant later testifies to same effect), cert. denied, 484 
U.S. 1011, 98 L.Ed. 2d 660, 108 S.Ct. 710 (1988). Thus, 
appellant’s 
failure to enter 
trial objections effectively 
waived any error. See United States v. Fisher, 21 M.J. 327. 
While offering evidence on the twenty nine drug-related 
offenses charged against appellant, the prosecution’s wit- 
nesses also revealed evidence of several drug-related in- 
cidents with which appellant was not charged. They in- 
volved other instances of alleged use of marijuana and 
other drugs, efforts to avoid detection through urinalysis 
by use of other chemicals in his system, ignoring drug use 
by other servicemembers, and attempting to persuade wit- 
nesses not to testify against him at the instant court- 
martial. 
In this Court, appellant complains that the sole purpose 
of this evidence was improperly to paint his character in 
such a way as to lead the members to believe that he acted 
in conformity 
with 
that character 
on 
the occasions 
charged. Mil.R.Evid. 404(b). Appellant raised no similar 
objection at trial, however, so again his appellate cries of 
foul have been waived absent a finding of plain error. 
Mil.R.Evid. 103(a)(1) and (d). We find none. See United 
States v. Fisher, supra. 
Applying the three-part test articulated in United States 
v. Reynolds, 
29 M.J. 
105, 
109 (C.M.A. 
1989), and 
reiterated in United States v. Cousins, 35 M.J. 70, 74 
(C.M.A. 1992), there would not seem to be any error at 
all, much less error that was obvious and substantial. The 
evidence of uncharged misconduct all fairly may be viewed 
as part of the res gestae of the charged offenses —closely 
linked to the charged offenses in time, place, and circum- 
stance—and admissible to help explain and clarify the 

10a 
pattern of appellant’s drug abuse and efforts to avoid 
detection that was reflected in the charged offenses. See 
United States v. Metz, 34 M.J. 349, 351 (C.M.A. 1992). 
Further, considering the extensive and varied pattern of 
drug-related charges facing appellant, it is difficult to im- 
agine how evidence of a relatively small number of similar 
uncharged incidents could have offered a danger of unfair 
prejudice that would substantially outweigh the probative 
value of the evidence. See Mil.R.Evid. 403. 
Additionally, there is no chance at all, in our view, that 
the challenged evidence had an unfair prejudicial impact 
on the members’ deliberations. The evidence of appellant’s 
guilt was abundant. Moreover, the members themselves 
capably demonstrated an ability to focus the evidence with 
laser-like precision on the offenses charged by acquitting 
appellant on nearly one-third of those offenses. 
IV 
The decision of the United States Coast Guard Court of 
Military Review is affirmed. 
Chief Judge SULLIVAN and Judges Cox, CRAWFORD, 
and GIERKE concur. 
a
a

lla 
APPENDIX B 
U.S. 
COAST 
GUARD 
COURT 
OF 
MILITARY 
REVIEW 
CGCM 0034 
Docket No. 947 
UNITED STATES 
v. 
JAMES D. RYDER, BOATSWAIN’S MATE SECOND CLASS, 
U.S. CoAsT GUARD 
April 27, 1992 
34 M.J. 1077 
Military Judge: (12 June 1989) CAPT Thomas W. Snook, 
USCG 
Military Judge: (19 July 1989) CAPT Philip F. Roberts, 
JAGC, USN 
Military Judge: (21-25 August 1989) CAPT Douglas A. 
Smith, USCG 
Trial Counsel: LCDR Lawrence I. Kiern, USCG 
Civilian Defense Counsel: Kevin Hogan, Esquire, (21-25 
August 1989) 
Detailed Defense Counsel: LT Michael Forney, JAGC, 
USNR, (12 June, 19 July and 21-25 August 1989) 

12a 
Appellate Defense Counsel: LCDR G. Arthur Robbins, 
USCG 
Appellate 
Government 
Counsel: 
LCDR 
Michael 
J. 
Devine, USCG 
BEFORE PANEL ONE, BAuM, BRIDGMAN, and SHKOR, 
Appellate Military Judges. 
BAUM, Chief Judge: 
At a trial held on 12 June, 19 July and 21-25 August 
1989, Appellant pled not guilty to numerous offenses 
before a general court-martial composed of officers and 
enlisted members. Despite his pleas, the court convicted 
Appellant of one specification of distribution of lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD) and fifteen specifications of 
wrongful use of controlled substances, which included 
marijuana, LSD and cocaine, in violation of Article 112(a), 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ); and two speci- 
fications of solicitation of Coast Guard members to use or 
distribute drugs in violation of Article 134, UCMJ. He was 
sentenced to reduction to E-1, forfeiture of $699 per month 
for 60 months, confinement for 5 years and a dishonorable 
discharge. The convening authority approved the reduction 
and discharge as adjudged but mitigated the forfeitures to 
$699 per month for 36 months and the confinement to 3 
years. Before this Court, Appellant briefed and orally 
argued the following two assignments of error: 
IMPROPERLY INTRODUCED AND ADMITTED EVI- 
DENCE RESULTED IN APPELLANT’S WRONGFUL 
CONVICTION 

13a 
APPELLANT WAS DENIED DUE PROCESS OF LAW 
AND 
RECEIVED 
A DISPROPORTIONATE 
SEN- 
TENCE DUE TO THE MILITARY JUDGE UNDULY 
EMPHASIZING THE DETERRENT FUNCTION OF 
SENTENCING WHEN HE RESPONDED TO AN IN- 
QUIRY FROM THE MEMBERS DURING SENTENC- 
ING DELIBERATIONS 
During oral argument, a motion to assign the following 
supplemental error was granted from the bench and briefs 
from appellate defense and Government were submitted: 
APPELLANT WAS DENIED EFFECTIVE ASSIST- 
ANCE OF COUNSEL IN VIOLATION OF THE SIXTH 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION AND ARTI- 
CLE 27, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 827. 
Assignment of Error I 
IMPROPERLY INTRODUCED AND ADMITTED EVI- 
DENCE RESULTED IN APPELLANT’S WRONGFUL 
CONVICTION 
In Assignment of Error I, Appellant contends that he 
was convicted as a direct result of the admission of three 
clusters of inadmissible evidence: (1) urinalysis test results 
showing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) metabolite at levels 
below the Coast Guard cutoff for reporting samples as 
positive, accompanied by inadmissible testimony from an 
expert witness, (2) testimony by a second expert concerning 
the reliability of government witnesses who reported the use 
of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), including improper in- 
| 
troduction 
of 
prior 
consistent 
statements 
by those 
witnesses, and (3) evidence of uncharged misconduct. 

l4a 
Urinalysis Test Results 
The facts with respect to the urinalysis test results are 
that four separate urine samples, stipulated to have been 
provided by Appellant, were admitted in evidence without 
objection, 
along with 
the laboratory 
reports 
of gas 
chromatography/mass 
spectrometry 
(GC/MS) 
testing 
done on each sample, also admitted without objection by 
the defense. The director of the laboratory, Dr. Ray Liu, 
was qualified as an expert witness and testified that the 
reports showed that GC/MS testing had been conducted 
on all the samples and reflected THC metabolites in each 
of the samples at the following levels: 11.14 nanograms 
per milliliter, 7.58 nanograms per milliliter, 5.8 nano- 
grams per milliliter and 7.76 nanograms per milliliter. He 
further testified that the procedure established by labora- 
tory contract with the Coast Guard provides that results of 
GC/MS testing showing THC metabolites below 15 nano- 
grams are reported as negative. Dr. Liu, when asked to 
correlate the various test results with possible marijuana 
ingestion on dates testified to by various witnesses, ex- 
pressed the opinion that, because of the elapsed time be- 
tween the observed ingestion and the testing, the nano- 
grams of THC metabolite shown by GC/MS analysis indi- 
cated either one-time ingestion of a large quantity of mari- 
juana or chronic use of smaller amounts. No objections 
were interposed to any of this testimony. 
Appellant, 
citing 
U.S. 
v. 
Arguello, 
29 M.J. 
198 
(C.M.A. 1989) and U.S. v. Gray, 30 M.J. 231 (C.M.A. 
1990), now asserts that admission of the test results and 
Dr. Liu’s testimony was plain error. The Government, in 
response, submits that admission of the urinalysis findings 
as well as Dr. Liu’s testimony was not plain error and that 
any issue in this regard should be deemed waived by Ap- 
pellant’s failure to object at trial. The Government notes 

a 
ee 
EEE 
EE Ee——————————— 
lSa 
that the instant trial was held before the decisions in U.S. 
v. Arguello, supra, and U.S. 
v. Joyner, 29 M.J. 209 
(C.M.A. 
1989), 
cases 
involving 
urinalysis 
test 
results 
below departmental cutoff levels. The Government says, 
however, that even considering those cases as persuasive 
authority on the subject, the facts here distinguish the in- 
stant case from Arguello and align it more closely with 
Joyner, which upheld the admission of urinalysis evidence 
below a level set by the Department of Defense. 
While we are not convinced as to this case’s similarity 
with Joyner, as seen by the Government, we do distinguish 
the instant facts from U.S. v. Arguello, supra, as well as 
from U.S. v. Gray, supra, the other decision cited by Ap- 
pellant. Both of those cases were governed by Department 
of Defense regulations which bar disclosure or use of test 
results below the established level for a positive result. The 
Coast Guard, which is not a part of the Department of 
Defense, has regulations which do not expressly prevent 
use of test results below a certain point as corroborating 
evidence in a court-martial. 
The Government notes that the Coast Guard regulations 
do provide that only urinalysis tests showing nanograms 
above a certain magnitude may be used as the sole basis 
for administrative or disciplinary action. Here, while the 
results were below that specified level, they were used only 
to corroborate the testimony of witnesses who observed 
the accused smoking marijuana on specific dates. Accord- 
ingly, we find that use of this evidence did not contravene 
the express terms of Coast Guard Regulations and did not 
constitute plain error. The fact that the nanograms per 
milliliters in each instance were below that called for in 
Coast Guard regulations for use as the only evidence of 
marijuana ingestion goes only to the weight of the evi- 
dence as corroboration, not to its admissibility. Plain er- 
ror was not committed and the waiver rule applies. Ap- 
pellant’s assignment in this regard is rejected. 

l6a 
Expert Testimony Concerning LSD 
Appellant asserts that the testimony of a second expert 
witness, Dr. Sandra Jo Counts, concerning the effects of 
LSD served to vouch for the truthfulness of subsequent 
government witnesses who testified to use of LSD by Ap- 
pellant, and, thus, impermissibly invaded the province of 
the factfinder. Appellant also contends that this expert’s 
testimony was improperly used as a means for introducing 
prior consistent statements of the government witnesses. 
Appellant failed to object to this testimony at trial, and 
the Government asserts waiver. 
Appellant’s failure to object constituted waiver. Aside 
from waiver, however, we consider the expert’s testimony 
to be proper in all respects. While the opinions expressed 
by the expert rested on facts related to her by government 
witnesses, that is fairly routine with respect to expert opin- 
ion. It does not mean that the expert is vouching for the 
truth of the facts, simply that the expert opinion concern- 
ing LSD flowed from the asserted facts. It was left to the 
court to determine whether the underlying testimony was 
true or not. In our view, the expert was simply saying that 
the facts related by the witnesses, if deemed to be true, are 
consistent with LSD use. Appellant’s assigned errors with 
respect to this testimony are rejected. 
Testimony of Uncharged Misconduct 
As a separate matter, Appellant assigns as error that 
numerous instances of uncharged misconduct were related 
to the court by government witnesses. As before, the com- 
plained of testimony was not objected to at trial and 
again, we deem the issue waived. Accordingly, Appellant’s 
Assignment of Error I is rejected in its entirety. 

17a 
Assignment of Error Il 
APPELLANT WAS DENIED DUE PROCESS OF LAW 
AND 
RECEIVED 
A DISPROPORTIONATE 
SEN- 
TENCE DUE TO THE MILITARY JUDGE UNDULY 
EMPHASIZING THE DETERRENT FUNCTION OF 
SENTENCING WHEN HE RESPONDED TO AN IN- 
QUIRY FROM THE MEMBERS DURING SENTENC- 
ING DELIBERATIONS 
In his second assignment of error, Appellant contends 
that he was denied due process of law and received a dis- 
proportionate sentence as a result of the military judge’s 
response to an inquiry from the court members. Appellant 
says that the judge’s statement unduly emphasized the de- 
terrent function of sentencing. The facts relating to this 
assignment are that midway through sentence delibera- 
tions, the members submitted a question to the judge ask- 
ing whether the court could make a written statement in 
conjunction with its sentence. That statement, after char- 
acterizing the accused’s offenses, said: 
We fervently hope that enough of the details of this 
and other similar cases can be extracted from the 
record and published so it can be available to com- 
manding officers to use as training material. If so, 
perhaps the message to our people can get through 
that: 
1) If you do things like this, in the long term you 
will not get away with it. 
2) When you get caught, it will be a painful experi- 
ence not only for you, but for others around you, in- 
cluding your family. 
3) It can happen anywhere if the people in responsi- 
ble positions don’t keep their eyes and ears open and 
do their job. 
Record of Trial Appellate Exhibit 
XX XIX. 

18a 
Upon reading that proposed statement, the judge said to 
the members in open court: 
Gentlemen, having closely examined Appellate Ex- 
hibit 39, I can understand your concerns and feelings 
that’s [sic] expressed in this. However, under the cir- 
cumstances, I believe it would be inappropriate to 
make that sort of pronouncement in the Court when 
you announce the sentence. I believe the content of 
the sentence that you announce will, by its content, 
convey the message that is contained in this exhibit. 
Record at 1295. 
The defense made no objection to this instruction, nor 
' did it request a session out of the presence of the members 
to read the statement and state its position to the judge. 
Here, for the first time, Appellant objects to the judge’s 
remarks and claims they led directly to a disproportionate 
sentence by emphasizing the deterrent function of sentenc- 
ing. 
Appellant contends that the plain inference to be drawn 
from the judge’s words accompanying his ruling not to 
allow the court’s statement was that the court should im- 
pose 
a severe 
enough 
sentence 
to communicate 
its 
message. The Government, in response, says that inter- 
pretation stretches 
the judge’s instruction beyond 
its 
natural meaning. In the Government’s view, the judge was 
simply telling the members that he would not allow the 
court to read a possibly confusing statement into the 
record in conjunction with the sentence. In any event, ac- 
cording to the Government, “[t]he defense may not sit idle 
if they do not concur with the procedure adopted by the 
Military Judge. If defense counsel deems instructions to be 
unclear or imprecise, there is an obligation for counsel to 
object or seek clarification.” Government’s Brief at 15. 
The Government submits that, assuming arguendo that 

cD 
S. 
Mlree when. 
B. 
erst 
ads 
ris 
teers 
ceria 
usin 
y 
Vedic 
os 
noon 
19a 
somehow the judge’s explanation was in error, it did not 
amount to plain error and the defense’s failure to object 
waives the issue. We agree. 
Moreover, we also agree with the Government’s asser- 
tion that the number and nature of the offenses, in com- 
bination with the surrounding circumstances, warranted 
the adjudged sentence. The accused, a second class petty 
officer, used drugs over a substantial period of time and 
was also convicted of distributing LSD. Furthermore, he 
was senior member of his duty section and used drugs 
while underway in a Coast Guard boat. The maximum 
punishment authorized for his offenses included 68 years 
confinement. We agree with the Government that the 
sentence imposed, which includes only five years confine- 
ment, simply cannot be characterized as disproportionate. 
Appellant’s second assignment of error is rejected. 
Assignment of Error Ill 
APPELLANT WAS DENIED EFFECTIVE ASSIST- 
ANCE OF COUNSEL IN VIOLATION OF THE SIXTH 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION AND ARTI- 
CLE 27, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 827. 
In his last assignment of error, Appellant argues that he 
was denied effective assistance of counsel in violation of 
the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution and Article 27, 
UCMJ. In support of this contention, Appellant points to 
counsel’s failure to object to the evidence described in 
Assignment of Error I as inadmissible. He also cites the 
defense’s failure to examine the court members’ proposed 
sentencing statement and the failure to object to the 
judge’s instruction in that regard. Additionally, Appellant 
says that counsel failed to conduct any prior independent 
investigation of the urinalysis values and failed to cross- 
examine the expert witness, Dr. Liu, on the matter of the 

i 
20a 
urinalysis results being Jess than the amounts accepted as 
standard test deviation, or on the possibility of innocent 
ingestion producing such results. Appellant also faults 
counsel for not calling a defense expert to explain the am- 
biguity of the Government’s evidence. Moreover, Ap- 
pellant sees the failure to submit any post-trial assign- 
ments of error to the convening authority as further in- 
dication of ineffective representation. In Appellant’s view 
these asserted failures, taken as a whole, fall well outside 
the range of professionally competent assistance, and con- 
stitute ineffective representation. 
Similar assertions pertaining to another counsel were 
addressed by this Court in the companion case of U.S. v. 
Puckett, 32 M.J. 783 (C.G.C.M.R. 1991). As we stated in 
that case, the standard for reviewing such claims of inef- 
fective representation is set out in Strickland v. Washing- 
ton, 466 U.S. 668, 104S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed. 2d _—— 
That standard bears repeating here: 
First, the defendant must_show that counsel’s per- 
formance was deficient. This requires showing that 
counsel made errors so serious that counsel was not 
functioning as the “counsel” guaranteed the defend- 
ant by the Sixth Amendment. Second, the defendant 
must show that the deficient performance prejudiced 
the defense. This requires showing that counsel errors 
were so serious as to deprive the defendant of a fair 
trial, a trial whose result is reliable. 
Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 at 687, 104 S.Ct. 
2052 at 2064. 
The counsel errors asserted by Appellant do not meet 
the test of Strickland v. Washington, supra. \n an affi- 
davit from Appellant’s civilian attorney, filed with the 
Court by the Government, defense counsel explains his ac- 
tions as part of overall strategy that had a reasonable basis 

OOO 
ek 
OE 
nde 
Rah 
wet 
Me 
Na. 
te 
Ce 
a 
te 
eke 
eee 
2la 
at the time. Appellant was maintaining his innocence in 
the face of numerous expected witnesses who would testify 
to the contrary. 
The accused planned to take the stand in 
his own defense, and he did just that, denying his guilt 
under oath. Technical objections to evidence that might 
have been sustained, if raised when first offered by the 
Government, would later prove fruitless upon that same 
evidence being presented as rebuttal to the accused’s own 
testimony. In light of this conclusion, defense strategy was 
to forego such objections and concentrate, instead, on ob- 
taining favorable testimony from prosecution witnesses on 
cross-examination. In line with this tactic, a decision was 
made not to attempt to discredit the government witnesses 
whose 
testimony 
on 
cross-examination 
might 
prove 
helpful. 
We find counsel’s trial and pretrial actions with respect 
to the charges against the accused were consistent with this 
Strategy and not to be characterized as deficient. His ac- 
tions at the sentencing stage of trial are also deemed to be 
reasonable. Those actions, as explained by counsel, are 
not considered 
to be errors on 
his part. 
Finally, the 
defense attorney’s decision after trial not to submit assign- 
ments Of error to the convening authority was consistent 
with his client’s post-trial acknowledgment of guilt and 
desire to cooperate with the Government in an effort by 
the accused to obtain clemency. Counsel successfully pur- 
sued the clemency tack instead of asserting legal errors and 
ultimately obtained a reduction in the sentence from five 
years forfeitures and confinement to three years for both. 
For the foregoing reasons, Appellant’s third assignment 
of error is deemed to be without merit. 
Appellant has noted that the finding of guilty of Speci- 
fication | of Additional Charge I, which alleges that he 
used marijuana in or near Neah Bay on or about 30 
November 
1988, is not supported by the evidence. We 

22a 
agree. Accordingly, the finding of guilty of Specification 1 
of Additional Charge I is set aside and the Specification is 
dismissed. The remaining findings of guilty are deemed to 
be correct in law and fact. 
We have reassessed the sentence in light of the finding 
of guilty that was set aside. Upon reassessment, we find 
the sentence legally correct and appropriate for the re- 
maining offenses. We are convinced on the basis of the en- 
tire record that the remaining findings of guilty and sen- 
tence should be approved. Accordingly, the remaining 
findings of guilty and the sentence, as approved below, are 
affirmed. 
Judges BRIDGMAN and SHKOR concur. 

ales 
alas 
dal 
aad 
rene 
lel 
lak 
Na - 
4 
pons hy 
gare 
ele 
POW 
Dea 
tias. 
SP 
23a 
APPENDIX C 
U.S. COAST GUARD 
COURT OF MILITARY REVIEW 
CGCM 0034 
Docket No. 947 
UNITED STATES 
V. 
JAMES D. RYDER, BOATSWAIN’S MATE SECOND CLASS, 
U.S. Coast GUARD 
July 6, 1992 
34 M.J. 1259 
Trial Counsel: LCDR Lawrence I. Kiern, USCG 
Assistant Trial Counsel: LT Brian Schroeder, USCG 
Civilian Defense Counsel: Kevin Hogan, Esquire, (21-25 
August 1989) 
Detailed Defense Counsel: LT Michael Forney, JAGC, 
USNR, (12 June, 19 July and 21-25 August 1989) 
Appellate Defense Counsel: LCDR G. Arthur Robbins, 
USCG 
Appellate Government Counsel: LT Garland M. Walker, 
USCGR 

24a 
BEFORE PANEL ONE, BAuM, BRIDGMAN, SHKOR and 
EDWARDS,!' Appellate Military Judges. 
PER CURIAM: 
On 8 May, 1992, this Court ordered reconsideration of 
our decision of 27 April 1992, 34 M.J. 1077, in response to 
a motion by the Appellant. Subsequently, on 26 May 
1992, Appellant filed the following assignments of error to 
be considered in addition to the three previously filed and 
adversely resolved by our earlier decision: 
iV 
APPELLANT’S CONVICTION MUST BE SET ASIDE 
BECAUSE 
DUE 
PROCESS 
REQUIRES THAT 
A 
JUDGE IN A CRIMINAL CASE HAVE A FIXED 
TERM OF OFFICE. BUT SEE UNITED STATES V. 
GRAF, 32 M.J. 809 (N.M.C.M.R. 
1990), PETITION 
GRANTED, 33 M.J. 189 (C.M.A. 1991) (MEM.). 
Vv 
APPELLANT’S COURT-MARTIAL LACKED JURIS- 
DICTION BECAUSE THE MILITARY JUDGE WAS 
DESIGNATED IN VIOLATION OF THE APPOINT- 
MENTS CLAUSE OF THE CONSTITUTION. 
VI 
THE COURT OF MILITARY REVIEW IS WITH- 
OUT POWER TO AFFIRM THE FINDINGS OF GUIL- 
TY AND SENTENCE BECAUSE THE APPELLATE 
MILITARY JUDGES ARE ASSIGNED IN VIOLATION 
OF THE APPOINTMENTS CLAUSE OF THE CON- 
STITUTION. 
' Judge Edwards did not participate in this decision. 

PAT 
aN 
CRIN 
A 
AN BN 
a 
CR 
AMON 
NINE 
A 
ic 
lh 
LOL 
AST 
Malt 
a 
le Rind 
Me 
25a 
Upon reconsideration of our prior decision, we adhere 
to the determination therein with respect to Assignments 
of Error I, II and III. With respect to the newly asserted 
errors, Assignments V and VI were briefed and orally ar- 
gued before Panel Five of this Court in the case of U.S. y. 
Prive, 35 M.J. 569 (C.G.C.M.R. 1992). That panel’s deci- 
sion is deemed dispositive of those issues and we follow 
the holding in that case. 
Assignment of Error IV was summarily assigned as an 
error in U.S. v. Prive, supra. It has been briefed in the in- 
stant case and, among other things, Appellant argues that 
the United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Military 
Review decided this issue wrongly in U.S. v. Graf, 32 M.J. 
809 (N.M.C.M.R. 1990), Petition Granted, 33 M.J. 189 
(C.M.A. 1991) (MEM.). He contends that we should re- 
ject that Court’s analysis in U.S. v. Graf, supra, and, in- 
stead, find that due process requires a fixed term of office 
for general court-martial and appellate military judges. To 
the contrary, we must reject Appellant’s assignment be- 
cause we find U.S. v. Graf, supra, to be correctly decided. 
| 
In light of the foregoing, upon reconsideration, our 
decision of 27 April 1992 setting aside the finding of guilty 
of Specification 1 of Additional Charge I, affirming the 
remaining findings of guilty, and affirming the sentence is 
reaffirmed. 
Chief Judge BAUM and Judges BRIDGMAN and SHKOR 
CONCUR. 

26a 
APPENDIX D 
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE 
UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE 
10 U.S.C. § 866. Art. 66. Review by Court of Military Review 
(a) 
Each Judge Advocate General shall establish 
a 
Court of Military Review which shall be composed of one 
or more panels, and each such panel shall be composed of 
not less than three appellate military judges. For the pur- 
pose of reviewing court-martial cases, the court may sit in 
panels or as a whole in accordance with rules prescribed 
under subsection (f). Any decision of a panel may be re- 
considered by the court sitting as a whole in accordance 
with such rules. Appellate military judges who are assigned 
to a Court of Military Review may be commissioned of- 
ficers or civilians, each of whom must be a member of a 
bar of a Federal court or of the highest court of a State. 
The 
Judge Advocate General shall designate as chief judge 
one of the appellate military judges of the Court of Mili- 
tary Review established by him. The chief judge shall 
determine on which panels of the court the appellate 
judges assigned to the court will serve and which military 
judge assigned to the court will act as the senior judge on 
each panel. 
* 
* 
* 
(c) 
In a case referred to it, the Court of Military 
Review may act only with respect to the findings and sen- 
tence as approved by the convening authority. It may af- 
firm only such findings of guilty, and the sentence or such 
part or amount of the sentence, as it finds correct in law 
and fact and determines, on the basis of the entire record, 
should be approved. In considering the record, it may 
weigh the evidence, judge the credibility of witnesses, and 

eee 
rien 
mae 
AC 
27a 
determine controverted questions of fact, recognizing that 
the trial court saw and heard the witnesses. 
* 
* 
* 
(f) 
The Judge Advocates General shail prescribe uni- 
form rules of procedure for Courts of Military Review and 
shall meet periodically to formulate policies and procedure 
in regard to review of court-martial cases in the offices of 
the Judge Advocates General and by Courts of Military 
Review. 
(g) 
No member of a Court of Military Review shall be 
required, or on his own initiative be permitted, to prepare, 
approve, disapprove, review, or submit, with respect to 
any other member of the same or another Court of Mili- 
tary Review, an effectiveness, fitness, or efficiency report, 
or any other report or document used in whole or in part 
for the purpose of determining whether a member of the 
armed forces is qualified to be advanced in grade, or in 
determining the assignment or transfer of a member of the 
armed forces, or in determining whether 
a member of the 
armed forces should be retained on active duty. 
ve US. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 
1994— 301-858/88002 
