>) 94 925 
NOV 22 19% 
No. S4prFick OF THE GERI 
In THE 
Supreme Court 
of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 
JoHN W. HECHINGER, et al., 
‘ 
Petitioners, 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
AUTHORITY, et al., 
Respondents, 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Intervenor. 
Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit 
APPENDIX TO 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
Of Counsel: 
WILLIAM T. COLEMAN, JR. 
Grecory WOLFE 
Counsel of Record 
EDWARD S. FAGGEN 
DONALD T. BLiss 
LESLIE BERKOWITZ 
DEBRA A. VALENTINE 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
MATTHEW B. PACHMAN 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY AND 
O’MELVENY & MYERS 
ITS BOARD OF REVIEW 
555 13th St., N.W. 
44 Canal Center Plaza 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
Alexandria, VA 22814 
(202) 383-5325 
(708) 739-8740 
ee 
WILSON 
- Epas Printinc Co., Inc. 
- 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Opinion and Judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in Hech- 
inger v. Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, 
No. 94-7086 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 27, 1994) 0.0... 
eee 
Order Granting Stay of Effective Date of Opinion and 
Order of District Court and Stay of Mandate and Effec- 
tive Date of Opinion and Order of Court of Appeals, 
No. 94-7086 (D.C. Cir. Oct. 24, 1994) 000. 
Memorandum Opinion and Order of the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia in Hechin- 
ger v. Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, 
G45 F. Bape PO te. TO) os 
Modification of January 31, 1994 Memorandum Opinion 
and Order of the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia, 845 F. Supp. 902, 909 (D.D.C. 
phases cchadataaabbaceisiadcliedibdacthinidlen 
dt merits ib ida 
Order Granting Stay of District Court 
Judgment Pend- 
ing Appeal in Hechinger v. Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority, No. 94-7086 (D.C. Cir. April 11, 
ND deiieihicioinsbiadciipimisincisapiatiarci 
teres RIBS Sanaa cu t 
Constitutional 
Provisions, 
Statutes, Ordinances, and 
Regulations Involved, in relevant part: 
U.S. Const. art. I, §§ 1, 6 cl. 2, 7 cl. 2, 7 cl. 3; art. 
ime 
ee 
Re 
OS, 
AS 
ae 
cee 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986, 
Pub. 
L. No. 99-500, 
100 Stat. 
1783-373 
(Un- 
III SMI isthe 
a ics Since eta 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Act Amend- 
ments of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-240, 105 Stat. 2197- 
203 (1991 Amendments) ........ 
Page 
la 
20a 
22a 
35a 
39a 
40a 
42a 
69a 

ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 
Page 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986, 
as amended by the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports Act Amendments of 1991, formerly codified 
at.49 U.S.C. app. § 24G1-BAG1 © oon 
acc cc cn 
cee eens 
80a 
ee 
eT 
113a 
RS is 
I 
 eiliicsnincininihiidenat eiciieciniichashiniiababaat 
132a 
A, Se 
IIE, shirinssntcnceccnsetendnénaunndaatheibacdesasie 
144a 
pT 
yk __, SBE 
eiaRores treet es 
ar 
a 
165a 
Lease of the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
CHRIS Uae BPE 
dncrertaciscneciensntiniceuaimienaeseeen 
se, 173a 
Amendment No. 1 to the Lease of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports (Dec. 31, 1991) .................... 
197a 
Bylaws of the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Authority (Mar. 4, 1987), as amended 
(Jan. 8, 
SUG ROE AGE 3, BOND Licciceeteeeeee ecco 
200a 
Plaintiffs’ Statement of Material Facts (from Plain- 
tiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment) ..............000000....... 
217a 
Affidavit of Pamela Gilbert (from Plaintiffs’ Motion 
Ee 
en ee ne 
219a 
* Pursuant to Pub. L. No. 103-272 
(July 5, 1994), most laws 
relating to transportation formerly codified in 49 U.S.C. app. have 
been recodified elsewhere. 
The Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Act of 1986 as amended was not recodified and remains in force as 
it appears in the former codification. See H.R. Rep. No. 180, 103rd 
Cong., 1st Sess. 644 (1993), reprinted in 1994 U.S.C.C.A.N. 818, 
1461. 
The codified version of the amended statute is reprinted 
herein for the convenience of the Court. 

la 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 
Argued May 19, 1994 
Decided September 27, 1994 
No. 94-7036 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, JR.; CraiG H. BABB; CITIZENS 
FOR THE ABATEMENT OF AIRCRAFT NOISE, INC., 
Appellees 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Intervenor for Appellee 
V. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS AUTHORITY; 
BOARD OF REVIEW, 
Appellants 
Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia 
D.D.C. No. 92cv00556) 
Before 
BUCKLEY, 
WILLIAMS, 
and 
RoceErs, 
Circuit 
Judges. 
Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge BUCKLEY. 
BUCKLEY, Circuit Judge: 
The Metropolitan Washing- 
ton Airports Authority operates 
the Washington Na- 
tional and Dulles International Airports under lease from 
the Federal Government and is required by statute to 
submit certain actions to a Board of Review before they 

2a 
may take effect. As originally enacted, the statute stipu- 
lated that the Board be composed entirely of Members of 
Congress and gave it the power to veto the Authority’s 
actions. 
In 1991, the Supreme 
Court held that the 
Board was an agent of Congress and that it exercised 
federal power in violation of the doctrine of the separation 
of powers. The Court’s decision was based in significant 
degree on the Board’s mandatory congressional member- 
ship and its veto power. 
Although Congress has since 
amended the statute to eliminate these provisions, we con- 
clude that the amendments impose other qualifications for 
Board membership and have vested the Board with other 
powers that, together, continue to offend the Constitution. 
I. BACKGROUND 
In 1987, the Secretary of Transportation entered into 
a long-term lease of the Washington National and Dulles 
International Airports to the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority 
(“Authority”), 
an independent 
re- 
gional authority that had been created two years earlier 
by compact between the Commonwealth of Virginia and 
the District of Columbia. 
Prior to that time, the two air- 
ports had been operated by the Federal Government. 
The lease was authorized by the Metropolitan Washing- 
ton Airports Act of 1986 (“Transfer Act”) (codified as 
amended at 49 U.S.C. app. §§ 2451-2461 (1988 & Supp. 
III 1991)). Congress conditioned the lease on the Au- 
thority’s establishment of a Board of Review (“Board”) 
consisting of nine Members of Congress. Id. § 2456(f) (1) 
(1988) (superseded); Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Authority v. Citizens for the Abatement of Aircraft Noise, 
Inc., 111 S. Ct. 2298, 2303 (1991) (“CAAN”). 
Under 
the congressional scheme, the Authority was required to 
submit the following actions for the Board’s consideration 
at least 30 calender days before they were to become 
effective (60 days in the case of the annual budget): 

3a 
(i) the adoption of an annual budget; 
(ii) the authorization for the issuance of bonds; 
(iii) the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regula- 
tion; 
(iv) the adoption or revision of a master plan, in- 
cluding any proposal for land acquisition; and 
(v) the appointment of the chief executive officer. 
49 U.S.C. app. § 2456(f)(4)(B) 
(1988) (superseded ). 
If the Board did not disapprove an action within 30 days, 
it could take effect. 
49 U.S.C. app. § 2456(f) (4)(C) 
(1988) (superseded). 
On June 17, 1991, the Supreme Court ruled that the 
Board was vested with power that violated the consti- 
tutional doctrine of the separation of powers. CAAN, 111 
S. Ct. at 2312 (1991) (affirming judgment in Citizens for 
the Abatement of Aircraft Noise, Inc. v. Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Auth., 917 F.2d 48 (D.C. 
Cir. 
1990)). 
Within six months, Congress enacted amend- 
ments 
to the Transfer 
Act 
(“1991 
Amendments” 
or 
“Amendments”) that effected major changes in the com- 
position and powers of the Board. 
We begin with the first. 
As originally enacted, the 
Transfer Act required that the nine members of the Board 
be Members of Congress, of whom eight had to be mem- 
bers of specified congressional committees having juris- 
diction over transportation issues. 
The Board members 
were to be chosen from lists furnished by the Speaker of 
the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate. 
49 U.S.C. app. § 2456(f)(1) (1988) (superseded). 
The 
Supreme Court noted the following problems with this 
arrangement: 
The list system, combined with congressional author- 
ity over committee assignments, guarantees Congress 
effective control over appointments. 
Control over 
committee assignments also gives Congress effective 

4a 
removal power over Board members because depriv- 
ing a Board member of membership in the relevant 
committees deprives the member of authority to sit 
on the Board. 
CAAN, 111 S. Ct. at 2308. 
After this admonishment, 
Congress revised the composition of the Board to require 
that 
[m]Jembers of the Board of Review shall be individ- 
uals who have experience in aviation matters and in 
addressing the needs of airport users and who them- 
selves are frequent users of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports. A member of the Board of Review 
shall be a registered voter of a State other than 
Maryland, Virginia, or the District of Columbia. 
49 U.S.C. app. § 2456(f)(2)(C). 
While the Authority’s 
Board of Directors (“Directors”) continues to appoint the 
members of the Board of Review and now has the power 
to remove members for cause, 
id. § 2456(f)(11), the 
Directors are still confined to the lists of nominees sub- 
mitted by the Speaker and the President pro tempore. Id. 
§ 2456(f)(1). 
The 1991 Amendments also redefined the powers of the 
Board. 
While they eliminated the Board’s veto authority, 
they expanded its other powers in a number of significant 
ways. The Amendments extended the list of actions requir- 
ing Board review to include “the award of a contract... 
which has been approved by the board of directors of the 
Airports Authority” as well as “any action of the board of 
directors approving a terminal design or airport layout or 
modification of such design or layout[,]” 49 U.S.C. app. 
§ 2456(f)(4)(B) (Supp. III 1991), and authorized mem- 
bers of the Board to participate in, but not vote at, meet- 
ings of the Directors. 
Id. § 2456(f)(7). 
The Amend- 
ments also made substantial changes in the review process, 
including a grant to the Board of the authority to make 
recommendations regarding actions submitted for its re- 

Sa 
view, id. § 2456(f)(4)(C), such actions to be referred 
to Congress for its further review if the Directors fail to 
adopt the Board’s recommendations. 
/d. § 2456(f) (4) 
(D) (ii). 
Specifically, the amended Transfer Act provides that 
the Board may, within 30 calendar days or 10 “legisla- 
tive days” of its submission, whichever is longer, present 
to the Directors a recommendation concerning a proposed 
action. 
Id. §2456(f)(4)(C). 
Legislative days are cal- 
culated by 
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, and any 
day on which neither House of Congress is in session 
because of an adjournment sine die, a recess of more 
than 3 days, or an adjournment of more than 3 
days.... 
Id. If no recommendation is made during that period, or 
if the Board decides it will make no recommendation be- 
fore the period elapses, the Directors’ proposal may take 
effect. Id. 
Similarly, if the Board makes a recommendation and 
the Directors adopt it, the revised proposal may go into 
effect immediately. 
Id. § 2456(f)(4)(D)(i). 
If the Di- 
rectors do not adopt the Board’s recommendation, the Di- 
rectors must submit a detailed description of the proposed 
action, the Board’s recommendation, and the Directors’ 
evaluation and response to the recommendation to the 
Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate for 
a review period of 60 legislative days. Id. § 2456(f) 
(4) 
(D) (ii). If Congress does not pass a joint resolution of 
disapproval within this period, the Directors’ proposed 
action may take effect. Id. § 2456(f) (4)(D) (i), (5)(B). 
Among the features of the original Act that have been 
retained are the Board’s authority to “request the 
. 
. 
. 
Authority to consider and vote, or to report, on any matter 
related to” the Dulles or National Airports, to which the 
Authority must comply “as promptly as feasible,” 
id. 

6a. 
§ 2456(f)(6), and what may be described as the 1986 
Act’s “drop-dead” clause. 
It provides that if the Board 
of Review 
is unable to carry out its functions under this sub- 
chapter by reason of a judicial order, the Airports 
Authority thereafter shall have no authority to per- 
form any of the actions that are required . 
. 
. to be 
submitted to the Board of Review. 
Id. § 2456(h). 
On cross-motions for summary judgment, VU. S. District 
Judge Joyce Hens Green concluded that the Board of 
Review was an agent of Congress that exercised federal 
power, Hechinger v. Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Auth., 845 F. Supp. 902, 907 (D.D.C. 1994), and held 
that the amended Act was unconstitutional in that it per- 
mitted the Board to exercise impermissible control over 
the Authority. Jd. at 908. Judge Green also held that the 
members of the Board were selected in a manner that vio- 
lated the Constitution’s Appointments Clause. 
Jd. at 908- 
09. As we agree that the Board is a congressional agent 
that exercises significant federal power in violation of 
separation-of-powers principles, we do not address the lat- 
ter ruling. 
II. ANALYSIS 
A. 
Is the Board of Review an Agent of Congress? 
Following the approach adopted by the Supreme Court 
in CAAN, 111 
S. Ct. at 2306-09, we 
first determine 
whether the Board is an agent of Congress. 
No single 
factor is dispositive. Among the factors considered by 
the CAAN Court were the conditioning of the lease of 
the two airports on the Authority’s creation of the Board 
of Review, the presence of the drop-dead clause, the Fed- 
eral Government’s 
strong and continuing interest in the efficient opera- 
tion of the airports . 
. 
. [which] motivated the crea- 
a
a
m

7a 
tion of the Board of Review, . 
. 
. [and][m]Jost signifi- 
cant, [that] membership on the Board of Review 
[was] limited to federal officials, specifically mem- 
bers of congressional committees charged with au- 
thority over air transportation. 
CAAN, 111 S. Ct. at 2307. The Court concluded: 
We thus confront an entity created at the initiative 
of Congress, the powers 
of which Congress has 
delineated, the purpose of which is to protect an 
acknowledged federal interest, and membership in 
which is restricted to congressional officials. Such an 
entity necessarily exercises sufficient federal power as 
an agent of Congress 
to mandate 
separation-of- 
powers scrutiny. 
Id. at 2308. 
As amended, the Transfer Act presents us with the 
Same entity, although devoid of the explicit membership 
restrictions. 
The new Board and its powers continue to 
be the creation of Congress, 
the drop-dead provision 
remains in place, and the federal interest in the efficient 
operation of the two airports continues unchanged. 
The 
question, then, is whether erasing the condition that the 
Board’s membership be limited to Members of Congress, 
eight of whom sit on specified congressional committees, 
while requiring the Authority to select members from lists 
prepared by the Speaker of the House and the President 
pro tempore of the Senate, 
suffices 
to eliminate 
the 
Board’s status as an agent of Congress and thus immu- 
nizes the amended Act from separation-of-powers review. 
It is true that the Court found the original member- 
ship condition “[mJost significant.” 
Jd. at 2307. 
Yet 
this condition was but one of “[s]everal factors combin- 
[ing]” to warrant separation-of-powers 
analysis, 
id. at 
2306-07. 
Its elimination, then, does not end our inquiry. 
Indeed, the Court specifically called for a functional ap- 

8a 
proach, reminding us that “ ‘separation-of-powers analysis 
does not turn on the labeling of an activity.’” Jd. at 2307 
(quoting Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 393 
(1989)). 
To this end, we look to the revised provisions establish- 
ing the Board. 
Its members must be: 
(1) frequent users 
of the Metropolitan Washington Airports; (2) registered 
voters of a State other than Maryland, Virginia, or the 
District of Columbia; and (3) experienced in aviation 
matters and in addressing the needs of airport users. 
49 
U.S.C. app. § 2456(f)(2)(C). Hechinger maintains that 
these qualifications are met by Members of Congress who 
serve on the relevant oversight committees, thus assuring 
their domination 
of the Board. 
Similarly, 
the United 
States, an intervenor, argues that the district court cor- 
rectly concluded that the new requirements for Board 
membership “ensured that many members of Congress— 
and few others—will be eligible to serve on the Board of 
Review.” Hechinger, 845 F. Supp. at 907. The Author- 
ity responds that these requirements do not compel the 
selection of a Member of Congress but merely ensure that 
the Board will provide nationwide users with informed 
representation. 
While it is true that Board membership is no longer 
limited to Representatives and Senators who sit on com- 
mittees that have jurisdiction over air transportation, as a 
practical matter, 
relatively few individuals other than 
members or alumni of those committees will be able to 
meet the new criteria. 
Thus it is hardly happenstance 
that of the nine members appointed to the Board follow- 
ing adoption of the 1991 Amendments, eight were Mem- 
bers of Congress who served on committees having juris- 
diction over air transportation—the lone outsider being 
a former Secretary of Transportation. 
Cf. C & A Car- 
bone, Inc. v. Town of Clarkstown, 114 §. Ct. 1677, 1684 
(1994) (Court looks beyond “explicit terms” of facially 
neutral 
local 
ordinance 
to 
its “pracical 
effect 
and 
design.” 
). 

9a 
We are also struck by Congress’s choice of the period 
within which the Board must make its recommendations: 
the longer of 30 calendar days or 10 legislative days. 
Again, it is not happenstance that computation of the 
latter requires the exclusion of those days on which Rep- 
resentatives and Senators may be expected to be out of 
town; namely, the weekends, holidays, and congressional 
adjournments and recesses when they are free to work in 
their 
respective 
constituencies. 
Jd. § 2546(f£)(4)(C). 
There can be no reason for such a provision other than 
to serve the convenience of the Members of Congress 
who were expected to serve on the Board. 
Finally, we examine the manner in which the members 
of the Board are selected. 
While they are no longer 
required to be Members of Congress, and while they 
may now be removed for cause by the Directors, id. 
§ 2456(f)(11), 
they must 
still be nominated by the 
Speaker of the House or the President pro tempore of the 
Senate. 
Id. § 2456(f)(1). 
It is true that the Directors 
may request that additional names be submitted, 
id. 
§ 2456(f)(1), but we have little doubt who would win a 
test of wills because the 1991 Amendments also provide 
that at any time that the Board 
has more than 4 vacancies and lists have been pro- 
vided for appointments to fill such vacancies, the Air- 
ports Authority shall have no authority to perform 
any of the actions that [must] be submitted to the 
Board of Review. 
Id. § 2456(f)(2)(D). 
In CAAN, the Supreme Court found it significant that 
“appointments must be made from the lists, and there is 
no requirement that the lists contain more recommenda- 
tions than the number of Board openings.” 111 S. Ct. at 
2308 (emphasis in original). 
This remains true of the 
amended Act. Because the Directors may never go out- 
side the lists furnished by the Speaker and the President 

10a 
pro tempore, we conclude that Congress retains control 
over appointments. 
This control, together with the pro- 
visions that in practice ensure that the Board will be 
dominated by Members of Congress, persuades us that 
Congress intended the Board to serve, and we hold that 
it does serve, as its agent. 
B. 
Does the Board of Review Exercise Federal Power? 
In order to determine the nature of the power exercised 
by the new Board, it is necessary to understand the prac- 
tical consequences of its ability to delay actions that are 
contemplated by the Authority. Under the Transfer Act, 
the Board has the longer of 30 days or 10 legislative days 
within which to review certain actions proposed by the 
Directors. 49 U.S.C. app. § 2456(f)(4)(C); see also id. 
§ 2456(f)(4)(B) 
(listing actions). 
The Board may let 
the proposal go into effect by allowing the waiting period 
to lapse, may “decide[ ] it will not make a recommenda- 
tion on an action” (thereby allowing it to go into effect 
immediately), or may make recommendations regarding 
the action, including one that it not take effect. 
Jd. 
§ 2456(f)(4)(C). 
If recommendations 
are made and 
the Directors adopt them, the proposal may go into effect 
immediately, id. § 2456(f)(4)(D)(i); if the recommen- 
dations are not adopted, they must be transmitted, along 
with “a detailed description of the action 
. 
. 
. and the 
evaluation and response of the board of directors to [the 
Board of Review’s] recommendation[s],” to Congress for 
a 60-legislative-day 
review 
period. 
Id. § 2456(f)(4) 
(D) (ii). 
The Authority argues that because the Board has lost 
its right to veto and may only make recommendations, it 
has been stripped of power and serves solely in an ad- 
visory capacity. 
Yet the Board’s loss of its veto power 
does not necessarily mean that it has lost the effective 
control over the Authority that the Supreme Court found 
to be an unconstitutional exercise of federal power. 
See 

lia 
CAAN, 111 S. Ct. at 2308, 2312. We must therefore 
examine the potential impact of the Board’s remaining 
authority on the Directors’ decisionmaking. 
To this end, 
we examine the various ways in which the Board is able 
to affect the substance of the Authority’s actions. 
First, the Board may request the Authority “to consider 
and vote, or to report, on any matter related” to the two 
airports; and the Authority must do so “as promptly as 
feasible.” Id. § 2456(f)(6). 
The Board thus has the 
ability to force any issue it wishes onto the Authority’s 
agenda for priority consideration. 
Second, members of the Board may participate as non- 
voting members 
in meetings 
of the 
Directors. 
Id. 
§ 2456(f)(7). 
To paraphrase our comment in Federal 
Election Comm'n v. NRA Political Victory Fund, 6 F.3d 
821 (D.C. Cir. 1993), cert. granted, 114 S. Ct. 2703 
(June 20, 1994), in which we invalidated an arrange- 
ment whereby Congress appointed two of its agents as 
non-voting ex officio members of the Federal Election 
Commission, “we cannot conceive why Congress would 
wish [members of the Board of Review to participate in 
meetings of the Directors] if not to exercise some in- 
fluence.” 
See id. at 826 (emphasis in original). 
Even 
if the members “were to remain completely silent during 
all deliberations (a rather unlikely scenario), their mere 
presence as agents of Congress [would] convey [ ] a tacit 
message to the [Directors].” 
Jd. at 826. We held, in 
that case, that “the mere presence of agents of Congress 
on an entity with executive powers offends the Constitu- 
tion.” Id. at 827. Although members of the Board may 
not vote at meetings of the Directors, they may attend 
them; they may place items on the agenda for the Di- 
rectors’ priority consideration; and they are free to express 
their views on proposed actions before the Directors have 
made the formal decisions that must then be submitted 
to the Board for its consideration. 
This arrangement 
raises the same concerns that underpinned our decision 

12a 
in NRA 
Political Victory Fund: 
Advice 
. 
. 
. 
surely 
implies influence, and Congress must limit the exercise 
of its influence, whether in the form of advice or not, 
to its legislative role.” /d. 
Finally, and most significantly, the Board has the dis- 
cretion to accelerate the implementation of a Directors’ 
decision by promptly approving it or consigning it to the 
delays and uncertainties of a congressional review. The 
Authority argues that the Transfer Act’s review require- 
ments are nothing more than variations on legitimate 
“report-and-wait” provisions to be found in other statutes. 
These typically require that a federal agency’s proposed 
actions be referred to Congress for a period that is long 
enough to permit them to be studied and, if found want- 
ing, to allow for the passage of a joint resolution of dis- 
approval. See, e.g., Sibbach v. Wilson & Co., Inc., 312 
U.S. 1, 15 (1941) 
(report-and-wait provision allowing 
Congress to review the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
and “veto their going into effect if contrary to the policy 
of the legislature”); Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 
U.S. 678, 689-90 (1987) (provision requiring Secretary 
of Labor to refer certain proposed regulations to trans- 
portation committees of both Houses of Congress). 
Hechinger concedes that Congress could have consti- 
tutionally required that all the Directors’ proposed actions 
be submitted to Congress for a period of review before 
taking effect. But Congress has vested the Board with a 
substantive role that distinguishes this case from the 
“report-and-wait” cases on which the Authority relies. 
The provisions in those cases require automatic referral 
of particular decisions to Congress; thus their effect on 
the referring party’s decisionmaking is neutral. Here, by 
contrast, the Board has the ability to decide whether 
action taken by the Directors will be allowed to take 
immediate effect or be subjected to a 60-statutory-day 
congressional review. 
It is this discretion that provides 
the Board its leverage. 

13a 
The Authority nevertheless sees an analogy between the 
Board’s power to delay the effective date of Authority 
actions and that of the Comptroller General to stay the 
award of contracts under the Competition in Contracting 
Act of 1984, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3556 (1988) (“CICA”), 
which two circuit courts have upheld. See Ameron, Inc. 
v. United States Army Corps of Eng’rs, 809 F.2d 979 
(3d Cir. 1986); Lear Siegler, Inc., Energy Prods. Div. v. 
Lehman, 842 F.2d 1102 (1988), irrelevant portion with- 
drawn en banc, 893 F.2d 205 (9th Cir. 1989). CICA 
authorizes the Comptroller General to investigate com- 
plaints that a federal agency has solicited bids or awarded 
a contract in violation of the law. 
If the Comptroller 
General notifies an agency that a rejected bidder has 
filed a protest, the award of the contract is automatically 
Stayed pending an investigation of the disputed bidder’s 
charges. 
31 
U.S.C. 
§ 3553(c)(1). 
The Comptroller 
General may take up to 90 working days to conduct the 
investigation but may dismiss the protest before they have 
expired (thereby lifting the stay) if he finds it to be 
frivolous or facially invalid. 
Id. § 3554(a)(1), 
(3). 
On the other hand, the stay may be overridden by 
[t]he head of the procuring activity responsible for 
award of a contract .. 
. upon a written finding. 
. 
. 
that urgent and compelling circumstances that sig- 
nificantly affect interests of the United States will 
not permit waiting for the decision of the Comp 
troller General. . . . 
Id. § 3553(d)(2)(A) 
(ii). If the Comptroller General 
finds a breach of the laws governing the solicitation or 
award of government contracts, he must make appropri- 
ate recommendations to the agency, id. § 3554(b)(1); 
and if these are not implemented, he must record the per- 
tinent information in a report he is required to submit 
to Congress on an annual basis. Id. § 3554(e)(2). 
In Ameron, 
the Third Circuit concluded 
that the 
Comptroller General’s ability to shorten the 90-day stay 

l4a 
provision might well cause procurement officials to “exer- 
cise their discretion in ways which are not required by the 
procurement laws, and which they would not otherwise 
have chosen, in order to minimize conflict with the Comp- 
troller General.” 
It found, however, that “any potential 
disruption 
of the executive 
function 
[was] 
minimal.” 
Ameron, 809 F.2d at 997. The Ninth Circuit’s analysis 
was similar: 
[T]he proper inquiry is not whether a legislative 
agent can temporarily “bind” or “directly affect” 
parties outside 
the legislative branch, 
but rather 
whether the legislative agent exercises control or ul- 
timate authority in the disposition of a particular 
issue. 
It is clear that the stay provisions do not es- 
tablish such control. 
As noted above, the stay is 
temporary, usually 90 working days or less. Because 
the recommendations of the Comptroller General are 
non-binding, the stay cannot be used to coerce the 
procuring agency to make a particular final disposi- 
tion; rather the stay provisions force nothing more 
than a dialogue between the procuring agency and 
the legislature. 
Lear, 842 F.2d at 1110 (emphasis in original). 
The 
Ninth Circuit stressed that the imposition of a stay was 
initiated by a bid protester, not the Comptroller General, 
and that the Comptroller General may only consider the 
length of time necessary to decide the bid protest in vary- 
ing the length of the stay and “is not authorized to con- 
sider the importance or wisdom of the purchase decision.” 
Id. at 1111; see also Ameron, 809 F.2d at 997. 
The authority wielded by the Board under the Transfer 
Act is significantly greater than that of the Comptroller 
General under CICA. 
Unlike CICA, the amended Act 
does not condition the Board’s review authority on third- 
party complaints; rather, it authorizes the Board to re- 
view particular issues considered by the Authority. 
Sec- 
ond, and more important, the Act does not allow the Au- 

15a 
thority to override the Board, a safeguard that both Lear 
and Ameron viewed as vital in concluding that the stay 
provisions did not vest the Comptroller General with 
power over persons outside the legislative branch. Lear, 
842 F.2d at 1111 (“Were the Comptroller General thus 
able to stay a procurement contract indefinitely, a serious 
issue of his control over procurement would be raised . . . 
[However, the override] provision lodges ultimate author- 
ity over the timing of the contracts with the executive 
branch and obviates the problem of an indefinite stay.” 
); 
Ameron, 809 F.2d at 997 (“If the Comptroller General 
really does require so much time to decide the protest 
that the stay interferes with important executive interests, 
CICA authorizes the executive to override the stay.”) 
(footnote omitted). 
By contrast, the Directors’ inability to override the 
Board and forestall congressional review is a serious hin- 
drance to the Authority, because many of the decisions 
subject to review, such as the adoption of budgets, the 
letting of contracts, and the issuance of bonds, are time- 
sensitive. 
Major airports 
are complex operations, 
es- 
pecially when, as here, significant capital improvement 
programs are in progress. Any delay in the adoption of 
an annual budget and any suspension of the authority 
to let contracts or issue bonds can result in millions of 
dollars of additional costs and can adversely affect the 
public safety. 
See Affidavit of James A. Wilding, Gen- 
eral Manager of the Authority (Feb. 14, 1994) at 4, 
7-9 (supporting Authority’s motion for stay of district 
court’s order). The pressure to avoid such costly inter- 
ruptions by accommodating the Board is self-evident. 
The Authority acknowledges that the Board is in a po- 
sition to influence the Directors, but it maintains that the 
ways in which the Board may affect their decisions are 
indistinguishable from those by which Congress is able 
“to advise, coordinate, and even directly influence an 
executive agency 
. 
. 
. through oversight hearings, appro- 

‘l6a 
priation and authorization legislation, or direct communi- 
cation with the [agency].” NRA Political Victory Fund, 
6 F.3d at 827. There can be no question that Congress 
is able to exercise enormous influence over agency de- 
cisions in these and other constitutionally permissible ways. 
But there is a qualitative difference between these chan- 
nels for congressional influence and the structural rela- 
tionship between Board and Authority that the Transfer 
Act has established—the difference between persuasion 
and coercion. 
In CAAN, the Court quoted James Madison on the 
potential that always exists, in democratic societies, for 
the abuse of legislative power: 
It will not be denied, that power is of an encroach- 
ing nature, and that it ought to be effectively re- 
strained from passing the limits assigned to it. 
# 
* 
* 
[The legislative department’s] constitutional powers 
being at once more extensive and less suspectible of 
precise limits, it can with the greater facility, mask 
under complicated and indirect measures, 
the en- 
croachments which it makes on the co-ordinate de- 
partments. 
It is not unfrequently a question of real- 
nicety in legislative bodies, whether the operation of 
a particular measure, will, or will not extend beyond 
the legislative sphere. 
111 S. Ct. at 2310-11 (quoting The Federalist No. 48, 
pp. 332-34 (J. Cooke ed. 1961) (J. Madison) ). 
We acknowledge that we are dealing with “a question 
of real-nicety,” but we are satisfied that Congress has here 
encroached “beyond the legislative sphere” because the 
Board of Review has been vested with a range of powers 
whose cumulative effect is to enable it to interfere im- 
permissibly with the Directors’ performance of their in- 
dependent responsibilities. 
In the place of the veto pro- 
vision, the amended Transfer Act empowers the Board to 

17a 
choose, in its sole discretion, which of the Authority’s 
decisions may be implemented immediately and which will 
be subjected to the risks and delays of congressional re- 
view. In the place of mandatory congressional member- 
ship on the Board, it sets forth requirements that both in 
principle and in practice continue to ensure congressional 
domination of the Board. In redefining the powers of the 
Board, it actually expands the scope of its review. More- 
over, the amended statute retains provisions permitting 
the Board to compel the Authority to consider particular 
issues and conditioning the Authority’s ability to take 
vital actions on the Board’s own continuing ability to ex- 
ercise its powers under the Act. 
What tips the balance, in our judgment, is the Board’s 
power to delay and perhaps. overturn critical decisions 
by requiring their referral to Congress. The delays it can 
impose are hardly trivial. The 60-legislative-day congres- 
sional review period will extend for at least three months 
and, depending on the congressional cycle, can last as 
long as six. Affidavit of Pamela Gilbert, Legislative Di- 
rector of Public Citizen’s Congress Watch (May 28, 
1992) at 2. Cf. Bliley v. Kelly, 23 F.3d 507, 509 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (30-legislative-day congressional review period 
extended from January 11, 1991 to March 6, 1991— 
a period of 54 calendar days.) Thus, as Judge Green 
aptly put it, 
[u]Jpon receipt of a “recommendation” 
from the 
Board of Review, the Airports Authority has two 
choices. 
It can adopt the recommendation 
. 
. 
. [or] 
transmit a detailed description of the proposed ac- 
tion to Congress. 
. 
. 
. 
In short, the Airports Au- 
thority must either bow to the will of the Board of 
Review, or risk the time and uncertainty of congres- 
sional action. 
This power is far more than merely 
“advisory” as defendants claim; it gives the Board 
of Review the power to coerce the Airports Author- 
ity to comply with any “recommendation.” 

18a 
Hechinger, 845 F. Supp. at 908. The mere existence of 
this power to delay provides the Directors with an enor- 
mous incentive to avoid confrontations by tailoring their 
decisons to suit the Board’s pleasure; it also gives the 
Board the power to hold an important decision hostage 
in order to secure the Directors’ agreement to an unre- 
lated matter. 
We do not suggest that the Board has or would abuse 
its authority in such a manner. 
But the potential for 
abuse is there. As the Supreme Court observed in CANN, 
the statutory scheme challenged today provides a blue- 
print for extensive expansion of the legislative power 
beyond its constitutionally-confined role. Given the 
scope of the federal power to dispense benefits to 
the States in a variety of forms and subject to a host 
of statutory conditions, Congress could, if this Board 
of Review were valid, use similar expedients to en- 
able its Members or its agents to retain control, 
outside the ordinary legislative process, of the ac- 
tivities of state grant recipients charged with execut- 
ing virtually every aspect of national policy. 
As 
James Madison precisely observed, the legislature 
“can with greater facility, mask under complicated 
and indirect measures, the encroachments which it 
makes on the co-ordinate departments.” 
111 S. Ct. at 2312 (quoting The Federalist No. 48 at 
334 (J. Cooke ed. 1961)). 
To our mind, Congress’s 
revisions of the Transfer Act have not satisfied the con- 
cerns expressed in CAAN. 
Although the Board’s veto 
power has been eliminated, the nature of the relationship 
between the Board and the Directors is such that the 
latter must necessarily trim their sails to accommodate 
the former’s wishes. This, in our judgment, is a sufficient 
exercise of federal power to violate the doctrine of the 
separation of powers. 
Having so determined, it is not 
necessary for us to classify the nature of that power: 

19a 
If the [Board of Review’s] power is executive, the 
Constitution does not permit an agent of Congress 
to exercise it. If the power is legislative, Congress 
must exercise it in conformity with the bicameralism 
and presentment requirements of Art. I, § 7. 
CAAN, 111 S. Ct. at 2312. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we agree with the district 
court’s conclusion that the provisions of the amended 
Transfer Act, taken together, indicate that the Board of 
Review remains a congressional agent and that it exercises 
power in violation of the doctrine of the separation of 
powers; accordingly, we affirm the district court’s judg- 
ment. 
We direct, however, that actions taken by the 
Board to this date not be invalidated automatically on 
the basis of our decision. See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 
1, 142 (1976) (past acts of invalidly constituted Commis- 
sion accorded “de facto validity” ). 
So ordered 

20a 
[Filed Oct. 24, 1994] 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 
No. 94-7036 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, JR., et al., 
Appellees, 
v. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
AUTHORITY, et al., 
Appellants. 
BEFORE: 
Buckley, Williams 
and Rogers, 
Circuit 
Judges 
ORDER 
Upon consideration of Appellants’ Unopposed Emer- 
gency Motion for Extension of Stay of Judgment and 
Effective Date of Opinion and Order of the District Court, 
and For Stay of Mandate and Effective Date of Opinion 
and Order of This Court Pending Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari and Possible Congressional Action, it is 
ORDERED, by the Court, that the stay granted by this 
Court applicable to the district court’s judgment and the 
effective date of the district court’s opinion and order 
remain in force pending the later of the filing of and final 
disposition of the case by the Supreme Court on a petition 
for a Writ of Certiorari; or, should the Supreme Court 
decline to issue a Writ of Certiorari, 60 days after such 
denial of certiorari; or until March 31, 1995; it is 
FURTHER ORDERED, by the Court, that the man- 
date and effective date of this Court’s opinion and order 

21a 
dated September 27, 1994 be stayed pending the later of 
the filing of and final disposition of the case by the Su- 
preme Court on a petition for a Writ of Certiorari; or, 
should the Supreme Court decline to issue a Writ of Cer- 
tiorari, 60 days after such denial of certiorari; or until 
March 31, 1995. 
Per Curiam 
For THe Court: 
RON GARVIN 
Clerk 
By: /s/ Robert A. Bonner 
RoBERT A. BONNER 
Deputy Clerk 
ar te Me Bi A Cr hn Li 
HE) el 

22a 
[Filed Jan. 31, 1994] 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Civil Action No. 92-556 (JHG) 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
V. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
AUTHORITY, et al., 
Defendants. 
MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER 
Plaintiffs, John W. Hechinger, Sr., Craig H. Baab, and 
Citizens for the Abatement of Aircraft Noise, Inc., initi- 
ated this action challenging the constitutionality of defend- 
ant Board of Review. The Board of Review is an entity 
with the power to review certain actions of defendant 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (“Airports 
Authority”); which was created to operate the metro- 
politan Washington airports located in the Virginia sub- 
urbs. 
Plaintiffs allege that the Board of Review violates 
the doctrine of separation of powers and that its members 
are appointed in violation of the Appointments Clause’ 
and serve in violation of the Incompatibility and Ineligi- 
bility Clause.’ 
Through this action, plaintiffs seek: 
(1) a declaration 
that the Board of Review is unconstitutional; and (2) an 
order enjoining the Board of Review from exercising its 
review authority and enjoining the Airports Authority 
from performing any actions that it is required to submit 
to the Board of Review. The parties filed cross-motions 
for summary judgment. 
In addition, the United States 
1 United States Const. Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. 
2 United States Const. Art. I, §6, cl. 2. 

23a 
filed a statement of interest pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 517, 
in which it offered its views supporting the plaintiffs’ 
position that the Board of Review is unconstitutional. 
For the reasons expressed below, plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment is granted and defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment is denied. 
I. Background 
These parties are before this Court for the second time 
to litigate the constitutionality of the Board of Review. 
Although the new Board of Review will be evaluated 
without any taint from the earlier proceedings, it is neces- 
sary to review certain details from the earlier litigation 
to properly understand the present action. 
See Century 
Communications Corp. v. FCC, 835 F.2d 292, 299 (D.C. 
Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1032 (1988). 
The federal government historically maintained control 
over the two metropolitan Washington airports in the 
Virginia suburbs, Washington National Airport (“Na- 
tional”) and Dulles International Airport (“Dulles”). 
In 
the mid-1980’s, however, the Secretary of Transportation 
(“Secretary”) determined that it was necessary to shift 
control over these airports away from the federal govern- 
ment to ease the burden of financing capital improve- 
ments. The Secretary recommended that the federal gov- 
ernment transfer control over these airports to a regional 
authority and appointed an advisory commission to de- 
velop a plan to create this authority. 
The advisory commission recommended that this re- 
gional authority be created by a congressionally approved 
compact between Virginia and the District of Columbia. 
The advisory commission further recommended that an 
eleven-member Board of Directors, composed of individ- 
uals who were neither elected nor appointed officials, gov- 
ern the authority, and that ten of these directors reside in 
the metropolitan Washington area. 
These recommenda- 

24a 
tions were intended not only to ensure the non-political 
nature of the authority but to protect local interests as 
well. 
In accordance with the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-591, 99th Cong., 2d 
Sess. (1986) (“Transfer Act”) 
(codified at 49 U.S.C. 
App. §§ 2451-2461), Virginia and the District of Co- 
lumbia passed legislation to establish the Airports Au- 
thority. See 1985 Va. Acts, ch. 598, as amended by 1987 
Va. Acts ch. 665; 1985 D.C. Law 6-67, as amended by 
1987 D.C. Law 7-18. The Transfer Act authorized the 
transfer of operating control over National and Dulles to 
the Airports Authority, which was to be independent of 
the federal, Virginia, and District of Columbia govern- 
ments. 49 U.S.C. App. § 2456(a)(6). The Transfer Act 
established a Board of Directors to govern the Airports 
Authority, but mandated the creation of the Board of 
Review to review certain actions of the Board of Directors. 
The original Board of Review was composed of nine 
members of Congress, eight of whom served on specified 
congressional committees and none of whom could be 
from Maryland, Virginia, or the District of Columbia. 
49 U.S.C. App. § 2456(f)(1). The Board of Directors 
had to submit many core decisions to the Board of Review 
for approval, including the adoption of its budget, au- 
thorization of bonds, promulgation of regulations, adop- 
tion of a master plan, and the appointment of its chief 
executive officer. 49 U.S.C. App. § 2456(f)(4)(B). Sig- 
nificantly, the Board of Review could veto any of these 
core decisions. 49 U.S.C. App. § 2456(f)(4)(D). More- 
over, the legislation provided that the Airports Authority 
could not independently carry out any of these core func- 
tions 
if a court declared 
the Board of Review unconstitu- 
tional. 49 U.S.C. § 2456(h). 
The Airports Authority assumed operating responsi- 
bility of National and Dulles in mid-1987, pursuant to a 

25a 
lease that contained all of the provisions of the Transfer 
Act. Subs yently, plaintiffs filed a lawsuit challenging 
the constitutionality of the original Board of Review. 
In 
that earlier lawsuit, Citizens for the Abatement of Aircraft 
Noise, Inc. v. Metropolitan Washington Airports Author- 
ity, 718 F. Supp. 974 (D.D.C. 1989), rev’d in part, 917 
F.2d 48 (D.C. Cir. 1990), aff'd, 111 S. Ct. 2298 (1991) 
[hereinafter “CAAN I”], the Supreme Court held that 
the Board of Review, as then comprised, was unconstitu- 
tional. The Court determined that the Board of Review 
exercised sufficient federal power to mandate separation 
of powers scrutiny even though the Airports Authority 
was technically a creature of state law. 
111 S. Ct. at 
2306. 
Separation of powers scrutiny was necessary be- 
cause transfer of control over National and Dulles was 
conditioned on the creation of the Board of Review and 
the federal government has a strong and continuing in- 
terest in the operation of these airports. 
Id. at 2307. 
The Supreme Court further determined that the Board 
of Review was an agent of Congress. Membership on the 
Board 
of Review was restricted 
to members of Congress, 
all but one of whom served on particular committees. 
Thus, the Board of Review was composed exclusively 
of members of Congress and Congress could control who 
served on the Board of Review by altering the member- 
ship on the relevant committees. 
In essence, Congress 
had the power to appoint and remove members of the 
In sum, the Court invalidated the Board of Review 
it was 
gress, the powers of which Congress has delineated, the 
ich 
is to protect an acknowledged 
federal 
bership in which is restricted to con- 
*In the earlier lawsuit between these parties, the United States 
a statement of interest supporting the defendants’ position 
constitutional. 
filed 
that the Board of Review was 
<a 
aay 
eee 

26a 
gressional officials.” 
Jd. at 2308. The Board of Review 
was simply an improper attempt by Congress either to 
assume executive responsibilities or to exercise legislative 
authority in violation of the bicameralism and present- 
ment requirements of Article I, Section 7. Jd. at 2312. 
In response to the Supreme Court’s decision, Congress 
passed the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act Amend- 
ments of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-240, Title VII, 105 Stat. 
2197 (Dec. 18, 1991) (“1991 Amendments”). The 1991 
Amendments retained the Board of Review, but altered 
its composition, the qualifications for membership, and 
its powers.‘ 
President Bush signed the 1991 Amend- 
ments into law on December 18, 1991, but expressed 
concern about the constitutionality of these provisions in 
his signing statement: 
During congressional consideration of amendments 
intended to cure the defects found by the Supreme 
Court, the Administration expressed the view that 
the new Board of Review created by Title VII would 
violate the Appointments Clause of the Constitution. 
We adhere to this view, noting that the matter will 
now be resolved in court. 
Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment, Exhibit A. 
The new Board of Review is composed of nine indi- 
viduals, all of whom the Board of Directors must select 
from 
lists submitted 
by the Speaker of the House 
(“Speaker”) and the President pro tempore of the Senate 
(“President pro tempore’). 
1991 Amendments § 7002 
(a)(1). 
Although the Board of Directors may request 
additional recommendations, there is no requirement that 
the Speaker and the President pro tempore submit more 
names than the number of vacancies on the Board of 
*The 1991 Amendments retained many aspects of the old Board 
of Review, notably the provision that the Airports Authority 
cannot perform any action subject to oversight by the Board of 
Review if a court declares the Board of Review unconstitutional. 

27a 
Review. 
Jd. Further, 
the Board of Review is not ex- 
pressly limited to members of Congress. 
To qualify for 
membership on the Board of Review, a person must: 
(1) have experience in aviation matters and in addressing 
the needs of airport users; (2) be a frequent user of 
Metropolitan Washington Airports; and (3) be a regis- 
tered voter in a jurisdiction other than Virginia, Mary- 
land, or the District of Columbia. 
1991 Amendments 
§ 7002(b)(2)(C). 
In addition, members may be re- 
moved for cause by a two-thirds vote of the Board of 
Directors. 1991 Amendments § 7002(f) (1). 
The 1991 Amendments also altered the power of the 
Board of Review. The Board of Review no longer has 
the express veto power that its predecessor enjoyed. 
In- 
stead, the new Board of Review has the power to make 
“recommendations” to the Board of Directors regarding 
each of the core functions over which the original Board 
of Review had a veto power plus several additional core 
functions, such as the award of a contract, the design of 
a terminal, and transactions involving land. 1991 Amend- 
ments §§ 7002(d)(1), 
(2). 
If the Board of Review 
makes such a recommendation, the proposed action may 
take effect only if the Board of Directors adopts the 
recommendation or if the Board of Directors submits the 
proposed action to Congress and waits a specified number 
of days. 1991 Amendments § 7002(d)(2)(D). 
II. Discussion 
Summary judgment is appropriate when there is “no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and . . . the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” 
Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 56(c). “The inquiry performed is the thres- 
hold inquiry of determining whether there is a need for 
trial—whether, in other words, there are any genuine 
issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of 
fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor 
of either party.” Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 

28a 
U.S. 242, 250 (1986). On considering a motion for sum- 
mary judgment, the “evidence of the non-movant is to 
be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn 
in his favor.” 
Id. at 255. At the same time, however, 
Rule 56 places a burden on the nonmoving party to “go 
beyond the pleadings and by her own affidavits, or by 
the ‘depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admis- 
sions on file,’ designate ‘specific facts showing that there 
is a genuine issue for trial.’” Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 
477 U.S. 317, 324 (1986). 
Plaintiffs claim that the 1991 Amendments did not 
remedy the constitutional defects of the Transfer Act. 
Specifically, plaintiffs make two related challenges to the 
new Board of Review. 
First, plaintiffs allege that the 
new Board of Review is “a congressional agent that may 
not, under the Constitution, 
exercise retained 
federal 
power to control the actions of the Airports Authority.” 
Memorandum in Support of Plaintiffs’ Motion for Sum- 
mary Judgment 
(“Plaintiff's Mem.”) 
at 
18. 
Second, 
plaintiffs assert that members of the Board of Review 
are selected in violation of the Appointments Clause. 
Id. at 18-19.° Defendants, in contrast, claim that the new 

29a 
A. 
The Powers of the Board of Review 
Plaintiffs first argue that the Board of Review cannot 
exercise 
its prescribed 
functions 
consistent 
with 
the 
Constitution. 
This challenge focuses on the doctrine of 
separation of powers and the requirements of biocameral- 
ism and presentment. The doctrine of separation of pow- 
ers prohibits Congress, 
either directly or through 
its 
agents, from exercising executive power. See Bowsher v. 
Synar, 478 U.S. 714, 733 (1986). 
Similarly, Congress, 
either directly or through its agents, cannot exercise legis- 
lative power without complying with the requirements of 
bicameralism and presentment. CAAWN I, 111 S. Ct. at 
2312; see INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 951 (1983). 
To demonstrate that the Board of Review is constitu- 
tionally deficient, therefore, plaintiffs must show that the 
Board of Review is an agent of Congress and that it 
exercises some type of federal power. 
Plaintiffs have 
established both elements. 
To reiterate, briefly, to qualify for membership on the 
Board of Review, a person must: 
(1) have experience 
in aviation matters and in addressing the needs of air- 
port users; (2) be a frequent user of the metropolitan 
Washington airports; and (3) not to be a registered voter 
in Maryland, Virginia, or the District of Columbia. 
1991 
Amendments § 7002(b)(2)(C). The Airports Authority 
selects the members of the Board of Review, but 
it can 
only choose those individuals that either the Speaker or 
the President pro tempore recommend. 
If the Airports 
Authority is dissatisfied with the candidates recommended, 
it can request additional names for consideration. 
The 
Airports Authority can remove members of the Board of 
Review for cause by a two-thirds 
vote. 
These criteria and conditions create an entity that is 
unquestionably an agent of Congress. Although Congress 
divested itself of removal power, it retained appointment 
power and ensured that many members of Congress— 
and few others—will be eligible to serve on the Board of 

30a 
Review. 
Further, and more fundamentally, 
either the 
Speaker or the President pro tempore must select every 
member of the Board of Review. Although the Airports 
Authority may request additional names for consideration, 
it is forced to choose only those individuals recommended 
by Congress. 
Congress, therefore, retained extraordinary 
control over the composition of the Board of Review; the 
Board of Directors is without power to appoint anyone 
who has not received a recommendation from the con- 
gressional leadership. 
Moreover, Congress clearly did not address the con- 
cerns that the Supreme Court expressed in CAAN I. In 
CAAN I, the Court declared that the original Board of 
Review mandated separation of powers review because it 
was “an entity created at the initiative of Congress, the 
powers of which Congress has delineated, the purpose of 
which is to protect an acknowledged federal interest, and 
membership in which is restricted to congressional offi- 
cials.” 111 S. Ct. at 2308. Pursuant to the 1991 Amend- 
ments, the Board of Review is still an entity created at 
the initiative of Congress, the powers of which Congress 
has delineated, and the purpose of which is to protect 
an acknowledged federal interest. The only change is that 
membership is not restricted to congressional officials, but 
rather to those selected by congressional officials. 
This 
superficial change is insufficient to insulate the Board of 
Review from constitutional scrutiny.* 
The more provocative question is whether the Board 
of Review exercises federal power. 
And the answer is 
“yes.” Pursuant to the 1991 Amendments, the Board of 
Review no longer has the power to veto actions of the 
Board of Directors. The Board of Review does, however, 
exercise significant control over the Airports Authority 
and management 
over 
its core 
aspects of operation 
through its power to make “recommendations.” 
In fact, 
* Interestingly, eight of the nine members of the original Board 
of Review were promptly appointed to the new Board of Review. 

3la 
the new Board of Review has power to influence more 
actions than the old Board of Review. 
In addition to 
control over the adoption of a budget, authorization for 
the issuance of bonds,’ the promulgation of regulations, 
the adoption of a master plan, and the appointment of a 
chief executive officer, the new Board of Review can 
control the award of contracts, any terminal design or 
modification, and any land transaction. 
49 U.S.C. App. 
§ 2456(f)(4)(B); 1991 Amendments § 7002(d)(1)(E). 
Upon receipt of a “recommendation” from the Board 
of Review, the Airports Authority has two choices. 
It 
can adopt the recommendation, at which point the pro- 
posal 
with 
the recommendation 
takes 
effect. 
1991 
Amendments § 7002(d)(2)(D). 
If the Airports Author- 
ity does not adopt a recommendation, it must transmit a 
detailed description of the proposed action to Congress. 
The action cannot take effect until after the expiration of 
sixty calendar days, “excluding Saturdays, Sundays, holi- 
days, and any day on which neither House of Congress 
is in session because of an adjournment sine die, a recess 
of more than 3 days, or an adjournment of more than 
3 days,” unless Congress acts sooner. 
1991 Amendments 
§ 7002(d)(2)(D) 
(ii). This report and wait provision, 
in effect, gives the Board of Review power to delay an 
action of the Board of Directors by as long as six months. 
The Airports Authority has a choice: 
accept the 
“recommendation” of the Board of Review for immediate 
enactment of the proposal, or submit the proposal to 
Congress, wait a potentially lengthy period of time, and 
hope that Congress does not disapprove the proposal. In 
Short, the Airports Authority must disapprove the pro- 

32a 
posal. 
In short, the Airports Authority must either bow 
to the will of the Board of Review, or risk the time and 
uncertainty of congressional action. 
This power is far 
more 
than merely “advisory” 
as defendants 
claim; 
it 
gives the Board of Review the power to coerce the Air- 
ports Authority to comply with any “recommendation.” 
The Constitution does not permit this agent of Congress 
to play such an influential role in controlling the actions 
of the Airports Authority. 
See Lear Siegler, 
Inc. 
v. 
Lehman, 842 F.2d 1102, 1108 (9th Cir. 1988) (stating 
that if “Congress ‘in effect has retained control,’ its ac- 
tion and the statuory provision on which it is based are 
unconstitutional”) 
(quoting 
Bowsher, 
106 
S. Ct. 
at 
3192), rev'd on other grounds, 893 F.2d 205 (9th Cir. 
1989) (en banc). 
B. 
The Appointments Clause 
Plaintiffs next argue that the members of the Board of 
Review are selected in violation of the Appointments 
Clause. 
The Appointments 
Clause 
dictates 
that 
the 
President shall appoint all officers of the United States. 
U.S. Const., Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. Principal officers must be 
selected with the advice and consent of the Senate, and 
the appointment of inferior officers is vested in the Presi- 
dent alone. 
I/d.; see Buckley 
v. 
Valeo, 424 U.S. 
1 
(1976). The President does not select the members of 
the Board of Review; they are selected by the Airports 
Authority from lists provided by the Speaker and Presi- 
dent pro tempore. 
If the Board of Review exercises sig- 
nificant executive authority,* the method of appointing 
its members is constitutionally defective. 
Id. at 126; see 
Freytag v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 111 S. Ct. 
2631, 2640 (1991). 
8In the earlier lawsuit, the Court of Appeals 
noted that the 
actions of the Board of Review are “quintessentially executive.” 
917 F.2d at 56. The sole inquiry here, therefore, is whether the 
Board of Review exercises significant federal authority. 

33a 
Defendants assert that there is no Appointments Clause 
violation because the Board of Review is a nonfederal, 
interstate agency. Defendants’ Mem. at 33-34. This argu- 
ment clearly is without merit. In CAAN I, the Supreme 
Court determined that “the fact that the Board of Review 
was created by state enactments is not enough to immu- 
nize it from separation-of-powers review.” CAAN I, 111 
S. Ct. at 2306-07. Defendants do not advance any reason 
why an Appointments Clause analysis should be any dif- 
ferent. 
The strong federal interest of the Airports Au- 
thority plainly warrants Appointments Clause review. 
Defendants also argue that the Board of Review does 
not exercise significant federal authority. 
Defendants’ 
Mem. at 33. The Court has already considered and re- 
jected this argument in the context of separation of 
powers and holds also that the members of the Board 
of Review are selected in violation of the Appointments 
Clause. 
II. Conclusion 
The Board of Review plays a pivotal role in the admin- 
istration of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act. 
It exercises significant executive powers delegated to it by 
Congress, which created the Board of Review and over 
which Congress continues to wield considerable control. 
This unconstitutionally violates separation of powers prin- 
ciples and the Appointments Clause. 
Since the provisions regarding the Board of Review 
in the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act Amend- 
ments 
of 1991 have this date been found unconstitutional 
and the Board of Review must be, and is, invalidated, 
the MWAA is without authority “thereafter” to carry 
out those actions the Board of 
iew is required 
to 
oversee. 49 U.S.C.A. App. § 2456(h). 
It is, therefore, 
essential to direct (as did the Circuit Court) that “actions 
taken by the Board [of Review] to this date not be in- 
validated automatically on the basis of [this] decision.” 
a 

34a 
CAAN I, 917 F.2d at 57-58; see Buckley 
v. Valeo, 
424 US. 1, 142 (1976). 
While there shall be no stay for the reasons noted 
herein, the Court clearly recognizes the impact of this 
decision and the immediate jeopardy of operations at 
both Washington National Airport and Dulles Interna- 
tional Airport. 
I strongly urge that prompt review be 
given this matter in the Circuit Court and/or in Congress. 
Therefore, for the reasons stated above, it is hereby 
ORDERED that plaintiffs’ motion for summary judg- 
ment is granted; it is 
FURTHER DECLARED that the Board of Review is 
unconstitutional and its actions invalid from the date of 
this order; it is 
FURTHER ORDERED 
that defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment is denied. 
IT IS SO ORDERED. 
January 31, 1994 
/s/ Joyce Hens Green 
JoYcE HENS GREEN 
United States District Judge 

35a 
[Filed Feb. 15, 1994] 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Civil Action No. 92-556 (JHG) 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
V. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
AUTHORITY, et al., 
Defendants. 
MODIFICATION OF JANUARY 31, 1994 
MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER 
Defendants, supported by the United States, urge the 
Court to reconsider its January 31, 1994, Memorandum 
Opinion and Order (“Opinion and Order”) insofar as that 
decision denied a stay of the judgment. 
Plaintiffs oppose 
this request, arguing that a stay would permit defendants 
to continue their unconstitutional actions and, ultimately, 
Cause irreparable harm to plaintiffs. Alternatively, plain- 
tiffs assert that any stay be limited in duration to no more 
than thirty days to permit Congress to act and the de- 
fendants to seek expedited review in the Court of Appeals. 
This Court recognizes its right to grant a stay pending 
appeal in cases in which it has declared a statute uncon- 
stitutional. See Bowen v. Kendrick, 483 U.S. 1304, 1304- 
OS (1987). Although initially inclined to deny the stay, 
the Court will re-examine that decision in light of the 
relevant factors: (1) the likelihood that the party seeking 
the stay will prevail on appeal; (2) the likelihood that 
party seeking the stay will be irreparably harmed: (3) 
the likelihood of harm to others if the stay is granted; 

36a 
and (4) the public interest in granting the stay. Cuomo 
v. United States Nuclear Regulatory Comm’n, 772 F.2d 
972, 974 (D.C. Cir. 1985) 
(citing Washington Metro. 
Area Transit Comm'n v. Holiday Tours, Inc., 559 F.2d 
841, 843 (D.C. Cir. 1977). 
It is, of course, difficult for the Court to conclude that 
defendants are likely to succeed on appeal. Nonetheless, 
recognizing the presumption of constitutionality of con- 
gressional action and that the other factors weigh in de- 
fendants’ favor, a limited stay will be granted. 
The immediate harm to defendants will indeed be ir- 
reparable absent a limited stay. Many capital improve- 
ment projects, an extensive concession contract, and other 
airport improvements were pending before the Board of 
Review on the date of this Court’s order. These projects, 
which benefit not only the defendants but the public in its 
entirety, cannot proceed in the absence of a limited stay. 
Further, defendants have assured the Court that, as to 
these pending matters, “the Board of Review had not and 
will not make a recommendation ... .” Memorandum 
of Points and Authorities in Support of Defendants’ Mo- 
tion for Modification or Clarification of the Court’s Opin- 
ion and Order of January 31, 1994 and for Stay of the 
Judgment and of the Effective Date of the Opinion and 
Order, Pending Final Resolution of the Appeal at 3 (em- 
phasis added). 
On the other hand, any harm to plaintiffs is not im- 
mediate. Plaintiffs admit that they “may not have a par- 
ticular interest” in the pending matters, but state that 
“A some point, the major decisions solidifying the ex- 
pansionist course will be completed.” 
Plaintiffs’ Opposi- 
tion to Defendants’ Motion for a Stay and Motion for 
Modification or Clarification of this Court’s Opinion and 
Order at 2, 6. This speculative harm does not outweigh 
the immediate harm to defendants in the absence of a 
stay. 

37a 
This case, however, does not justify the indefinite stay 
that defendants seek. Such a stay might ultimately cause 
irreparable harm to plaintiffs as airport expansion crosses 
a point of no return. 
Further, and more critically, an 
indefinite stay would remove any incentive for defend- 
ants to seek expedited review in the Court of Appeals or 
in Congress. 
Upon balancing all of the relevant factors, therefore, a 
Stay of seventy-five (75) days from the date of the original 
Opinion and Order is warranted. 
Such a stay is long 
enough to prevent irreparable harm to defendants, and, at 
the same time, is not too long such that it risks irreparable 
harm to plaintiffs. 
It also will permit the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Authority (“MWAA”) to continue 
its progress as to those matters for which the Board of 
Review was not going to exercise 
its constitutionally 
offensive power to make “recommendations.” 
Further, 
a stay of seventy-five days will permit defendants to seek 
expedited review in the Court of Appeals and/or immed- 
iately bring these issues before Congress. 
Of course, de- 
fendants are in no way precluded from making an appli- 
cation to the Court of Appeals for an enlargement of 
this stay, if and when appropriate. 
The Court reiterates its earnest hope that prompt ac- 
tion is taken on this matter. Accordingly, it is hereby 
ORDERED that, pursuant to this Court’s January 31, 
1994 Opinion and Order, all actions taken by the MWAA 
that were approved by the Board of Directors and sub- 
mitted to the Board of Review before January 31, 1994, 
for which the time for review had expired prior to such 
effective date without the Board of Review having made 
any recommendation thereon, remain lawful, valid, and 
effective, and the MWAA can perform such actions, 
including the issuance of bonds that have been previously 
authorized; it is 
FURTHER ORDERED that this Court’s January 31, 
1994 Opinion and Order is modified as follows: 
actions 

38a 
taken by the Board of Directors of the MWAA, which 
were submitted to the Board of Review before the effec- 
tive date of this Court’s Opinion and Order and which 
were still pending before the Board of Review on the 
effective date of such Opinion and Order but concerning 
which the Board of Review had not made any recom- 
mendation, and will not be making any recommendation, 
are lawful, valid, and effective, and the MWAA can per- 
form such actions, including the issuance of bonds that 
have been previously authorized; it is 
FURTHER ORDERED that the issuance of the Judg- 
ment and the effective date of the Court’s Opinion and 
Order dated January 31, 1994 are stayed from the date 
thereof for a period of seventy-five (75) days provided 
that defendants file a Notice of Appeal in the United 
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Cir- 
cuit on or before February 22, 1994. 
IT IS SO ORDERED. 
February 15, 1994 
/s/ Joyce Hens Green 
Joyce HENS GREEN 
United States District Judge 

39a 
- 
[Filed Apr. 11, 1994] 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 
No. 94-7036 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, JR.; Craic H. BAAB; 
CITIZENS FOR THE ABATEMENT OF AIRCRAFT NOISE, INC. 
Vv. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORT AUTHORITY; 
BOARD OF REVIEW, 
Appellants 
BEFORE: 
Buckley, 
Williams 
and 
Rogers, 
Circuit 
Judges 
ORDER 
Upon consideration of appellants’ motion for Stay pend- 
ing appeal, the opposition thereto and the reply; and the 
statement by the United States in support of the motion 
for stay pending appeal, it is 
ORDERED that the district court’s judgment and the 
effective date of the district court’s January 31, 1994 
opinion and order be stayed until fifteen days after this 
court renders its decision in this appeal. See Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Comm'n vy. Holiday Tours, Inc., 559 
F.2d 841, 843 (D.C. Cir. 1977); D.C. Circuit Handbook 
of Practice and Internal Procedures 66-67 (1994). 
Per Curiam 
FOR THE Court: 
RON GARVIN 
Clerk 
By: /s/ Cheri Carter 
Deputy Clerk 

: 
a 
40a 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS, STATUTES, 
ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS 
INVOLVED 
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 
Article I, section 1: 
All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested 
in a Congress of the United States, which shall con- 
sist of a Senate and House of Representatives. 
Article I, section 6, clause 2: 
No Senator or Representative shall, during the Time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil 
Office under the Authority of the United States, 
which shall have been created, or the Emoluments 
whereof shall have been increased during such time; 
and no Person holding any Office under the United 
States, shall be 
a Member of either House during his 
Continuance in Office. 
Article I, section 7, clause 2, in pertinent part: 
Every Bill which shall have passed the House of 
Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it be- 
comes a Law, be presented to the President of the 
United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if 
not he shall return it, with his Objections to that 
House in which it shall have originated, who shall 
enter the Objections at large on their Journal and 
proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsidera- 
tion two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the 
Bill, it shall be sent, together with the Objections, 
to the other House, by which it shall likewise be re- 
considered, and if approved by two thirds of that 
House, it shall become a Law. 

4la 
Article I, section 7, clause 3: 
Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Con- 
currence of the Senate and House of Representa- 
tives may be necessary (except on a question of 
Adjournment) shall be presented to the President 
of the United States; and before the Same shall take 
Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disap- 
proved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of 
the Senate and House of Representatives, according 
to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case 
of a Bill. 
Article II, section 1, in pertinent part: 
The executive Power shall be vested in a President 
of the United States of America. 
Article II, section 2, clause 2, in pertinent part: 
[H]e shall nominate, and by and with the Advice 
and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassa- 
dors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of 
the Supreme Court, and all other Officers of the 
United States, whose Appointments are not herein 
otherwise provided for, and which shall be estab- 
lished by Law: 
but Congress may by Law vest the 
Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think 
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, 
or in the Heads of Departments. 
Article IV, section 3, clause 2: 
The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and 
make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting 
the Territory or other Property belonging to the 
United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall 
be so construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the 
United States, or of any particular State. 

42a 
SUBCHAPTER III—METROPOLITAN 
WASHINGTON AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 
49 U.S.C. § 2451 (1988). 
Findings 
The Congress finds that— 
(1) the two 
federally 
owned 
airports 
in the 
metropolitan area of Washington, District of Colum- 
bia, constitute an important and growing part of the 
commerce, transportation, and economic patterns of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia, the District of Co- 
lumbia, and the surrounding region; 
(2) Baltimore/Washington International Airport, 
owned and operated by the State of Maryland, is an 
air transportation 
facility that provides service to 
the 
greater 
Metropolitan 
Washington 
region 
to- 
gether with the two federally owned airports, and 
timely Federal-aid grants to Baltimore/Washington 
International Airport will provide additional capac- 
ity to meet the growing air traffic needs and to com- 
pete with other airports on a fair basis; 
(3) the Federal Government has a continuing but 
limited interest in the operation of the two federally 
owned airports, which serve the travel and cargo 
needs of the entire Metropolitan Washington region 
as well as the District of Columbia as the national 
seat of government; 
(4) operation of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports by an independent local agency will fa- 
cilitate timely improvements at both airports to meet 
the growing demand of interstate air transportation 
occasioned by the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 
(Public Law 95-504; 92 Stat. 1705); 
(S) all other major air carrier airports in the 
United States are operated by public entities at the 
State, regional, or local level; 

43a 
(6) any change in status of the two airports must 
take into account the interest of nearby communi- 
ties, the traveling public, air carriers, general avia- 
tion, airport employees, and other interested groups, 
as well as the interests of the Federal Government 
and State governments involved; 
(7) in recognition of a perceived limited need for 
a Federal role in the management of these airports 
and the growing local interest, the Secretary has 
recommended a transfer of authority from the Fed- 
eral to the local/State level that is consistent with 
the management of major airports elsewhere in the 
Nation; 
(8) an operating authority with representation 
from local jurisdictions, similar to authorities at all 
major airports in the United States, will improve 
communications with local officials and concerned 
residents regarding noise at the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports; 
(9) a commission of congressional, State, and lo- 
cal officials and aviation representatives has recom- 
mended to the Secretary that transfer of the fed- 
erally owned airports be as a unit to an independent 
authority to be created by the Commonwealth of 
Virginia anc the District of Columbia; and 
(10) the Federal interest in these airports can be 
provided through a lease mechanism which provides 
for local control and operation. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6002, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-373; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6002, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-376.) 

44a 
§ 2452. 
Purpose 
(a) In general 
It is therefore declared to be the purpose of the Con- 
gress in this subchapter 
to authorize 
the transfer 
of 
operating responsibility under long-term lease of the two 
Metropolitan Washington Airport properties as a unit, 
including access highways and other related facilities, to 
a properly constituted independent airport authority cre- 
ated by the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District 
of Columbia, in order to achieve local control, manage- 
ment, operation, and the development of these important 
transportation assets. 
(b) Inclusion of BWI not precluded 
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to pro- 
hibit the Airports Authority and the State of Maryland 
from entering into an agreement whereby Baltimore/ 
Washington International Airport may be made part of 
a regional airports authority, subject to terms and con- 
ditions agreed to by the Airports Authority, the Secre- 
tary, the Commonwealth 
of Virginia, 
the District of 
Columbia, and the State of Maryland. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6003, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-374; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6003, Oct. 
30, 1986, 100 Stat. 3341-377.) 

45a 
§ 2453. 
Definitions 
In this subchapter; 
(1) Administrator 
The 
term 
“Administrator” 
means 
the 
Adminis- 
trator of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2) Airports Authority 
The term “Airports Authority” means the Metro- 
politan Washington 
Airports Authority, 
a public 
body to be created by the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and the District of Columbia consistent with 
the requirements of section 2456 of this title. 
(3) Employees 
The term “employees” means all ‘permanent Fed- 
eral Aviation Administration personnel employed on 
the date the lease under section 2454 of this title 
takes effect by the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports, an organization within the Federal Aviation 
Administration. 
(4) Metropolitan Washington Airports 
The term 
“Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports” 
means Washington National Airport and Washington 
Dulles International Airport. 
(5) Secretary 
The term 
“Secretary” 
means 
the Secretary of 
Transportation. 
(6) Washington Dulles International Airport 
q 
The term “Washington Dulles International Air- 
port” means the airport constructed under the Act 
entitled “An Act to authorize the construction, pro- 
tection, operation, and maintenance of a public air- 

46a 
port on or in the vicinity of the District of Colum- 
bia,” approved September 7, 1950 (64 Stat. 770), 
and includes the Dulles Airport Access Highway and 
Right-of-way, 
including the extension between the 
Interstate Routes 1-495 and I-66. 
(7) Washington National Airport 
The term “Washington National Airport” means 
the airport described in the Act entitled “An Act 
to provide for the administration of the Washington 
National Airport, and\for other purposes,” approved 
June 29, 1940 (54 Stat. 686). 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6004, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-374; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6004, Oct. 
30, 1986, 100 Stat. 3341-378.) 
§ 2454. 
Lease of Metropolitan Washington Airports 
(a) Authority to enter into lease 
The Secretary is authorized to enter into a lease of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports with the Airports Au- 
thority for a 50-year term and to enter into any related 
agreement necessary for the transfer of authority and 
property to the Airports Authority. 
Authority to enter 
into a lease and agreement under this section shall lapse 
two years after October 18, 1986. 
(b) Payments 
(1) Lease payments 
The lease shall provide for the Airports Authority 
to pay to the general fund of the Treasury annually 
an amount, computed using the GNP Price Deflator, 
to equal $3,000,000 in 1987 dollars. The Secretary 
and the Airports Authority may renegotiate the level 
of lease payments attributable to inflation costs every 
ten years. 

47a 
(2) Retirement obligations 
(A) Discontinued service 
Not later than one year after the lease takes 
effect, the Airports Authority shall pay to the 
Treasury of the United States, to be deposited 
to the credit of the Civil Service Retirement and 
Disability Fund, an amount determined by the 
Office of Personnel Management to represent the 
actual added costs incurred by the Fund due to 
discontinued 
service retirement under section 
8336(d)(1) of Title 5 of employees who elect 
not to transfer to the Airports Authority. 
(B) Unfunded liability 
Not later than one year after the lease takes 
effect, the Airports Authority shall pay to the 
Treasury of the United States, to be deposited 
to the credit of the Civil Service Retirement 
and Disability Fund, an amount determined by 
the Office of Personnel Management to repre- 
sent the present value of the difference between 
(i) the future cost of benefits payable from the 
Fund and due the employees covered under 
section 2457(e) of this title that are attribu- 
table to the period of employment following the 
date the lease takes effect, and (ii) the con- 
tributions made by the employees and the Air- 
ports Authority under section 2457(e) of this 
title. In determining the amount due, the Office 
of Personnel Management shall take into con- 
sideration the actual interest such amount can 
be expected to earn when invested in the Treas- 
ury of the United States. 
(c) Minimum 
terms and conditions 
The Airports Authority shall agree, at a minimum, to 
the following conditions and requirements in the lease: 

48a 
(1) Operation of airports as a unit 
The Airports Authority shall operate, maintain, 
protect, 
promote, 
and develop 
the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports as a unit and as primary air- 
ports serving the Metropolitan Washington area. 
(2) Airport purposes 
The real property constituting the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports shall, during the period of the 
lease, be used only for airport purposes. 
For the 
purposes of this paragraph, the term “airport pur- 
poses” means a use of property interests (other than 
a sale) for aviation business or activities, or for ac- 
tivities necessary or approprate to serve passengers 
or cargo in air commerce, or for nonprofit, public 
use facilities. 
If the Secretary determines that any 
portion of the real property leased to the Airports 
Authority pursuant to this subchapter is used for 
other than airport purposes, the Secretary shall (A) 
direct that appropriate measures be taken by the Air- 
ports Authority to bring the use of such portion of 
real property in conformity with airport purposes, 
and (B) retake possession of such portion of real 
property if the Airports Authority fails to bring the 
use of such portion into a conforming use within a 
reasonable period of time, as determined by the 
Secretary. 
(3) AIP requirements 
The Airports Authority shall be subject to the re- 
quirements of section [49 U.S.C.A. § 2210(a)] and 
the assurances and conditions required of grant re- 
cipients under such Act [49 U.S.C.A. § 2201 
et 
seq.] as of the date the lease takes effect. Notwith- 
standing 
section 
511(a)(12) 
of such 
Act 
[49 
U.S.C.A. § 2210(a)(12)], all revenues generated by 
the Metropolitan Washington Airports shall be ex- 
re ee
ae
eS 
RO 
RTI 
ne ee 
Se ———
. 
1 fh 
Hes 
Roki 
ea 
cae 
ahs 
Op 
PIR 

49a 
pended for the capital and operating costs of such 
airports. 
(4) Contracts 
In acquiring by contract supplies or services for an 
amount estimated to be in excess of $200,000, or 
awarding concession contracts, the Airports Author- 
ity shall obtain, to the maximum extent practicable, 
full and open competition through the use of pub- 
lished competitive procedures. 
By a vote of seven 
members, the Airports Authority may grant excep- 
tions to the requirements of this paragraph. 
(5) Continuation of regulations 
(A) In general 
Except as provided in subparagraph (B) all 
regulations of the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports 
(14 C.F.R. 159) shall become regulations 
of the Airports Authority on the date the lease 
takes effect and shall remain in effect until 
modified or revoked by the Airports Authority 
in accordance with procedures of the Airports 
Authority. 
(B) Exceptions 
The following regulations shall cease to be in 
effect on the date the lease takes effect: 
(i) section 159.59(a) of title 14, Code 
of Federal Regulations (relating to new- 
technology aircraft); and 
(ii) section 159.191 of title 14, Code 
of Federal Regulations ( relating to viola- 
tions of Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations as Federal misdemeanors). 

50a 
(C) Operations 
The Airports Authority may not increase or 
decrease the number of instrument flight rule 
takeoffs and landings authorized by the High 
Density Rule (14 C.F.R. 93.121 
et seq.) at 
Washington National Airport on October 
18, 
1986 and may not impose a limitation after the 
date the lease takes effect on the number of 
passengers taking off or landing at Washington 
National Airport. 
(6) Transfer of rights, liabilities, and obligations 
(A) In general 
Except as specified in subparagraph (B) of 
this paragraph, the Airports Authority shall as- 
sume all rights, liabilities, and oblgations (tan- 
gible and incorporeal, present and executory) 
of the Metropolitan Washington Airports on the 
date the lease takes effect, including leases, per- 
mits, 
licenses, 
contracts, 
agreements, 
claims, 
tariffs, accounts receivable, accounts payable, 
and litigation relating to such rights and ob- 
ligations, regardless whether judgment has been 
entered, damages awarded, 
or appeal taken. 
Before the date the lease takes effect, the Secre- 
tary shall also assure that the Airports Author- 
ity has agreed to cooperate in allowing repre- 
sentatives of the Attorney General and the Sec- 
retary adequate access to employees and records 
when needed for the performance of functions 
related to the period before the effectiveness of 
the lease. The Airports Authority shall assume 
responsibility for the Federal Aviation Adminis- 
tration’s Master Plans for the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports. 

S5la 
(B) Exceptions 
The procedure for disputes resolution con- 
tained in any contract entered into on behalf of 
the United States before the date the lease takes 
effect shall continue to govern the performance 
of the contract unless otherwise agreed to by 
the parties to the contract. 
Claims for mone- 
tary damages founded in tort, by or against the 
United States as the owner and operator of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports, arising be- 
fore the date the lease takes effect shall be ad- 
judicated as if the lease had not been entered 
into. 
(C) Payments into Employees’ Compensation 
Fund 
The Federal Aviation Administration shall re- 
main responsible for reimbursing the Employ- 
ees’ Compensation Fund, pursuant to section 
8147 of Title 5 for compensation paid or pay- 
able after the date the lease takes effect in ac- 
cordance with chapter 81 of Title 5 with regard 
to any injury, disability, or death due to events 
arising before such date, whether or not a claim 
has been filed or is final on such date. 
(D) Collective bargaining rights 
The Airports Authority shall continue all col- 
lective bargaining rights enjoyed before the date 
the lease takes effect by employees of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports. 
(7) Audits 
The Comptroller General of the United States may 
conduct periodic audits of the activities and trans- 
actions of the Airports Authority in accordance with 
generally accepted management principles, and under 

52a 
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by 
the Comptroller General. Any such audit shall be 
conducted at such place or places as the Comptroller 
General may deem appropriate. All books, accounts, 
records, reports, files, papers, and property of the 
Airports Authority shall remain in possession and 
custody of the Airports Authority. 
(8) Code of ethics 
The Airports Authority shall develop a code of 
ethics and financial disclosure in order to assure the 
integrity of all decisions made by its board of direc- 
tors and employees. 
(9) Restriction on use of certain revenues 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
landing fee imposed for operating an aircraft or 
revenues derived from parking automobiles— 
(A) at Washington Dulles International Air- 
port may be used for maintenance or operating 
expenses (excluding debt service, depreciation, 
and amortization) at Washington National Air- 
port; or 
(B) at Washington National Airport may be 
used for maintenance or operating expenses (ex- 
cluding debt service, depreciation, and amortiza- 
tion) at Washington Dulles International Air- 
port. 
(10) General aviation fees 
The Airports Authority shall compute the fees and 
charges for landing general aviation aircraft at the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports on the same basis 
as the landing fees for air carrier aircraft, except 
that the Airports Authority may require a minimum 
landing fee not in excess of the landing fee for air- 
craft weighing 12,500 pounds. 

53a 
(11) Other terms 
The Secretary shall include such other terms and 
conditions applicable to the parties to the lease as are 
consistent with and carry out the provisions of this 
subchapter. 
(d) Submission to Congress 
The Secretary shall submit the lease entered into under 
this section to Congress. 
The lease may not take effect 
before the passage of (1) 30 days, or (2) 10 days in 
which either House of Congress is in session, whichever 
occurs later. 
(e) Enforcement of lease provisions 
The district courts of the United States shall have 
jurisdiction to compel the Airports Authority and its offi- 
cers and employees to comply with the terms of the lease. 
An action may be brought on behalf of the United States 
by the Attorney General, or by any aggrieved party. 
(Pub.L 99-500, Title VI, § 6005, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 Stat. 
1783-375; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6005, Oct. 30, 1986, 
100 Stat. 3341-378.) 
§ 2455. 
Capital improvements, construction, and reha- 
bilitation 
(a) Improvements 
It is the sense of the Congress that the Airports Au- 
thority should— 
(1) pursue the improvement, construction, and re- 
habilitation of the facilities at Washington Dulles 
International Airport and Washington National Air- 
port simultaneously; and 
(2) to the extent practicable, cause the improve- 
ment, construction, and rehabilitation proposed by the 
Secretary to be completed at both of such Airports 

54a 
within 5 years after the earliest date on which the 
Airports Authority issues bonds under the authority 
required by section 2456 of this title for any such 
improvement, construction, or rehabilitation. 
(b) Secretary’s assistance 
The Secretary shall assist the three airports serving the 
Washington, 
D.C. 
metropolitan 
area 
in planning 
for 
operational and capital improvements at those airports 
and shall accelerate consideration of applications for Fed- 
eral financial assistance by whichever of the three air- 
ports is most in need of increasing airside capacity. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6006, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 Stat. 
1783-378; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6006, Oct. 30, 1986, 
100 Stat. 3341-381.) 
§ 2456. 
Aijrports Authority 
(a) Powers conferred by Virginia and the District of 
Columbia 
The Airports Authority shall be a public body cor- 
porate and politic, having the powers and jurisdiction as 
are conferred upon it jointly by the legislative authority 
of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of 
Columbia or by either of the jurisdictions and concurred 
in by the legislative authority of the other jurisdiction, 
but at a minimum 
meeting 
the requirements 
of this 
section. 
(b) Purpose 
The Airports Authority shall be— 
(1) independent of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and its local government, the District of Co- 
lumbia, and the Federal Government; and 
(2) a political subdivision constituted solely to 
operate and improve both Metropolitan Washington 
Be e
So
pal
at 
Bakae 
oP 
aR 
hee 
Oe, 
Canes
Roe
Cok
ea
eee eee 

55a 
Airports 
as primary 
airports 
serving the Metro- 
politan Washington area. 
(c) General authorities 
The Airports Authority shall be authorized— 
(1) to acquire, maintain, improve, operate, pro- 
tect, and promote the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
e 
ports for public purposes; 
4 
(2) to issue bonds from time to time in its dis- 
P 
cretion for public purposes, including the purposes 
of paying all or any part of the cost of airport im- 
provements, construction, and rehabilitation, and the 
acquisition of real and personal property, including 
operating equipment for the airports, which bonds— 
(A) shall not constitute a debt of either ju- 
risdiction or a political subdivision thereof; and 
(B) may be secured by the Airports Author- 
ity’s revenues generally, or exclusively from the 
income and revenues of certain designated proj- 
i‘ 
ects whether or not they are financed in whole 
4 
or in part from the proceeds of such bonds; 
4 
(3) to acquire real and personal property by 
q 
purchase, lease, transfer, or exchange, and to ex- 
4 
ercise such powers of eminent domain within the 
Commonwealth of Virginia as are conferred upon 
it by the Commonwealth of Virginia; 
(4) to levy fees or other charges; and 
(5) to make and maintain agreements with em- 
ployee organizations to the extent that the Federal 
Aviation Administration is so authorized on Octo- 
ber 18, 1986. 
(d) Conflict-of-interest provisions 
The Airports Authority shall be subject to a conflict- 
of-interest provision providing that members of the board 
| 
and their immediate families may not be employed by or 

56a 
otherwise hold a substantial financial interest in any en- 
terprise that has or is seeking a contract or agreement 
with the Airports Authority or is an aeronautical, avia- 
tion services, or airport services enterprise that other- 
wise has interests that can be directly affected by the 
Airports Authority. 
Exceptions to requirements of the 
preceding sentence may be made by the official appoint- 
ing a member at the time the member is appointed, if 
the financial interest is fully disclosed and so long as 
the member does not participate in board decisions that 
directly affect 
such 
interest. 
The Airports Authority 
shall include in its code developed under section 2454(c) 
(8) of this title the standards by which members will 
determine what constitutes a substantial financial inter- 
est and the circumstances under which an exception may 
be granted. 
(e) Board of directors 
(1) Appointment 
The Airports Authority shall be governed by a 
board of directors of 11 members, as follows: 
(A) five members shall be appointed by the 
Governor of Virginia; 
(B) three members shall be appointed by the 
Mayor of the District of Columbia; 
(C) two members shall be appointed by the 
Governor of Maryland; and 
(D) one member shall be appointed by the 
President with the advice and consent of the 
Senate. 
The Chairman shall be appointed from among the 
members by majority vote of the members and shall 
serve until replaced by majority vote of the mem- 
bers. 
sh 
teint
nite 
eecaatoc
et
: ‘ 

57a 
(2) Restrictions 
Members shall (A) not hold elective or appointive 
political office, (B) serve without compensation other 
than for reasonable expenses incident to board func- 
tions, and (C) reside within the Washington Stand- 
ard Metropolitan Statistical Area, except that the 
member appointed by the President shall not be re- 
quired to reside in that area. 
(3) Terms 
Members shall be appointed to the board for a 
term of 6 years, except that of members first ap- 
pointed— 
(A) by the Governor of Virginia, 2 shall be 
appointed for 4 years and 2 shall be appointed 
for 2 years; 
(B) by the Mayor of the District of Colum- 
bia, 1 shall be appointed for 4 years and 1 shall 
be appointed for 2 years; and 
(C) by the Governor of Maryland, 1 shall 
be appointed for 4 years. 
(4) Removal of Presidential appointees 
A member of the board appointed by the Presi- 
dent shall be subject to removal by the President 
for cause. 
(5) Required number of votes 
Seven votes shall be required to approve bond is- 
sues and the annual budget. 
(f) Board of Review 
(1) Composition 
The board of directors shall be subject to review 
of its actions and to requests, in accordance with 
this subsection, by a Board of Review of the Air- 

58a 
ports Authority. 
Such Board of Review 
shall be 
established by the board of directors and shall con- 
sist of the following, in their individual capacities, 
as representatives of users of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports: 
(A) two members of the Public Works and 
Transportation Committee and two members of 
the Appropriations Committee of the House of 
Representatives from 
a list provided by the 
Speaker of the House; 
(B) two members of the Commerce, Science, 
and Transportation Committee and two mem- 
bers of the Appropriations Committee of the 
Senate from a list provided by the President 
pro tempore of the Senate; and 
(C) one member 
chosen 
alternately 
from 
members of the House of Representatives and 
members of the Senate, from a list provided by 
the Speaker of the House or the President pro 
tempore of the Senate, respectively. 
The members of the Board of Review shall elect a 
chairman. A member of the House of Representa- 
tives or the Senate from Maryland or Virginia and 
the Delegate from the District of Columbia may not 
serve on the Board of Review. 
(2) Terms 
Members of the Board of Review appointed un- 
der subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) 
shall be appointed for terms of six years, except 
that of the members first appointed, one member 
under each of subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be 
appointed for a term of two years and one member 
under each of subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be 
appointed for a term of four years. Members of the 
Board of Review appointed under subparagraph (C) 

59a 
shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
A va- 
cancy in the Board shall be filled in the same man- 
ner in which the original appointment was made. 
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy before the 
expiration of the term for which his or her predeces- 
sor was appointed shall be appointed only for the 
remainder of such term. 
(3) Procedures 
The Board of Review shall establish procedures 
for conducting its business. The procedures may in- 
clude requirements for a quorum at meetings and 
for proxy voting. 
The Board shall meet at least 
once each year and shall meet at the call of the 
chairman or 3 members of the Board. Any decision 
of the Board of Review under paragraph (4) or (5) 
shall be by a vote of 5 members of the Board. 
(4) Disapproval procedure 
(A) Submission required 
An action of the Airports Authority described 
in subparagraph (B) shall be submitted to the 
Board of Review at least 30 days (or at least 
60 days in the case of the annual budget) be- 
fore it is to be become effective. 
(B) Actions affected 
The following are the actions referred to in 
subparagraph (A): 
(i) the adoption of an annual budget; 
(ii) the authorization for the issuance 
of bonds; 
(iii) the adoption, amendment, 
or re- 
peal of a regulation; 
(iv) the adoption or revision of a mas- 
ter plan, including any proposal for land 
acquisition; and 
| 

60a 
(v) the appointment of the chief execu- 
tive officer. 
(C) 30-day disapproval period 
If the Board of Review does not disapprove 
an action within 30 days of its submission un- 
der this paragraph, the action may take effect. 
If the Board of Review disapproves any such 
action, it shall notify the Airports Authority 
and -shall give reasons for the disapproval. 
(D) Effect of disapproval 
An action disapproved under this paragraph 
shall not take effect. 
Unless an annual budget 
for a fiscal year has taken effect in accordance 
with this paragraph, 
the Airports Authority 
may not obligate or expend any money in such 
fiscal year, except for (i) debt service on pre- 
viously authorized obligations, and (ii) obliga- 
tions and expenditures for previously authorized 
capital expenditures and routine operating ex- 
penses. 
(5) Request for consideration of other matters 
The Board of Review may request the Airports 
Authority to consider and vote, or to report, on any 
matter related to the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports. Upon receipt of such a request the Airports 
Authority shall consider and vote, or report, on the 
matter as promptly as feasible. 
(6) Participation in meetings of Airports Authority 
Members of the Board of Review may participate 
as nonvoting members in meetings of the board of 
the Airports Authority. 
(7) Staff 
The Board of Review may hire two staff persons 
to be paid by the Airports Authority. The Airports 

6la 
Authority shall provide such clerical and support 
Staff as the Board may require. 
(8) Liability 
A member of the Board of Review Shall not be 
liable in connection with any claim, action, suit, or 
proceeding arising from service on the Board. 
(g) Certain actions to be taken by regulation 
Any action of the Airports Authority changing, 
or 
having the effect of changing, the hours of operation of 
or the type of aircraft serving either of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports may be taken only by regulation 
of the Airports Authority. 
(h) Limitation on authority 
If the Board of Review established under subsection 
(f) of this section is unable to carry out its functions 
under this subchapter by reason of a judicial order, the 
Airports Authority shall have no authority to perform 
any of the actions that are required by paragraph’ 
(f) 
(4) of this section to be submitted 
to the Board of 
Review. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6007, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-379; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, $ 6007, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-382.) 
§ 2457. 
Federal employes at Metropolitan Washington 
Airports 
(a) Employee protection 
Not later than the date the lease under section 2454 
of this title takes effect, the Secretary shall ensure that 
the Airports Authority has established arrangements to 
protect the employment interests of employees during 
1 So in original. 
Probably should be “subsection”. 

62a 
the 5-year period beginning on such date. These arrange- 
ments shall include provisions— 
(1) which ensure 
that the Airports Authority 
will adopt labor agreements in accordance with the 
provisions of subsection (b) of this section; 
(2) for the transfer and retention of all employ- 
ees who agree to transfer to the Airports Authority 
in their same positions for the 5-year period com- 
mencing on the date the lease under section 2454 of 
this title takes effect except in cases or reassign- 
ment, separation for cause, 
resignation, 
or retire- 
ment; 
(3) for the payment by the Airports Authority of 
basic and premium pay to transferred employees, 
except in cases of separation for cause, resignation, 
or retirement, for 5 years commencing on the date 
the lease takes effect at or above the rates of pay 
in effect for such employees on such date; 
(4) for credit during the 5-year period commenc- 
ing on the date the lease takes effect for accrued an- 
nual and sick leave and seniority rights which have 
been accrued during the period of Federal employ- 
ment by transferred employees retained by the Air- 
ports Authority; and 
(5) for an offering of not less than one life in- 
surance and three health insurance programs for 
transferred employees retained by the Airports Au- 
thority during the 5-year period beginning on the 
date the lease takes effect which 
are reasonably 
comparable with respect to employee premium cost 
and coverage to the Federal health and life insur- 
3
ance programs available to employees on the day 
.
before such date. 
.

63a 
(b) Labor agreements 
(1) Adoption 
The Airports Authority shall adopt all labor agree- 
ments which are in effect on the date the lease un- 
der section 2454 of this title takes effect. Such agree- 
ments shall continue in effect for the 5-year period 
commencing on such date, unless the agreement pro- 
vides for a shorter duration or the parties agree to 
the contrary before the expiration of that 5-year 
period. 
Such agreements shall be renegotiated dur- 
ing the 5-year period, unless the parties agree other- 
wise. 
Any labor-management 
negotiation impasse 
declared before the date the lease takes effect shall 
be settled in accordance with chapter 71 of Title 5. 
(2) Continuation 
The arrangements made pursuant to this section 
shall assure, during the 50-year lease term, the con- 
tinuation of all collective bargaining rights enjoyed 
by transferred employees retained by the Airports 
Authority. 
(c) Rights of terminated employees 
Any transferred employee whose employment with the 
Airports Authority is terminated during the 5-year pe- 
riod beginning on the date the lease under section 2454 
of this title takes effect shall be entitled, as a condition 
of any lease entered into in accordance with section 2454 
of this title, to rights and benefits to be provided by the 
Airports Authority that are similar to those such em- 
ployee would have had under Federal law if termination 
had occurred immediately before such date. 
(d) Annual and sick leave 
Any employee who transfers to the Airports Authority 
under this section shall not be entitled to lump-sum pay- 
ment for unused annual leave under section 5551 of Title 

64a 
5, but shall be credited by the Airports Authority with 
the unused annual leave balance on the date the lease 
under section 6005 takes effect, along with any unused 
Sick leave balance on such date. During the 5-year period 
beginning on such date, annual and sick leave shall be 
earned at the same rates permitted on the day before 
such date, and observed 
official holidays shall be the 
same as those specified in section 6103 of Title 5. 
(e) Civil Service retirement 
Any Federal employee who transfers to the Airports 
Authority and who on the day before the date the lease 
under section 2454 of this title takes effect is subject to 
subchapter III, of chapter 83 of Title 5 or chapter 84 
of such title shall, so long as continually employed by 
the Airports Authority without a break in service, con- 
tinue to be subject to such subchapter or chapter, as the 
case may be. 
Employment by the Airports Authority 
without a break in continuity of service shall be consid- 
ered to be employment by the United States Government 
for purposes of such subchapter and chapter. 
The Air- 
ports Authority shall be the employing agency fo pur- 
poses of such subchapter and chapter and shall contribute 
to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund 
such sums 
as 
are required by such subchapter 
and 
chapter. 
(f) Separated employees 
An employee who does not transfer to the Airports 
Authority and who does not otherwise remain a Federal 
employee shall be entitled to all of the rights and bene- 
fits available under Federal law for separated employ- 
ees, except that severance pay shall not be payable to 
an employee who does not accept an offer of employment 
from the Airports Authority of work substantially simi- 
lar to that performed for the Federal Government. 

65a 
(g) Access to records\ 
The Airports Authority shall allow representatives of 
the Secretary adequate access to employees and employee 
records of the Airports Authority when needed for the 
performance of functions related to the period before the 
date the lease under section 2454 of this title takes ef- 
fect. The Secretary shall provide the Airports Authority 
access to employee records of transferring employees for 
appropriate purposes. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6008, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-382; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6008, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-385.) 
§ 2458. 
Relationship to and effect of other laws 
(a) Other laws 
In order to assure that the Airports Authority has the 
same proprietary powers and is subject to the same re- 
strictions with respect to Federal law as any other air- 
port except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, dur- 
ing the period that the lease authorized by section 2454 
of this title is in effect— 
(1) the Metropolitan Washington Airports shall 
be considered public airports for purposes of the 
Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982 (49 
App. U.S.C. 2201 et seq.); [49 U.S.C.A. § 2201 et 
seq.]; and 
(2) the Acts entitled “An Act to provide for the 
administration of the Washington National Airport, 
and for other purposes,” approved June 29, 1940 
(54 Stat. 686), “An Act to authorize the construc- 
tion, protection, operation, and maintenance of a 
public airport in or in the vicinity of the District of 
Columbia,” approved September 7, 1950 (64 Stat. 
770), and “An Act making supplemental appropria- 
tions for the support of the Government for the fiscal 
year ending June 30, 1941, and for other purposes,” 
Sor
aeA
Pe 

66a 
approved October 9, 1940 (54 Stat. 1030), shall not 
apply to the operation of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports, and the Secretary shall be relieved 
of all responsibility under those Acts. 
(b) Inapplicability of certain laws 
The Metropolitan Washington Airports and the Air- 
ports Authority shall not be subject to the requirements 
of any law solely by reason of the retention by the United 
States of the fee simple title to such airports or by rea- 
son of the authority of the Board of Review under sub- 
section 2456(f) of this title. 
(c) Police power 
The Commonwealth of Virginia shall have concurrent 
police power authority over the Metropolitan Washing- 
ton Airports, and the courts of the Commonwealth of 
Virginia may exercise jurisdiction over Washington Na- 
tional Airport. 
(d) Planning 
(1) In general 
The authority of the National Capital Planning Com- 
mission under section 71d of Title 40 shall not apply to 
the Airports Authority. 
(2) Consultation 
The Airports Authority shall consult— 
(A) with 
the National 
Capital 
Planning 
Commission and the Advisory Council on His- 
toric Preservation before undertaking any major 
alterations to the exterior of the main terminal 
at Washington Dulles International Airport, and 
(B) with 
the National 
Capital 
Planning 
Commission 
before 
undertaking 
development 

67a 
that would alter the skyline of Washington Na- 
tional Airport when viewed from the opposing 
shoreline of the Potomac River or from the 
George Washington Parkway. 
(e) Operation limitations 
(1) High Density Rule 
The Administrator may not increase the number 
of instrument flight rule takeoffs and landings au- 
thorized for air carriers by the High Density Rule 
(14 C.F.R. 93.121 et seq.) at Washington National 
Airport on October 18, 1986 and may not decrease 
the number of such takeoffs and landings except for 
reasons of safety. 
(2) Annual passenger limitations 
The Federal Aviation Administration air traffic 
regulation 
entitled 
“Modification 
of 
Allocation: 
Washington National Airport” (14 C.F.R. 93.124) 
shall cease to be in effect on October 18, 1986. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6009, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-384; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6009, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-387.) 
§ 2459. 
Authority to negotiate extension of lease 
The Secretary and the Airports Authority may at any 
time negotiate an extension of the lease entered into 
under section 2454(a) of this title. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6010, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6010, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 
§ 2460. 
Separability 
Except as provided in section 2456(h) of this title, if 
any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof 

68a 
to any person or circumstance, 
is held invalid, the re- 
mainder of this subchapter and the application of such 
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be 
affected thereby. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6011, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6011, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 
§ 2461. 
Nonstop flights 
Perimeter rule 
An air carrier may not operate an aircraft nonstop 
in air transportation between Washington National Air- 
port and another airport that is more than 1,250 statute 
miles away from Washington National Airport. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6012, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6012, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 

6924 
f 
| 
TITLE VII—AIR TRANSPORTATION 
ie 
Sec. 7001. 
Short Title. 
This title may be cited as the “Metropolitan Washing- 
ton Airports Act Amendments of 1991”. 
Sec. 7002. 
Board of Review 
(a) CoMPosITION.—Section 6007(f) (1) of the Metro- 
Fe 
politan Washington Airports Act of 1986 
(49 U.S.C. 
App. 2456(f)(1)) is amended to read as follows: 
“(1) ComposiTION.—The board of directors shall 
be subject to review of its actions and to requests, 
in accordance with this subsection, by a Board of 
e 
Review ofgthe- Airports Authority. 
The Board of 
Review shall be established by the board of directors 
to represent the interests of users of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports and shall be composed of 9 
members appointed by the board of directors as fol- 
lows: 
“(A) 4 individuals from a list provided by 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives. 
“(B) 4 individuals from a list provided by 
the President pro tempore of the Senate. 
“(C) 1 individual chosen alternately from a 
list provided by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives and from a list provided by the 
President pro tempore of the Senate. 
In addition to the recommendations on a list pro- 
vided under this paragraph, the board of directors 
may request additional recommendations.”. 
(b) TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS.—Section 6007 (f) 
(2) of such Act is amended to read as follows: 
“(2) TERMS, VACANCIES, AND QUALIFICATIONS.— 
a 
“(A) TERMS.—Members of the Board of 
Review appointed under paragraphs 
(1)(A) 
Le 
eS 
AWNARE 
Te 
EST 
SEPP 
OF 
Sete 
Sas 
DR 
ARTS 
eee 
beet 
era Was 
2d, eee 
OY 
Xs 
REST 
le 
en 

70a 
and (1)(B) shall be appointed for terms of 6 
years. 
Members of the Board of Review ap- 
pointed under paragraph (1)(C) shall be ap- 
pointed for terms of 2 years. A member may 
serve 
after the expiration 
of that member’s 
term until a successor has taken office. 
“(B) VACANCIES.—A vacancy in the Board 
of Review shall be filled in the manner in which 
the original appointment was made. Any mem- 
ber appointed to fill a vacancy occurring be- 
fore the expiration of the term for which the 
member’s predecessor was appointed shall be 
appointed only for the remainder of such term. 
“(C) QUALIFICATIONS.—Members 
of 
the 
Board of Review shall be individuals who have 
experience in aviation matters and in addressing 
the needs of airport users and who themselves 
are frequent users of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports. 
A member of the Board of 
Review shall be a registered voter of a State 
other than Maryland, Virginia, or the District 
of Columbia. 
“(D) EFFECT OF MORE THAN 4 VACANCIES. 
—At any time that the Board of Review estab- 
lished under this subsection has more than 4 
vacancies and lists have been provided for ap- 
pointments to fill such vacancies, the Airports 
Authority shall have no authority to perform 
any of the actions that are required by para- 
graph (4) to be submitted to the Board of Re- 
view.”. 
(c) PROCEDURES.—Section 6007(f)(3) 
of such Act 
is amended by inserting “and for the selection of a Chair- 
man” after “proxy voting”. 

Tila 
(d) REVIEW PROCEDURE.— 
(1) ACTIONS SUBJECT TO REVIEW.—Section 6007 
(f) (4) (B) of such Act is amended— 
a 
(A) by inserting 
“and 
any amendments 
# 
thereto” before the semicolon at the end of 
e 
clause (i); 
(B) by inserting “and an annual plan for 
y 
issuance of bonds and any amendments to such 
t 
plan” before the semicolon at the end of clause 
(ii); 
: 
(C) in clause (iv) by striking “. including 
4 
any proposal for land acquisition; and” and in- 
‘3 
serting a semicolon; 
(D) by striking the period at the end of 
clause (v) and inserting a semicolon; and 
(E) by adding at the end the following new 
: 
clauses: 
i 
“(vi) the award of a contract 
(other 
than a contract in connection with the 
issuance or sale of bonds which is exe- 
cuted within 30 days of the date of issu- 
ance of the bonds) which has been ap- 
proved by the board of directors of the 
Airports Authority; 
“(vii) any action of the board of direct- 
ors approving a terminal design or airport 
layout or modification of such design or 
layout; and 
“(viii) the authorization for the acqui- 
sition or disposal of land and the grant of 
a long-term easement.”. 
(2) RECOMMENDATIONS.—Section 6007 (f) (4) of 
such Act is amended by striking subparagraphs (C) 
and (D) and inserting the following new subpara- 
graphs: 
; 

72a 
“(C) RECOMMENDATIONS.—The 
Board 
of 
Review may make to the board of directors 
recommendations 
regarding an 
action 
within 
either (i) 30 calendar days of its submission 
under this paragraph; or (ii) 10 calander days 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, 
and any day on which neither House of Con- 
gress is in session because of an adjournment 
sine die, a recess of more than 3 days, or an 
adjournment of more than 3 days) of its sub- 
mission under this paragraph; whichever period 
is longer. Such reccommendations may include 
a recommendation 
that the action 
not take 
effect. 
If the Board of Review does not make 
a recommendation 
in the applicable 
review 
period under this subparagraph or if at any 
time in such review period the Board of Re- 
view decides that it will not make a recom- 
mendation on an action, the action may take 
effect. 
“(D) EFFECT OF RECOMMENDATION.— 
“(i) RESPONSE.—An 
action 
with 
re- 
spect to which the Board of Review has 
made 
a recommendation 
in accordance 
with subparagraph 
(C) may only take 
effect if the board of directors adopts such 
recommendation or if the board of direc- 
tors has evaluated and responded, in writ- 
ing, to the Board of Review with respect 
to such 
recommendation 
and 
transmits 
such action, evaluation, and response to 
Congress in accordance with clause 
(ii) 
and the 60-calendar day period described 
in clause (ii) expires. 
“(ii) NONADOPTION 
OF RECOMMENDA- 
TION.—If the board of directors does not 

73a 
adopt a recommendation of the Board of 
Review regarding an action, the board of 
directors shall transmit to the Speaker of 
the House 
of Representatives 
and 
the 
President of the Senate a detailed descrip- 
tion of the action, the recommendation of 
the Board of Review regarding the action, 
and the evaluation and response of the 
board of directors to such recommenda- 
tion, and the action may not take effect 
until the expiration of 60 calendar days 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holi- 
days, and any day on which neither House 
of Congress is in session because of an 
adjournment sine die, a recess 
of more 
than 3 days, or an adjournment of more 
than 3 days) beginning on the day on 
which the board of directors makes such 
transmission to the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the President of the 
Senate. 
“(E) LIMITATION ON EXPENDITURES.—Un- 
less an annual budget for a fiscal year has 
taken effect in accordance with this paragraph, 
the Airjorts Authority may not obligate or ex- 
pend any money in such fiscal year, except for 
(i) debt service on previously authorized obli- 
gations, and (ii) obligations and expenditures 
for previously authorized capital expenditures 
and routine operating expenses.”. 
(3) CONFORMING 
AMENDMENT.—Section 
6007 
(f)(4) of such Act is further amended by striking 
“DISAPPROVAL PROCEDURE.—” and inserting “RE- 
VIEW PROCEDURE.—”. 
(€) CONGRESSIONAL DISAPPROVAL PROCEDURE.—Sec- 
tion 6007(f) of such Act is amended by redesignating 
paragraphs (5), (6), (7), and (8) as paragraphs (6), 

74a 
(7), (8), and (9), respectively, and by inserting after 
paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: 
“(5) CONGRESSIONAL DISAPPROVAL PROCEDURE.— 
“(A) IN GENERAL.—This paragraph is en- 
acted by Congress— 
“(i) as an exercise of the rulemaking 
power of the Senate and the House of Rep- 
resentatives, respectively, and as such these 
provisions are deemed a part of the rule 
of each House, respectively, but applicable 
only with respect to the procedure to be 
followed in that House in the case of reso- 
lutions described by this paragraph; and 
they supersede other rules only to the ex- 
tent that they are inconsistent therewith; 
and 
“(ii) with full recognition of the con- 
stitutional right of either House to change 
the rule (so far as relating to the proced- 
ure of that House) 
at any time, in the 
same manner and to the same extent as 
in the case of any other rule of that House. 
“(B) RESOLUTION DEFINED.—For 
the pur- 
pose of this paragraph, the term ‘resolution’ 
means only a joint resolution, relating to an 
action of the board of directors transmitted to 
Congress in accordance with paragraph 
(4) 
(D) (ii), the matter after the resolving clause 
of which is as follows: 
“That the Congress dis- 
approves of the action of the board of directors 
of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Au- 
thority described as follows: 
the blank 
space 
therein 
being appropriately 
filled. Such term does not include a resolution 
which specifies more than one action. 

75a 
“(C) REFERRAL.—A resolution with respect 
to a board of director’s action shall be referred 
to the Committee on Public Works and Trans- 
portation of the House of Representatives, or 
the Committee 
on 
Commerce, 
Science 
and 
Technology of the Senate, by the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives or the President of the 
Senate, as the case may be. 
“(D) MOoTION TO DISCHARGE.—If the com- 
mittee to which a resolution has been referred 
has not reported it at the end of 20 calendar 
days after its introduction, it is in order to move 
to discharge the committee from further consid- 
eration of that joint resolution 
or any other 
resolution with respect to the board of directors 
action which has been referred to the committee. 
“(E) RULES WITH RESPECT TO MOTION.— 
A motion to discharge may be made only by an 
individual favoring the resolution, is highly priv- 
ileged (except that it may not be made after 
the committee has reported a resolution with 
respect to the same action), and debate thereon 
shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be 
divided 
equally between 
those favoring and 
those opposing the resolution. 
An amendment 
to the motion is not in order, and it is not in 
order to move to reconsider the vote by which 
the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. Mo- 
tions to postpone shall be decided without de- 
bate. 
“(F) EFFECT OF MOTION.—If the motion to 
discharge is agreed to or disagreed to, the mo- 
tion may not be renewed, nor may another mo- 
tion to discharge the committee be made with 
respect to any other resolution with respect to 
the same acion. 
3 
Ape 
6 — 
. 
- rd 
jee 
| ¥ ave: 
we 
eee
” Ses 
it 
os 
eC 
thee 
gene 
ee 
ET
Ci 
SIRT 
Ysa
prre 
a 
ttn 
, 
LR 
och: 
ne 
3 
oO 
TSE
PS 
Cian 
et 
Bite; 
te HOS 

76a 
“(G) SENATE PROCEDURE.— 
“(i) MOTION TO PROCEED.—When the 
committee of the Senate has reported, or 
has been discharged from further consider- 
ation of, a resolution, it is at any time 
thereafter in order (even though a pre- 
vious motion to the same effect has been 
disagreed to) to move to proceed to the 
consideration of the resolution. 
The mo- 
tion is highly privileged and is not debat- 
able. An amendment to the motion is not 
in order, and it is not in order to move to 
reconsider the vote by which the motion 
is agreed to or disagreed to. 
“(ii) LIMITATION ON DEBATE.—Debate 
in the Senate on the resolution shall be 
limtied to not more than 10 hours, which 
shall be divided equally between those fav- 
oring and those opposing the resolution. 
A motion further to limit debate is not de- 
batable. 
An amendment to, or motion to 
recommit, the resolution is not in order, 
and it is not in order to move to recon- 
sider the vote by which the resolution is 
agreed to or disagreed to. 
“(iii) NO DEBATE ON CERTAIN MOTIONS. 
In the Senate, motions to postpone made 
with respect to the consideration of a res- 
olution and motions to proceed to the con- 
sideration of other business shall be de- 
cided without debate. 
“(iv) APPEALS.—Appeals from the de- 
cisions of the Chair relating to the applica- 
tion of the rules of the Senate to the proce- 
dure relating to a resolution shall be de- 
cided without debate. 

77a 
“(H) EFFECT OF ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION 
BY OTHER HOUSE.—If, before the passage by 1 
House of a joint resolution of that House, that 
House receives from the other House a joint 
resolution, then the following procedures shall 
apply: 
“(i) The joint resolution of the other 
House shall not be referred to a committee 
and may not be considered in the House 
receiving it, except in the case of final 
passage as provided in clause (ii) (I). 
“(ii) With respect to a joint resolution 
described in clause (i) of the House re- 
ceiving the joint resolution— 
“(I) the procedure in that House 
shall be the same as if no joint reso- 
lution had been received from the 
House; but 
“(II) the vote 
on 
final passage 
shall be on the joint resolution of 
the other House. 
Upon disposition of the joint resolution re- 
ceived from the other House, it shall no 
longer be in order to consider the joint 
resolution that originated in the receiving 
House.”. 
(f) CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; REMOVAL FOR CAUSE. 
—Section 6007(f) of such Act is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraphs: 
“(10) CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.—In every con- 
tract or agreement to be made or entered into, or 
accepted by or on behalf of the Airports Authority, 
there shall be inserted an express condition that no 
member of a Board of Review shall be admitted to 

78a 
any share or part of such contract or agreement, 
or to any benefit to arise thereupon. 
“(11) REMOVAL.—A member of the Board of 
Review shall be subject to removal only for cause 
by a two-thirds vote of the board of directors.”. 
(g) LIMITATION 
ON AUTHORITY.—Section 
6007(h) 
of such Act is amended by inserting “thereafter” before 
“shall have no”. 
(h) REVIEW OF CONTRACTS.—Section 6007 of such 
Act is further amended by adding at the end the follow- 
ing new subsection: 
“(i1) REVIEW 
OF 
CONTRACTING 
PROCEDURES.—The 
Comptroller General shall review contracts of the Air- 
ports Authority to determine whether such contracts were 
awarded by procedures which follow sound Government 
contracting principles and are in compliance with section 
6005(c)(4) of this title. The Comptroller General shall 
submit periodic reports of the conclusions reached as a 
result of such review to the Committee on Public Works 
and Transportation of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transporta- 
tion of the Senate.”. 
Sec. 7003. 
Amendment of Lease. 
The Secretary of Transportation may amend the lease 
entered into with the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Authority under section 6005(a) 
of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Authority Act of 1986 to secure the 
Airports Authority’s consent to the conditions relating to 
the new Board of Review to be established pursuant to 
the amendments made by this Act. 
Sec. 7004. 
Termination of Existing Board of Review 
and Establishment of New Board of Review. 
(a) TERMINATION OF EXISTING BOARD AND ESTAB- 
LISHMENT OF NEW BoaRD.—Except as provided in sub- 

79a 
section (b), the Board of Review of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Authority in existence on the day 
before the date of the enactment of this Act shall termi- 
nate on such date of enactment and the board of di- 
rectors of such Airports Authority shall establish a new 
Board of Review in accordance with the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Act of 1986, as amended by this 
Act. 
(b) PROTECTION OF CERTAIN ACTIONS.—The provi- 
sions of section 6007(h) of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Act (49 U.S.C. App. 2456(h)) in effect on the 
day before the date of the enactment of this Act shall 
apply only to those actions specified in section 6007(f) 
(4)(B) of such Act that would have been submitted to 
the Board of Review of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority on or after June 17, 1991, the date 
on which the Board of Review of the Airports Authority 
was declared unable to carry out certain of its functions 
pursuant to judicial order. Actions taken by the Airports 
Authority and submitted to the Board of Review pur- 
suant to section 6007(f)(4) of such Act prior to June 
17, 1991, and not disapproved, shall remain in effect and 
shall not be set aside solely by reason of a judicial 
order invalidating certain 
functions 
of the Board 
of 
Review. 
(c) LIMITATION 
ON AUTHORITY 
OF AIRPORTS AU- 
THORITY.—The Metropolitan Washington Airports Au- 
thority shall have no authority to perform any of the 
actions that are required by section 6007(f)(4) of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Act, as amended by 
this Act, to be submitted to the Board of Review after 
the date of the enactment of this Act until the board of 
directors of the Airports Authority establishes 
a new 
Board of Review in accordance with such Act and ap- 
points the 9 members of the Board of Review. 
S
INS
BI
NS
8 N

80a 
SUBCHAPTER III—METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 
§ 2451. 
Findings 
The Congress finds that— 
(1) the two, 
federally owned 
airports 
in the 
metropolitan area of Washington, District of Colum- 
bia, constitute an important and growing part of the 
commerce, transportation, and economic patterns of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia, the District of Co- 
lumbia, and the surrounding region; 
(2) Baltimore/Washington International Airport, 
owned and operated by the State of Maryland, is an 
air transportation facility that provides service to the 
greater Metropolitan 
Washington 
region 
together 
with the two federally owned airports, and timely 
Federal-aid grants to Baltimore/Washington 
Inter- 
national Airport will provide additional capacity to 
meet the growing air traffic needs and to compete 
with other airports on a fair basis; 
(3) the Federal Government has a continuing but 
limited interest in the operation of the two federally 
owned airports, which serve the travel and cargo 
needs of the entire Metropolitan Washington region 
as well as the District of Columbia as the national 
seat of government; 
(4) operation of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports by an independent local agency will facili- 
tate timely improvements at both airports to meet 
the growing demand of interstate air transportation 
occasioned by the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 
(Public Law 95-504; 92 Stat. 1705); 
(5) all other major air carrier airports in the 
United States are operated by public entities at the 
State, regional, or local level; 
(6) any change in status of the two airports must 
take into account the interest of nearby communities, 

8la 
the traveling public, air carriers, general aviation, 
airport employees, and other interested groups, as 
well as the interests of the Federal Government and 
State governments involved; 
(7) in recognition of a perceived limited need for 
a Federal role in the management of these airports 
and the growing local interest, the Secretary has rec- 
ommended a transfer of authority from the Federal 
to the local/State level that is consistent with the 
management 
of major airports elsewhere 
in the 
Nation; 
(8) an operating authority with representation 
from local jurisdictions, similar to authorities at all 
major airports in the United States, will improve 
communications with local officials and concerned 
residents regarding noise at the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports; 
(9) a commission of congressional, 
State, and 
local officials and aviation representatives has recom- 
mended to the Secretary that transfer of the federally 
owned airports be as a unit to an independent au- 
thority to be created by the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and the District of Columbia; and 
(10) the Federal interest in these airports can be 
provided through a lease mechanism which provides 
fer local control and operation. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6002, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-373; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6002, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-376.) 
§ 2452. 
Purpose 
(a) In general 
It is therefore declared to be the purpose of the Con- 
gress in this subchapter to authorize the transfer of oper- 
ating responsibility under long-term lease of the two 
Metropolitan Washington Airport properties as a unit, 

82a 
including access highways and other related facilities, to 
a properly constituted independent airport authority cre- 
ated by the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of 
Columbia, in order to achieve local control, management, 
operation, and development of these important transpor- 
tation assets. 
(b) Inclusion of BWI not precluded 
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to pro- 
hibit the Airports Authority and the State of Maryland 
from entering into an agreement whereby Baltimore/ 
Washington International Airport may be made part of a 
regional airports authority, subject to terms and condi- 
tions agreed to by the Airports Authority, the Secretary, 
the Commonwealth of Virginia, the District of Columbia, 
and the State of Maryland. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6003, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-374; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6003, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-377.) 
§ 2453. 
Definitions 
In this subchapter— 
(1) Administrator 
The term “Administrator’ 
means 
the Adminis- 
trator of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2) Airports Authority 
The term “Airports Authority” means the Metro- 
politan Washington 
Airports Authority, 
a public 
body created by the Commonwealth of Virginia and 
the District of Columbia consistent with the require- 
ments of section 2456 of this title. 
(3) Employees 
The term “employees” means all permanent Fed- 
eral Aviation Administration personnel employed on 

83a 
the date the lease under section 2454 of this title 
takes effect by the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports, an organization within the Federal Aviation 
Administration. 
(4) Metropolitan Washington Airports 
The term 
“Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports” 
means Washington National Airport and Washington 
Dulles International Airport. 
(5) Secretary 
The term “Secretary” means 
the Secretary 
of 
Transportation. 
(6) Washington Dulles International Airport 
The term “Washington Dulles International Air- 
port” means the airport constructed under the Act 
entitled “An Act to authorize the construction, pro- 
tection, operation, and maintenance of a public air- 
port on or in the vicinity of the District of Colum- 
bia,” approved September 7, 1950 (64 Stat. 770), 
and includes the Dulles Airport Access Highway and 
Right-of-way, including the extension between the 
Interstate Routes I-495 and I-66. 
(7) Washington National Airport 
The term “Washington National Airport” means 
the airport described in the Act entitled “An Act to 
provide for the administration of the Washington 
National Airport, and for other purposes,” approved 
June 29, 1940 (54 Stat. 686). 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6004, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-374; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6004, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-378.) 
§ 2454. 
Lease of Metropolitan Washington Airports 
(a) Authority to enter into lease 
The Secretary is authorized to enter into a lease of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports with the Airports Au- 

84a 
thority for a 50-year term and to enter into any related 
agreement necessary for the transfer of authority and 
property to the Airports Authority. 
Authority to enter 
into a lease and agreement under this section shall lapse 
two years after October 18, 1986. 
(b) Payments 
(1) Lease payments 
The lease shall provide for the Airports Authority 
to pay to the general fund of the Treasury annually 
an amount, computed using the GNP Price Deflator, 
to equal $3,000,000 in 1987 dollars. The Secretary 
and the Airports Authority may renegotiate the level 
of lease payments attributable to inflation costs every 
ten years. 
(2) Retirement obligations 
(A) Discontinued service 
Not later than one year after the lease takes 
effect, the Airports Authority shall pay to the 
Treasury of the United States, to be deposited to 
the credit of the Civil Service Retirement and 
Disability Fund, an amount determined by the 
Office of Personnel Management to represent 
the actual added costs incurred by the Fund due 
to discontinued service retirement under section 
8336(d)(1) of Title 5 of employees who elect 
not to transfer to the Airports Authority. 
(B) Unfunded liability 
Not later than one year after the lease takes 
effect, the Airports Authority shall pay to the 
Treasury of the United States, to be deposited 
to the credit of the Civil Service Retirement and 
Disability Fund, an amount determined by the 
Office of Personnel Management to represent the 
present value of the difference between (i) the 
future cost of benefits payable from the Fund 

85a 
and due the employees covered under section 
2457(e) of this title that are attributable to the 
period of employment following the date the 
lease takes effect, and 
(ii) the contributions 
made by the employees and the Airports Au- 
thority under section 2457(e) of this tile. 
In 
determining the amount due, the Office of Per- 
sonnel Management shall take into considera- 
i 
tion the actual interest such amount can be ex- 
sft 
pected to earn when invested in the Treasury of 
i 
the United States. 
(c) Minimum terms and conditions 
i 
The Airports Authority shall agree, at a minimum, to 
4 
the following conditions and requirements in the lease: 
e 
(1) Operation of airports as a unit 
4 
The Airports Authority shall operate, maintain, 
B 
protect, 
promote, 
and develop 
the Metropolitan 
4 
Washington Airports as a unity and as primary air- 
A 
ports serving the Metropolitan Washington area. 
- 
: 
(2) Airport purposes 
: 
The real property constituting the Metropolitan 
: 
Washington Airports shall, during the period of the 
lease, be used only for airport purposes. 
For the 
: 
purposes of this paragraph, the term “airport pur- 
4 
poses” means a use of property interests (other than 
: 
a sale) for aviation business or activities, or for 
activities necessary or appropriate to serve passen- 
gers or cargo in air commerce, 
or for nonprofit, 
public use facilities. If the Secretary determines that 
any portion of the real property leased to the Air- 
ports Authority pursuant to this subchapter is used 
4 
for other than airport purposes, the Secretary shall 
> 
(A) direct that appropriate measures be taken by 
Eo 
the Airports Authority to bring the use of such por- 
tion of real property in conformity with airport pur- 

86a 
poses, and (B) retake possession of such portion of 
real property if the Airports Authority fails to bring 
the use of such portion into a conforming use within 
a reasonable period of time, as determined by the 
Secretary. 
(3) AIP requirements 
The Airports Authority shall be subject to the re- 
quirements of section [49 U.S.C.A. § 2210(a)] and 
the assurances and conditions required of grant re- 
cipients under such Act [49 U.S.C.A. 
§ 2201 
et 
seq.] as of the date the lease takes effect. Notwith- 
standing 
section 
511(a)(12) 
of such 
Act 
[49 
U.S.C.A. § 2201(a)(12)], all revenues generated by 
the Metropolitan Washington Airports shall be ex- 
pended for the capital and operating costs of such 
airports. 
(4) Contracts 
In acquiring by contract supplies or services for 
an amount estimated to be in excess of $200,000, 
or awarding concession contracts, the Airports Ap- 
thority shall obtain, to the maximum extent prac- 
ticable, full and open competition through the use 
of published competitive procedures. 
By a vote of 
seven members, the Airports Authority may grant 
exceptions to the requirements of this paragraph. 
(5) Continuation of regulations 
(A) In general 
Except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
all 
regulations 
of the Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports (14 C.F.R. part 159) shall become 
regulations of the Airports Authority on the 
date the lease takes effect and shall remain in 
effect until modified or revoked by the Airports 
Authority in accordance with procedures of the 
Airports Authority. 

87a 
(B) Exceptions 
The following regulations shall cease to be in 
effect on the date the lease takes effect: 
(i) section 139.39(a) of title 14, Code 
of Federal Regulations (relating to new- 
technology aircraft); and 
(ii) section 159.191 of title 14, Code 
of Federal Regulations (relating to viola- 
tions of Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations as Federal misdemeanors). 
(C) Operations 
The Airports Authority may not increase or 
decrease the number of instrument flight rule 
takeoffs and landings authorized by the High 
Density Rule (14 C.F.R. 93.121 et seq.) at 
Washington National Airport on October 18, 
1986 and may not impose a limitation after the 
date the lease takes effect on the number of 
passengers taking off or landing at Washington 
National Airport. 
(6) Transfer of rights, liabilities, and obligations 
(A) In general 
Except as specified in subparagraph (B) of 
this paragraph, the Airports Authority shall as- 
sume all rights, liabilities, and obligations (tan- 
gible and incorporeal, present and executory) 
of the Metropolitan Washington Airports on the 
date the lease takes effect, including leases, per- 
mits, licenses, 
contracts, 
agreements, 
claims, 
tariffs, accounts receivable, accounts payable, 
and litigation relating to such rights and obliga- 
tions, regardless whether judgment has been en- 
tered, damages awarded, or appeal taken. 
Be- 
fore the date the lease takes effect, the Secre- 

88a 
tary shall also assure that the Airports Au- 
thority has agreed to cooperate in allowing rep- 
resentatives of the Attorney General and the 
Secretary adequate access to employees and rec- 
ords when needed for the performance of func- 
tions related to the period before the effective- 
ness of the lease. The Airports Authority shall 
assume responsibility for the Federal Aviation 
Administration’s Master Plans for the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports. 
(B) Exceptions 
The procedure for disputes resolution con- 
tained in any contract entered into on behalf of 
the United States before the date the lease takes 
effect shall continue to govern the performance 
of the contract unless otherwise agreed to by 
the parties to the contract. Claims for monetary 
damages founded in tort, by or against the 
United States as the owner and operator of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports, arising be- 
fore the date the lease takes effect shall be ad- 
judicated as if the lease had not been entered 
into. 
(C) Payments 
into Employees’ Compensation 
Fund 
The Federal Aviation Administration 
shall 
remain responsible for reimbursing the Employ- 
ees’ Compensation Fund, pursuant to section 
8147 of Title 5 for compensation paid or pay- 
able after the date the lease takes effect in ac- 
cordance with chapter 81 of Title 5 with regard 
to any injury, disability, or death due to events 
arising before such date, whether or not a claim 
has been filed or is final on such date. 

89a 
(D) Collective bargaining rights 
The Airports Authority shall continue all col- 
lective bargaining rights enjoyed before the date 
the lease takes effect by employees of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports. 
(7) Audits 
The Comptroller General of the United States may 
conduct periodic audits of the activites and transac- 
tions of the Airports Authority in accordance with 
generally accepted management principles, and un- 
der such rules and regulations as may be prescribed 
by the Comptroller General. 
Any such audit shall 
be conducted at such place or places as the Comp- 
troller General may deem appropriate. 
All books, 
accounts, records, reports, files, papers, and property 
of the Airports Authority shall remain in possession 
and custody of the Airports Authority. 
(8) Code of ethics 
The Airports Authority shall develop a code of 
ethics and financial disclosure in order to assure 
the integrity of all decisions made by its board 
of directors and employees. 
(9) Restriction on use of certain revenues 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
landing fee imposed for operating an aircraft or 
revenues derived from parking automobiles— 
(A) at Washington Dulles International Air- 
port may be used for maintenance or operating 
expenses (excluding debt service, depreciation, 
and amortization) at Washington National Air- 
port; or 
(B) at Washington National Airport may be 
used for maintenance or operating expenses (ex- 
cluding debt service, depreciation, and amorti- 
inh 
IE 
PS 
IAEA 
OER

90a 
zation) at Washington Dulles International Air- 
port. 
(10) General aviation fees 
The Airports Authority shall compute the fees and 
charges for landing general aviation aircraft at the 
Metropolitan Washington Aiports on the same basis 
as the landing fees for air carrier aircraft, except that 
the Airports Authority may require a minimum land- 
ing fee not in excess of the landing fee for aircraft 
weighing 12,500 pounds. 
(11) Other terms 
The Secretary shall include such other terms and 
conditions applicable to the parties to the lease as 
are consistent with and carry out the provisions of 
this subchapter. 
(d) Submission to Congress 
The Secretary shall submit the lease entered into under 
this section to Congress. The lease may not take effect 
before the passage of (1) 30 days, or (2) 10 days in 
which either House of Congress is in session, whichever 
occurs later. 
(e) Enforcement of lease provisions 
The district courts of the United States shall have 
jurisdiction to compel the Airports Authority and its offi- 
cers and employees to comply with the terms of the lease. 
An action may be brought on behalf of the United States 
by the Attorney General, or by any aggrieved party. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI § 6005, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-375; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6005, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-378.) 

9la 
§ 2455. 
Capital improvements, construction, and reha- 
bilitation 
(a) Improvements 
It is the sense of the Congress that the Airports Au- 
thority should— 
(1) pursue the improvement, 
construction, 
and 
rehabilitation of the facilities at Washington Dulles 
International Airport and Washingotn National Air- 
port simultaneously; and 
(2) to the extent practicable, cause the improve- 
ment, construction, and rehabilitation proposed by 
the Secretary to be completed at both of such Air- 
ports within 5 years after the earliest date on which 
the Airports Authority issues bonds under the au- 
thority required by section 2456 of this title for any 
such improvement, construction, or rehabilitation. 
(b) Secretary’s assistance 
The Secretary shall assist the three airports serving the 
Washington, 
D.C. 
metropolitan 
area 
in planning 
for 
operational and capital improvements at those airports 
and shall accelerate consideration of applications for Fed- 
eral financial assistance by whichever of the three airports 
is most in need of increasing airside capacity. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6006, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-378; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6006, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-381.) 
§ 2456. 
Ajrports Authority 
(a) Powers conferred by Virginia and the District of 
Columbia 
The Airports Authority shall be a public body corpo- 
rate and politic, having the powers and jurisdiction as 
are conferred upon it jointly by the legislative authority 
of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of 
nabs 
saa 
iae 

oe 
—— 
Site 
ne 
ee 
ee 
ee 
92a 
Columbia or by either of the jurisdictions and concurred 
in by the legislative authority of the other jurisdiction, 
but at a minimum meeting the requirements of this sec- 
tion. 
(b) Purpose 
The Airports Authority shall be— 
(1) independent of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and its local governments, the District of Co- 
lumbia, and the Federal Government; and 
(2) a political subdivision constituted solely to 
operate and improve both Metropolitan Washington 
Airports as primary airports serving the Metropolitan 
Washington area. 
(c) General authorities 
The Airports Authority shall be authorized— 
(1) to acquire, maintain, improve, operate, pro- 
tect, and promote the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports for public purposes; 
(2) to issue bonds from time to time in its dis- 
cretion for public purposes, including the purposes 
of paying all or any part of the cost of airport im- 
provements, construction, and rehabilitation, and the 
acquisition of real and personal property, including 
operating equipment for the airports, which bonds— 
(A) shall not constitute a debt of either 
jurisdiction or a political subdivision thereof; 
and 
(B) may be secured by the Airports Author- 
ity’s revenues generally, or exclusively from the 
income and revenues of certain designated proj- 
ects whether or not they are financed in whole 
or part from the proceeds of such bonds; 

x. 
Ss) 
7 
93a 
(3) to acquire real and personal property by pur- 
chase, lease, transfer, or exchange, and to exercise 
such powers of eminent domain within the Common- 
wealth of Virginia as are conferred upon it by the 
Commonwealth of Virginia; 
(4) to levy fees or other charges; and 
(5) to make and maintain agreements with em- 
ployee organizations to the extent that the Federal 
Aviation Administration is so authorized on October 
18, 1986. 
(d) Conflict-of-interest provisions 
The Airports Authority shall be subject to a conflict-of- 
interest provision providing that members of the board 
and their immediate families may not be employed by or 
otherwise hold a substantial financial interest in any en- 
terprise that has or is seeking a contract or agreement 
with the Airports Authority or is an aeronautical, avia- 
tion services, or airport services enterprise that otherwise 
has interests that can be directly affected by the Airports 
Authority. 
Exceptions to requirements of the preceding 
sentence may be made by the official appointing a mem- 
ber at the time the member is appointed, if the financial 
interest is fully disclosed and so long as the member does 
not participate in board decisions that directly affect such 
interest. The Airports Authority shall include in its code 
developed under section 2454(c)(8) 
of this title the 
standards by which members will determine what consti- 
tutes 
a substantial 
financial 
interest and the circum- 
stances under which an exception may be granted. 
(e) Board of directors 
(1) Appointment 
The Airports Authority shall be governed by a 
board of directors of 11 members, as follows: 

94a 
(A) five members shall be appointed by the 
Governor of Virginia; 
(B) three members shall be appointed by 
the Mayor of the District of Columbia; 
(C) two members shall be appointed by the 
Governer of Maryland; and 
(D) one member shall be appointed by the 
President with the advice and consent of the 
Senate. 
The Chairman shall be appointed from among the 
members by majority vote of the members and shall 
serve until replaced by majority vote of the members. 
(2) Restrictions 
Members shall (A) not hold elective or appoint- 
ive political office, (B) serve without compensation 
other than for reasonable expenses incident to board 
functions, and (C) reside within the Washington 
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, except that 
the member appointed by the President shall not be 
required to reside in that area. 
(3) Terms 
Members shall be appointed to the board for a 
term of 6 years, 
except 
that of members 
first 
appointed— 
(A) by the Governor of Virginia, 2 shall be 
appointed for 4 years and 2 shall be appointed 
for 2 years; 
(B) by the Mayor of the District of Colum- 
bia, 1 shall be appointed for 4 years and 1 shall 
be appointed for 2 years; and 
(C) by the Governor of Maryland, 1 shall 
be appointed for 4 years. 

95a 
(4) Removal of Presidential appointees 
A member of the board appointed by the Presi- 
dent shall be subject to removal by the President for 
cause. 
(5) Required number of votes 
Seven votes shall be required to approve bond 
issues and the annual budget. 
(f) Board 
of Review 
(1) Composition 
The board of directors shall be subject to review 
of its actions and to requests, in accordance with 
this subsection, by a Board of Review of the Air- 
ports Authority. The Board of Review shall be es- 
tablished by the board of directors to represent the 
interests of users of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports and shall be composed of 9 members ap- 
pointed by the board of directors as follows: 
(A) 4 individuals from a list provided by 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives. 
(B) 4 individuals from a list provided by 
the President pro tempore of the Senate. 
(C) 1 individual chosen alternately from a 
list provided by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives and from a list provided by the 
President pro tempore of the Senate. 
In addition to the recommendations 
on a list pro- 
vided under this paragraph, the board of directors 
may request additional recommendations. 
(2) Terms, vacancies, 
and qualifications 
(A) Terms 
Members of the Board of Review appointed 
under paragraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B) shall be 

96a 
appointed for terms of 6 years. 
Members of 
the Board of Review appointed under paragraph 
(1)(C) shall be appointed for terms of 2 years. 
A member may serve after the expiration of 
that member’s term until a successor has taken 
office. 
(B) Vacancies 
A vacancy in the Board of Review shall be 
filled in the manner in which the original ap- 
pointment was made. 
Any member appointed 
to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration 
of the term for which the member’s predecessor 
was appointed shall be appointed only for the 
remainder of such term. 
(C) Qualifications 
Members of the Board of Review shall be 
individuals who have experience in aviation 
matters and in addressing the needs of airport 
users and who themselves are frequent users of 
the Metropolitan Washington Airports. A mem- 
ber of the Board of Review shall be a registered 
voter of a State other than Maryland, Virginia, 
or the District of Columbia. 
(D) Effect of more than 4 vacancies 
At any time that the Board of Review estab- 
lished under this subsection has more than 4 
vacancies and lists have been provided for ap- 
pointments to fill such vacancies, the Airports 
Authority shall have no authority to perform 
any of the actions that are required by para- 
graph (4) to be submitted to the Board of 
Review. 

97a 
(3) 
. Procedures 
The Board of Review shall establish procedures 
for conducting its business. The procedures may in- 
clude requirements for a quorum at meetings and 
for proxy voting and for the selection of a Chairman. 
The Board shall meet at least once each year and 
shall meet at the call of the chairman or 3 members 
of the Board. Any decision of the Board of Review 
under paragraph (4) or (5) shall be by a vote of 
5 members of the Board. 
(4) Review procedure 
(A) Submission required 
An action of the Airports Authority de- 
scribed in subparagraph (B) shall be submitted 
to the Board of Review at least 30 days (or at 
least 60 days in the case of the annual budget) 
before it is to become effective. 
(B) Actions affected 
The following are the actions referred to in 
subparagraph (A): 
(i) the adoption of an annual budget 
and any amendments thereto; 
(ii) the authorization for the issuance 
of bonds and an annual plan for issuance 
of bonds and any amendments 
to such 
pian; 
(iii) the adoption, amendment, or re- 
peal of a regulation; 
(iv) the adoption or revision of a mas- 
ter plan; 
(v) the appointment of the chief execu- 
tive officer; 

98a 
(vi) the award 
of a contract 
(other 
than a contract in connection with the issu- 
ance or sale of bonds which is executed 
within 30 days of the date of issuance of 
the bonds) which has been approved by 
the board of directors of the Airports Au- 
thority; 
(vii) any action of the board of direc- 
tors approving a terminal design or air- 
port layout or modification of such design 
or layout; and 
(viii) the authorization for the acqui- 
sition or disposal of land and the grant of 
a long-term easement. 
(C) Recommendations 
The Board of Review may make to the board 
of directors recommendations regarding an ac- 
tion within either (i) 30 calendar days of its 
submission under this paragraph; or (ii) 10 
calendar days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, 
and holidays, and any day on which neither 
House of Congress is in session because of an 
adjournment sine die, a recess of more than 3 
days, or an adjournment of more than 3 days) 
of its submission under this paragraph; which- 
ever period is longer. 
Such recommendations 
may include a recommendation that the action 
not take effect. 
If the Board of Review does 
not make a recommendation in the applicable 
review period under this subparagraph or if at 
any time in such review period the Board of 
Review decides that it will not make a recom- 
mendation on an action, the action may take 
effect. 

99a 
(D) Effect of recommendation 
(i) Response 
An action with respect to which the 
Board of Review has made a recommenda- 
tion in accordance with subparagraph (C) 
may only take effect if the board of direc- 
tors adopts such recommendation or if the 
board of directors has evaluated and re- 
sponded, in writing, to the Board of Re- 
f 
view with respect to such recommendation 
q 
and transmits such action, evaluation, and 
o 
response to Congress in accordance with 
clause (ii) and the 60-calendar day period 
described in clause (ii) expires. 
(ii) 
Nonadoption of recommendation 
If the board of directors does not adopt 
a recommendation of the Board of Review 
regarding an action, the board of directors 
q 
shall transmit to the Speaker of the House 
a 
of Representatives and the President of the 
F 
Senate a detailed description of the action, 
the recommendation of the Board of Re- 
view regarding the action, and the evalua- 
tion and response of the board of directors 
to such recommendation, and the action 
may not take effect until the expiration of 
60 calendar days (excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays, and holidays, and any day on 
which neither House of Congress is in ses- 
sion because of an adjournment sine die, 
a recess of more than 3 days, or an ad- 
journment of more than 3 days) begin- 
3 
ning on the day on which the board of di- 
e 
rectors makes such transmission 
to the 
3 
Speaker of the House of Representatives 
and the President of the Senate. 

100a 
(E) Limitation on expenditures 
Unless an annual budget for a fiscal year 
has taken effect in accordance with this para- 
graph, the Airports Authority may not obligate 
or expend any money in such fiscal year, ex- 
cept for (i) debt service on previously author- 
ized obligations, and (ii) obligations and ex- 
penditures for previously authorized capital ex- 
penditures and routine operating expenses. 
(5) Congressional disapproval procedure 
(A) In general 
This paragraph is enacted by Congress— 
(i) as an exercise of the rulemaking 
power of the Senate and the House of Rep- 
resentatives, respectively, and as such these 
provisions are deemed a part of the rule 
of each House, respectively, but applicable 
only with respect to the procedure to be 
followed in that House in the case of reso- 
lutions described by this paragraph; and 
they supersede other rules only to the ex- 
tent that they are inconsistent therewith; 
and 
(ii) with full recognition of the consti- 
tutional right of either House to change 
the rule (so far as relating to the proced- 
ure of that House) at any time, in the 
same manner and to the same extent as 
in the case of any other rule of that House. 
(B) Resolution defined 
For the purpose of this paragraph, the term 
“resolution” means only a joint resolution, re- 
lating to an action of the board of directors 
transmitted 
to Congress 
in accordance 
with 

101a 
_ paragraph (4)(D) (ii), the matter after the re- 
solving clause of which is as follows: 
“That 
the Congress disapproves of the action of the 
board of directors of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports Authority described as follows: 
———”, the blank space therein being appropri- 
ately filled. Such term does not include a reso- 
lution which specifies more than one action. 
(C) Referral 
A resolution with respect to a board of di- 
rector’s action shall be referred to the Com- 
mittee on Publics Works and Transportation of 
the House of Representatives, or the Committee 
on Commerce, Science and Technology of the 
Senate, by the Speaker of the House of Rep- 
resentatives or the President of the Senate, as 
the case may be. 
(D) Motion 
to discharge 
If the committee to which a resolution has 
been referred has not reported it at the end of 
20 calendar days after its introduction, it is in 
order to move to discharge the committee from 
further consideration of that joint resolution or 
any other resolution with respect to the board 
of directors action which has been referred to 
the committee. 
(E) Rules with respect to motion 
A motion to discharge may be made only by 
an individual favoring the resolution, is highly 
privileged (except that it may not be made after 
the committee has reported a resolution with 
respect to the same action), and debate thereon 
shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be 
divided equally between those favoring and 
those opposing the resolution. An amendment 

102a 
to the motion is not in order, and it is not in 
order to move to reconsider the vote by which 
the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. Mo- 
tions to postpone shall be decided without de- 
bate. 
(F) Effect of motion 
If the motion to discharge is agreed to or 
disagreed to, the motion may not be renewed, 
nor may another motion to discharge the com- 
mittee be made with respect to any other reso- 
lution with respect to the same action. 
(G) Senate procedure 
(i) Motion to proceed 
When the committee of the Senate has 
reported, or has been discharged from fur- 
ther consideration of, a resolution, it is 
at any time thereafter 
in order 
(even 
though a previous motion 
to the same 
effect has been disagreed to) to move to 
proceed to the consideration of the resolu- 
tion. The motion is highly privileged and 
is not debatable. 
An amendment to the 
motion is not in order, and it is not in 
order to move to reconsider the vote by 
which the motion is agreed to or disagreed 
to. 
(ii) Limitation on debate 
Debate in the Senate on the resolution 
shall be limited 
to not more 
than 
10 
hours, which shall be divided equally be- 
tween those favoring and those opposing 
the resolution. A motion further to limit 
debate is not debatable. 
An amendment 
to, or motion to recommit, the resolution 
is not in order, and it is not in order to 

103a 
move to reconsider the vote by which the 
‘ 
resolution is agreed to or disagreed to. 
4 
(iii) No debate on certain motions 
In the Senate, motions to postpone made 
with respect to the consideration of a reso- 
lution and motions to proceed to the con- 
sideration of other business shall be de- 
cided without debate. 
(iv) Appeals 
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair 
relating to the application of the rules of 
1 
the Senate to the procedure relating to a 
4 
resolution shall be decided without debate. 
(H) Effect of adoption of resolution by other 
house 
If, before the passage by 1 House of a joint 
resolution of that House, that House receives 
from the other House a joint resolution, then 
; 
the following procedures shall apply: 
(i) The joint resolution of the other 
1 
House shall not be referred to a committee 
q 
and may not be considered in the House 
4 
receiving it, except in the case of final pas- 
sage as provided in clause (ii) (I). 
(ii) With respect to a joint resolution 
described in clause (i) of the House re- 
ceiving the joint resolution— 
(I) the procedure in that House 
shall be the same as if no joint resolu- 
tion had been received from the other 
House; but 
(II) the vote on final passage shall 
be on the joint resolution of the other 
House. 

104a 
Upon disposition of the joint resolution 
re- 
ceived from the other House, it shall no longer 
be in order to consider the joint resolution that 
originated in the receiving House. 
(6) Request for consideration of other matters 
The Board of Review may request the Airports 
Authority to consider and vote, or to report, on any 
matter related to the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports. Upon receipt of such a request the Airports 
Authority shall consider and vote, or report, on the 
matter as promptly as feasible. 
(7) Participation in meetings of Airports Authority 
Members of the Board of Review may participate 
as nonvoting members in meetings of the board of 
the Airports Authority. 
(8) Staff 
The Board of Review may hire two staff persons 
to be paid by the Airports Authority. The Airports 
Authority shall provide such clerical and support 
staff as the Board may require. 
(9) Liability 
A member of the Board of Review shall not be 
liable in connection with any claim, action, suit, or 
proceeding arising from service on the Board. 
(10) Conflicts of interest 
. 
In every contract or agreement to be made or en- 
tered into, or accepted by or on behalf of the Air- 
ports Authority, there shall be inserted an express 
condition that no member of a Board of Review 
shall be admitted to any share or part of such con- 
tract or agreement, or to any benefit to arise there- 
upon. 

105a 
(11) Removal 
A member of the Board of Review shall be sub- 
ject to removal only for cause by a two-thirds vote 
of the board of directors. 
(g) Certain actions to be taken by regulation 
Any action of the Airports Authority changing, or 
having the effect of changing, the hours of operation of 
or the type of aircraft serving either of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports may be taken only by regulation of 
the Airports Authority. 
(h) Limitation on authority 
If the Board of Review established under subsection 
(f) of this section is unable to carry out its functions 
under this subchapter by reason of a judicial order, the 
Arports Authority thereafter shall have no authority to 
perform any of the actions that are required by para- 
graph’ (f)(4) of this section to be submitted to the 
Board of Review. 
(i) Review of contracting procedures 
The Comptroller General shall review contracts of the 
Airports Authority to determine whether such contracts 
were awarded by procedures which follow sound Govern- 
ment contracting principles and are in compliance with 
section 2454(c)(4) of this title. The Comptroller Gen- 
eral shall submit periodic reports of the conclusions 
reached as a result of such review to the Committee on 
Public Works and Transportation of the House of Rep- 
resentatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, 
and Transportation of the Senate. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6007, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-379; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6007, Oct. 
30, 1986, 100 Stat. 3341-382; Pub.L. 
102-240, Title 
VII, § 7002, Dec. 18, 1991, 105 Stat. 2197.) 
1 So in original. Probably should be “subsection”. 
PLA
VL
“at
Se 
partha
We 
he 
DEAE 
2. aS 
CREP
MT 
OER 
yt 
oo 
Sh 
es 
ests 
sgh 
Dae 
Miie! 

106a 
§ 2457. 
Federal employees at Metropolitan Washington 
Airports 
(a) Employee protection 
Not later than the date the lease under section 2454 
of this title takes effect, the Secretary shall ensure that 
the Airports Authority has established arrangements to 
protect the employment interests of employees during the 
5-year period beginning on such date. 
These arrange- 
ments shall include provisions— 
(1) which ensure that the Airports Authority will 
adop. labor agreements in accordance with the pro- 
visions of subsection (b) of this section; 
(2) for the transfer and retention of all employ- 
ees who agree to transfer to the Airports Authority 
in their same positions for the 5-year period com- 
mencing on the date the lease under section 2454 
of this title takes effect except in cases of reassign- 
ment, separation for cause, 
resignation, 
or retire- 
ment; 
(3) for the payment by the Airports Authority of 
basic and premium pay to transferred employees, ex- 
cept in cases of separation for cause, resignation, or 
retirement, for 5 years commencing on the date the 
lease takes effect at or above the rates of pay in ef- 
fect for such employees on such date; 
(4) for credit during the 5-year period commenc- 
ing on the date the lease takes effect for accrued 
annual and sick leave and seniority rights which 
have been accrued during the period of Federal em- 
ployment by transferred employees retained by the 
Airports Authority; and 
(5) for an offering of not less than one life in- 
surance and three health insurance programs for 
transferred employees retained by the Airports Au- 
thority during the 5-year period beginning on the date 

107a 
the lease takes effect which are reasonably compar- 
able with respect to employee premium cost and cov- 
erage to the Federal health and life insurance pro- 
grams available to employees on the day before such 
date. 
(b) Labor agreements 
(1) Adoption 
The Airports Authority shall adopt all labor agree- 
ments which are in effect on the date the lease under 
section 2454 of this title takes effect. 
Such agree- 
ments shall continue in effect for the 5-year period 
commencing on such date, unless the agreement pro- 
vides for a shorter duration or the parties agree to 
the contrary before the expiration of that 5-year 
period. Such agreements shall be renegotiated dur- 
ing the 5-year period, unless the parties agree other- 
wise. 
Any labor-management negotiation impasse 
declared before the date the lease takes effect shall 
be settled in accordance with chapter 71 of Title 5. 
(2) Continuation 
The arrangements made pursuant to this section 
shall assure, during the 50-year lease term, the con- 
tinuatior of all collective bargaining rights enjoyed 
by transferred employees retained by the Airports 
Authority. 
(c) Rights of terminated employees 
Any transferred employee whose employment with the 
Airports Authority is terminated during the 5-year period 
beginning on the date the lease under section 2454 of this 
title takes effect shall be entitled, as a condition of any 
lease entered into in accordance with section 2454 of this 
title, to rights and benefits to be provided by the Airports 
Authority that are similar to those such employees would 
have had under Federal law if termination had occurred 
immediately before such date. 

108a 
(d) Annual and sick leave 
Any employee who transfers to the Airports Authority 
under this section shall not be entitled to lump-sum pay- 
ment for unused annual leave under section 5551 of Title 
5, but shall be credited by the Airports Authority with the 
unused annual leave balance on the date the lease under 
section 6005 takes effect, along with any unused sick 
leave balance on such date. During the 5-year period be- 
ginning on such date, annual and sick leave shall be 
earned at the same rates permitted on the day before such 
date, and observed official holidays shall be the same as 
those specified in section 6103 of Title 5. 
(e) Civil Service retirement 
Any Federal employee who transfers to the Airports 
Authority and who on the day before the date the lease 
under section 2454 of this title takes effect is subject to 
subchapter III of chapter 83 of Title 5 or chapter 84 of 
such title shall, so long as continually employed by the 
Airports Authority without a break in service, continue to 
be subject to such subchapter or chapter, as the case may 
be. Employment by the Airports Authority without a 
break in continuity of service shall be considered to be 
employment by the United States Government for pur- 
poses of such subchapter and chapter. The Airports Au- 
thority shall be the employing agency for purposes of such 
subchapter and chapter and shall contribute to the Civil 
Service Retirement and Disability Fund such sums as are 
required by such subchapter and chapter. 
(f) Separated employees 
An employee who does not transfer to the Airports 
Authority and who does not otherwise remain a Federal 
employee shall be entitled to all of the rights and benefits 
available under Federal law for separated employees, ex- 
cept that severance pay shall not be payable to an em- 
ployee who does not accept an offer of employment from 
the Airports Authority of work substantially similar to 
that performed for the Federal Government. 

109a 
(g) Access to records 
The Airports Authority shall allow representatives of 
the Secretary adequate access to employees and employee 
records of the Airports Authority when needed for the 
performance of functions related to the period before the 
date the lease under section 2454 of this title takes effect. 
The Secretary shall provide the Airports Authority access 
to employee records of transferring employees for appro- 
priate purposes. 
. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6008, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-382; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6008, Oct. 
30, 1986, 100 Stat. 3341-385.) 
§ 2458. Relationship 
to and effect of other laws 
(a) Other laws 
In order to assure that the Airports Authority has the 
same proprietary powers and is subject to the same restric- 
tions with respect to Federal law as any other airport 
except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, during 
the period that the lease authorized by section 2454 of 
this title is in effect— 
(1) the Metropolitan Washington Airports shall 
be considered public airports for purposes of the 
Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982 (49 
App. U.S.C. 2201 et seq.); [49 U.S.C.A. § 2201 et 
seq.]; and 
(2) the Acts entitled “An Act to provide for the 
administration of the Washington National Airport, 
and for other purposes”, ayproved June 29, 1940 
(54 Stat. 686), “An Act to authorize the construc- 
tion, protection, operation, and maintenance of 4 
public airport in or in the vicinity of the District of 
Columbia”, approved September 7, 1950 (64 Stat. 
770), and “An Act making supplemental appropria- 
tions for the support of the Government for the 
fiscal year ending June 30, 1941, and for other 
e
By 
By 

110a 
purposes”, approved October 9, 1940 (54 Stat. 
1030), shall not apply to the operation of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports, and the Secre- 
tary shall be relieved of all responsibility under those 
Acts. 
(b) Inapplicability of certain laws 
The Metropolitan Washington Airports and the Air- 
ports Authority shall not be subject to the requirements 
of any law solely by reason of the retention by the United 
States of the fee simple title to such airports or by rea- 
son of the authority of the Board of Review under sub- 
section 2456(f) of this title. 
(c) Police power 
The Comomnwealth of Virginia shall have concurrent 
police power authority over the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports, and the courts of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia may exercise jurisdiction over Washington National 
Airport. 
(d) Planning 
(1) In general 
The authority of the National Capital Planning 
Commission under section 71d of Title 40 shall not 
apply to the Airports Authority. 
(2) Consultation 
The Airports Authority shall consult— 
(A) with 
the National 
Capital 
Planning 
Commission and the Advisory Council on His- 
toric Preservation before undertaking any major 
alterations to the exterior of the main terminal 
at Washington 
Dulles 
International 
Airport, 
and 
(B) with 
the National 
Capital 
Pianning 
Commission 
before undertaking 
development 

lila 
that would alter the skyline of Washington Na- 
tional Airport when viewed from the opposing 
shoreline of the Potomac River or from the 
George Washington Parkway. 
(e) Operation limitations 
(1) High Density Rule 
The Administrator may not increase the number 
of instrument flight rule takeoffs and landings author- 
ized for air carriers by the High Density Rule (14 
C.F.R. 93.121 et seq.) at Washington National Air- 
port on October 18, 1986 and may not decrease the 
number of such takeoffs and landings except for rea- 
sons of safety. 
(2) Annual passenger limitations 
The Federal Aviation Administration 
air traffic 
regulation 
entitled 
“Modification 
of 
Allocation: 
Washington National Airport” (14 C.F.R. 93.124) 
shall cease to be in effect on October 18, 1986. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6009, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-384; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6009, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-387.) 
§ 2459. 
Authority to negotiate extension of lease 
The Secretary and the Airports Authority may at any 
time negotiate an extension of the lease entered into under 
section 2454(a) of this title. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Tile VI, § 6010, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 Stat. 
1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6010, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 
§ 2460. 
Separability 
Except as provided in section 2456(h) of this title, if 
any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof 
to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the re- 

112a 
mainder of this subchapter and the application of such 
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be 
affected thereby. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6011, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6011, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 
§ 2461. 
Nonstop flights 
Perimeter rule 
An air carrier may not operate an aircraft nonstop in 
air transportation between Washington National Airport 
and another airport that is more than 1,250 statute miles 
away from Washington National Airport. 
(Pub.L. 99-500, Title VI, § 6012, Oct. 18, 1986, 100 
Stat. 1783-385; Pub.L. 99-591, Title VI, § 6012, Oct. 30, 
1986, 100 Stat. 3341-388.) 

113a 
1985 SESSION 
VIRGINIA ACTS OF ASSEMBLY—CHAPTER 598 
An Act to create a regional airport authority to acquire 
Washington National Airport and Washington Dulles 
International Airport from the federal government. 
[S 711] 
Approved Apr. 03, 1985 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
1. §1. Definitions—For the purposes of this act the 
following terms and phrases shall have the following 
meanings: 
“Authority Facilities” shall mean any or all airport 
facilities now existing or hereafter acquired or constructed 
or caused to be constructed by the Authority under this 
act, and together with any or all buildings, improve- 
ments, additions, extensions, replacements, appurtenances, 
lands, rights in land, water rights, air rights, franchises, 
machinery equipment, furnishings, landscaping, easements, 
utilities, approaches, roadways and other facilities neces- 
sary or desirable in connection therewith or incidental 
thereto, 
including the existing Dulles 
Airport Access 
Road and its right-of-way, acquired or constructed by the 
Authority; 
“Authority” shall mean the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority hereinafter created or, if the Author- 
ity shall be abolished, the board, body, or commission or 
agency succeeding to the principal functions thereof or 
upon whom the powers given by this act to the Authority 
shall be conferred by law; 
“Cost” shall mean, as applied to Authority Facilities, 
the cost of acquisiton of all lands, structures, rights-of- 
way, franchises, easements and other property rights and 
interests, the cost of lease payments, the cost of construc- 
tion, the cost of demolishing, removing or relocating any 

11l4a 
buildings or structures on lands acquired, including the 
cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings or 
structures may be moved or relocated, the cost of any 
extensions, enlargements, additions and improvements, the 
cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment, 
financing charges, interest on all bonds prior to and dur- 
ing construction and, if deemed advisable by the Author- 
ity, for a period not exceeding one year after completion 
of such construction, the cost of engineering, financial 
and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, 
estimates of cost and of revenues, other expenses neces- 
sary or incident to determining the feasibility or prac- 
ticability of constructng the Authority Facilities, admin- 
istrative expenses, provisions for working capital, reserves 
for interest and for extensions, enlargements, additions 
and improvements, the cost of bond insurance and other 
devices designed to enhance the cerditworthiness of the 
bonds, and such other expenses as may be necessary or 
incidential to the construction of the Authority Facilities, 
the financing of such construction and the placing of the 
Authority Facilities in operation. Any obligation or ex- 
penses incurred by the Commonwealth of any agency 
thereof, with the approval of the Authority, for studies, 
surveys, borings, preparation of plans and specifications 
or other work or materials in connection with the con- 
struction of the Authority Faciilties may be regarded as 
part of the cost of the Authority Facilities and may be 
reimbursed to the Commonwealth or such agency out of 
any funds available therefor or the proceeds of the reve- 
nue bonds issued for such Authority Facilities as here- 
inafter authorized. 
“Bonds” or “revenue bonds” shall mean bonds and 
notes or refunding bonds and notes or bond anticipation 
notes or other obligations of the Authority issued under 
the provisions of this act. 
§ 2. Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority cre- 
ated.—There is hereby created the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports Authority, hereafter referred to as the Au- 

115a 
thority, a public body corporate and politic and inde- 
pendent of all other bodies, having the powers and ju- 
risdiction hereinafter enumerated, 
and such other and 
additional powers as shall be conferred upon it by the 
legislative authorities of both the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and the District of Columbia. 
§ 3. Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority.— 
The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority created 
by this act is hereby authorized, when similarly author- 
ized by the District of Columbia, to acquire from the 
United States of America, by lease or otherwise, the two 
airports known 
as Washington National 
Airport and 
Washington Dulles International Airport and all related 
properties now administered by Metropolitan Washington 
Airports, an agency of the Federal Aviation Administra- 
tion of the United States Department of Transportation, 
but only with the approval of the Governor of Virginia. 
Subject to such gubernatorial approval, general consent 
is hereby given to conditions imposed by the Congress of 
the United States on such acquisitions that are not in- 
consistent with this act. 
§ 4. Membership; terms; officers—A. 
The Authority 
shall consist of eleven members: 
five appointed by the 
Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia, three ap- 
pointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia, two 
appointed by the Governor of the State of Maryland, and 
one appointed by the President of the United States. 
Members representing 
the Commonwealth 
of Virginia 
shall be subject to confirmation by the Virginia General 
Assembly. For the purposes of doing business, six mem- 
bers shall constitute a quorum. 
The failure of a single 
appointing official to appoint one or more members, as 
herein provided, shall not impair the Authority’s creation 
when the other conditions thereof have been met. 
B. Members shall (i) not hold elective or appointive 
public office, (ii) serve without compensation, and (iii) 
reside 
within 
the Washington 
Standard 
Metropolitan 

116a 
Statistical Area, except that the member appointed by 
the President of the United States shall not be required 
to reside in that area. 
The members of the Authority 
shall be entitled to reimbursement for their expenses in- 
curred in attendance upon the meetings of the Authority 
or while otherwise engaged in the discharge of their 
duties. 
C. Appointments to the Authority shall be for a period 
of six years. However, initial appointments shall be made 
as follows: 
each jurisdiction shall appoint one member 
for a full six-year term, a second member for a four-year 
term and in the case of the Commonwealh and the Dis- 
trict of Columbia, a third member for a two-year term. 
The Governor of Virginia shall make the final two Vir- 
ginia initial appointments for one two-year and one four- 
year term. 
The President shall make initial and sube- 
quent appointments for six-year terms. 
D. Seven affirmative votes shall be required to approve 
bond issues and the annual budget of the Authority. 
E. Each member may be removed or suspended from 
office only for cause, and in accordance with the laws of 
the jurisdiction from which he is appointed. 
F. The Authority shall annually elect one of its mem- 
bers as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall 
also elect annually a secretary and a treasurer, or a 
secretary-treasurer, who may or may not be members of 
the Authority, and prescribe their powers and duties. The 
Authority may also appoint from its staff an assistant 
secretary and an 
assistant 
treasurer, 
or an 
assistant 
secretary-treasurer, who shall, in addition to other duties, 
discharge such functions of the secretary and the treas- 
urer. 
G. The members of the Authority shall continue to 
serve until their successors shall be duly appointed. Any 
person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the un- 

117a 
expired term. 
Any member of the Authority shall be 
eligible for reappointment for one term. 
H. The members of the Authority shall not be person- 
ally liable for any act done or action taken in their 
capacities as members of the Authority, nor shall they be 
personally liable for any bond, note or other evidence of 
indebtedness issued by the Authority. 
§ 5. Powers and duties of the Authority—For the 
purpose of acquiring, operating, maintaining, developing, 
promoting and protecting Washington National Airport 
and Washington Dulles International 
Airport together 
as primary airports for public purposes serving the metro- 
politan Washington area, the Authority shall have all 
necessary or convenient powers including, but not limited 
to, the power: 
1. To adopt and amend by-laws for the regulation of 
its affairs and the conduct of its business; 
2. To plan, establish, operate, develop, construct, en- 
large, maintain, equip, operate and protect the airports; 
3. To adopt and amend regulations to carry out the 
powers granted by this section; 
4. To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its 
pleasure; 
5. To appoint one or more advisory committees; 
6. To issue revenue bonds of the Authority for any 
of its purposes, payable solely from the fees and revenues 
pledged for their payment, and to refund its bonds, all as 
provided in this act; 
7. To borrow money on a short-term basis and issue 
from time to time its notes therefor payable on such 
terms, conditions or provisions as it may deem advisable; 
8. To fix, revise, charge, and collect rates, fees, rentals 
and other charges for the use of the airports; 

118a 
9. To acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal 
property in the exercise of its powers and the perform- 
ance of its duties under this act; 
10. To employ, in its discretion, consulting engineers, 
attorneys, accountants, construction and financial experts, 
superintendents, managers, and such other employees and 
agents as may be necessary, and to fix their compensation 
and benefits. However, the Authority shall comply with 
any Act of Congress concerning former employees of the 
Federal Aviation Administration and Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports; 
11. To sue and be sued in its own name, plead and 
be impleaded; 
12. To construct or permit the construction of com- 
mercial and other facilities upon the airport property on 
terms established by the Authority and consistent with 
the purposes of this act; 
13. To make and enter into all contracts and agree- 
ments necessary or desirable to the performance of its 
duties, the proper operation of the airports and the fur- 
nishing of services to the travelling public and airport 
users, and such contracts shall be exclusive or limited 
when it is necessary to further the public safety, improve 
the quality of service, avoid duplication of services, or 
conserve airport property and the airport environment; 
14. To apply for, receive and accept such payments, 
appropriations, grants, gifts, loans, advances, and other 
funds, properties, and services as may be transferred or 
made available to it by the United States government or 
any other public or private entity or individual; and 
15. To do all acts and things necessary or convenient 
to carry out the powers expressly granted in this act. 
§ 6. Authority rules and regulations—The Authority 
shall have the power to adopt, amend, and repeal rules 
and regulations pertaining to the use, maintenance and 

119a 
operation of its facilities and governing the conduct of 
persons and organizations using its facilities. 
Unless the Authority shall by unanimous vote of all 
members present determine that an emergency exists, the 
Authority shall, prior to the adoption of any rule or 
regulation 
or 
alteration, 
amendment 
or 
modification 
thereof: 
a. Make such rule, regulation, alteration, amendment, 
or modification in convenient form available for public 
inspection in the office of the Authority for at least ten 
days; 
b. Publish a notice in a newspaper or newspapers 
of general circulation in the political subdivision where 
the Authority’s Facilities are located declaring the Au- 
thority’s intention to consider adopting such rule, regula- 
tion, alteration, amendment, or modification and inform- 
ing the public that the Authority will hold a public 
hearing at which any person may appear and be heard 
for or against the adoption of such rule or regulation or 
such alteration, amendment, or modification, on a day 
and at a time to be specified in the notice, after the 
expiration of at least ten days from the day of the publi- 
cation thereof; and 
c. Hold the public hearing on the day and at the time 
specified in such notice or any adjournment thereof, and 
hear persons appearing for or against such rule, regula- 
tion, alteration, amendment or modification. 
The Authority’s rules and regulations shall be avail- 
able for public inspection in the Authority’s principal 
Office. 
The Authority's rules and regulations relating to: 
a. Air operations and motor vehicle traffic, including 
but not limited to, motor vehicle speed limits and the 
location of and payment for public parking; 

120a 
b. Access to and use of Authority Facilities, including 
but not limited to solicitation, handbilling, picketing and 
the conduct of commercial activities; and 
c. 
Aircraft operation and maintenance; 
shall have the force and effect of law, as shall any other 
rule or regulation of the Authority which shall contain a 
determination by the Authority that it is necessary to 
accord the same force and effect of law in the public 
interest; provided, however, that with respect to motor 
vehicle traffic rudes and regulations, the Authority shall 
obtain the approval of the traffic engineer or comparable 
Official of the political subdivision in which such rules or 
regulations are to be enforced. The violation of any rule 
or regulation of the Authority relating to motor vehicle 
traffic shall be tried and punished in the same manner as 
if it had been committed on the public roads of the 
political subdivision in which such violation occurred; all 
other violations of the Authority’s rules and regulations 
having the force and effect of law shall be punishable as 
misdemeanors. 
§ 7. Police powers.—The Authority’s employees meet- 
ing the minimum requirements of the Criminal Justice 
Officers Training Standards Commission may be given 
special police power by any of the circuit courts of the 
political subdivisions in which the Authority’s Facilities 
are located. The authority conferred upon such special 
policemen shall be exercised only upon the Authority’s 
Facilities and shall be in all terms consistent with the 
requirements of Chapter 3 of Title 15.1 of the Code of 
Virginia. 
Such special policemen shall have all powers vested in 
police officers under Chapter 3 of Title 15.1 of the Code 
of Virginia and shall be responsible upon the Authority’s 
Facilities for enforcing the Authority’s rules and regula- 
tions and all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, 
and regulations of this Commonwealth and political sub- 
divisions, agencies, and instrumentalities thereof. 

121a 
Such special policemen may issue summons to appear, 
or arrest on view or on information without warrant as 
permitted by law, and conduct before any court of com- 
petent jurisdiction any person violating any rule or regu- 
ation. 
For the purpose of enforcing such statutes, ordinances, 
rules and regulations, the court or courts having jurisdic- 
tion for the trial of criminal offenses of the political sub- 
division wherein the offense was committed shall have 
jurisdiction to try a person charged with the violation of 
any such statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
§ 8. Operation of foreign trade zone.—The Authority 
is authorized and empowered to establish, operate and 
maintain a foreign trade zone and otherwise to expedite 
and encourage foreign commerce. 
§ 9. Acquisition 
of property; 
eminent domain.—A. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to acquire by pur- 
chase, lease or grant such additional lands, structures, 
property, rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements and 
other interests in lands as it may deem necessary or con- 
venient for construction and operation of the airports, 
upon such terms and at such prices as may be considered 
by it to be reasonable and can be agreed upon between 
it and the owner thereof. 
B. Any political subdivision of the Commonwealth, all 
or a part of which is located within sixty miles of Au- 
thority Facilities is authorized 
to provide services, 
to 
donate real or personal property and to make appropria- 
tions to the Authority for the acquisition, construction, 
maintenance, and operation of the Authority Facilities. 
Any such political subdivision is hereby authorized to 
issue its bonds in the manner provided in the Public 
Finance Act or in any applicable municipal charter for 
the purpose of providing funds to be appropriated to the 
Authority. The Authority may agree to assume, or re- 
imburse such a political subdivision for any indebtedness 

122a 
incurred by such political subdivision 
with respect to 
facilities conveyed by it to the Authority. With the con- 
sent of the governing body of the political subdivision 
any such agreement may be made subordinate to the 
Authority’s indebtedness to others. 
C. The Authority 
established 
hereunder 
is hereby 
granted full power to exercise the right of eminent do- 
main in the acquisition of any lands, easements, privileges 
or other property interests which are necessary for air- 
port and landing field purposes, including the right to 
acquire, by eminent 
domain, aviation 
easements 
over 
lands or water outside the boundaries of its airports or 
landing fields where necessary in the interests of safety 
for aircraft to provide unobstructed air space for the 
landing and taking off of aircraft utilizing its airports 
and landing fields even though such aviation easement be 
inconsistent with the continued use of such land, or in- 
consistent with the maintenance, preservation and renewal 
of any structure or any tree or other vegetation standing 
or growing on the land at the time of such acquisition. 
Proceedings for the acquisition of such lands, easements 
and privileges by condemnation may be instituted and 
conducted in the name of the Authority in accordance 
with Title 25 of the Code of Virginia. 
§ 10. Revenue bonds.—The Authority is hereby au- 
thorized to provide resolution for the issuance, at one time 
or from time to time, of revenue bonds of the Authority 
for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of 
Authority Facilities, including the refunding of federal 
appropriations 
not 
reimbursed 
to the United 
States 
Treasury by the Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports. 
The principal of and the interest on such bonds shall be 
of 

123a 
chase before maturity, at the option of the Authority, 
at such price or prices and under such terms and condi- 
tions as may be fixed by the Authority prior to the is- 
suance of the bonds. The bonds may bear interest payable 
at such time or times and at such rate or rates as deter- 
mined by the Authority or as determined in such manner 
as the Authority may provide, including the determina- 
tion by agents designated by the Authority under guide- 
lines established by it. The Authority shall determine 
the form and the manner of execution of the bonds, in- 
cluding any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and 
shall fix the denomination 
or denominations of the bonds 
and the place or places of payment of principal and in- 
terest, which may be at any bank or trust company 
within or without the Commonwealth of Virginia. In case 
any officer whose signature or a facsimile of whose signa- 
ture shall appear on any bonds or coupons shall cease to 
be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such 
signature or such facsimile shall nevertheless be valid 
and sufficient for all purposes 
the same as if he had re- 
mained in office until such delivery. Notwithstanding any 
other provision of this act or any recitals in any bonds 
issued under the provisions of this section, all such bonds 
shall be deemed to be negotiable instruments under the 
; ; 

124a 
provements, and shall be disbursed in such manner and 
under such restrictions, if any, as the Authority may pro- 
vide in the resolution authorizing the issuance of such 
bonds or in the trust agreement hereinafter mentioned 
securing the same. 
If the proceeds of the bonds of any 
issue, by error of estimates or otherwise, shall be less 
than such cost, additional bonds may in like manner be 
issued to provide the amount of such deficit, and, unless 
otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the is- 
suance of such bonds or in the trust agreement securing 
the same, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and 
shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without 
preference or priority of the bonds first issued. 
If the 
proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed such cost, 
the surplus shall be deposited to the credit of the sinking 
fund for such bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Au- 
thority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts 
or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchange- 
able for definitive bonds when such bonds shall have been 
executed and are available for delivery. The Authority 
may also provide for the replacement of any bonds which 
shall become multilated or shall be destroyed or lost. 
Bonds may be issued under the provisions of this section 
without obtaining the consent of any agency of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia, and without any other proceed- 
ings, conditions or things not specifically required by this 
section. 
§ 11. Refunding bonds.—The Authority is hereby au- 
thorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of its 
revenue refunding bonds for the purpose of refunding 
any bonds then outstanding which shall have been issued 
under the provisions of this act, including the payment 
of any redemption premium thereon and any interest ac- 
crued or to accrue to the date of redemption of such 
bonds, and if deemed advisable by the Authority, for 
either or both of the following additional purposes: 
con- 
Pr 
nage 

125a 
structing improvements, extensions or enlargement of the 
Authority Facilities in connection with which the bonds 
to be refunded shall have been issued, and paying all or 
any part of the cost of any additional Authority Facili- 
ties. The issuance of such bonds, the maturities and other 
details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the 
rights, duties and obligations of the Authority in respect 
to the same, shall be governed by the provisions of this 
act insofar as the same may be applicable. Revenue re- 
funding bonds issued under this section may be sold or 
exchanged for outstanding bonds issued under this act 
and, if sold, the proceeds thereof may be applied to the 
purchases, redemption or payment of such outstanding 
bonds. 
§ 12. Pledge of funds.—All moneys received pursuant 
to the provisions of this act, whether as proceeds from 
the sale of bonds, as revenues, or as grants, appropria- 
tions or other funds provided by federal, state or local 
governments, may be pledged to the payment of bonds 
issued by the Authority, if so pledged, shall be deemed 
to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as pro- 
vided in this act. 
§ 13. 
Marketability of bonds.—The Authority is au- 
thorized and empowered to exercise all or any part or 
combination of the powers herein granted, to make cove- 
nants other than and in addition to the covenants herein 
expressly authorized, of like, or different character; to 
make such covenants and to do any and all such acts and 
things as may be necessary or convenient or desirable in 
order to secure its bonds or, in the absolute discretion of 
the Authority, as will tend to make the bonds more market- 
able, notwithstanding that such covenants, acts or things 
may not be enumerated herein. 
§ 14. Bonds as legal investments and security for pub- 
lic deposits —Bonds issued by the Authority under the 
provisions of this act are hereby made securities in which 
all public officers and public bodies of the Commonwealth 

126a 
and its political subdivisions, 
all insurance companies, 
trust companies, banking associations, investment com- 
panies, executors, administrators, trustees and other fidu- 
Ciaries may properly and legally invest funds, including 
capital in their control or belonging to them. Such bonds 
are hereby made securities which may properly and le- 
gally be deposited with and received by any state or 
municipal officer or any agency or political subdivision 
of the Commonwealth for any purpose for which the de- 
posit of bonds or obligations is now or may hereafter 
be authorized by law. 
§ 15. Credit of Commonwealth and political subdivi- 
sions not pledged.—Revenue bonds issued under the pro- 
visions of this act shall not constitute a debt of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia or of any other political subdivi- 
sion thereof nor a pledge of the faith and credit of the 
Commonwealth or of any political subdivision thereof. 
Such bonds shall be payable solely from funds provided 
therefor from revenues. 
The issuance of revenue bonds 
under the provisions of this act shall not directly, in- 
directly, or contingently obligate the Commonwealth or 
any political subdivision thereof to the payment thereof 
or to the levy or pledge of any form of taxation what- 
ever therefor. 
All such revenue bonds shall contain a 
statement on their face substantially to this effect. 
§ 16. Trust agreement.—In the discretion of the Au- 

127a 
enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as 
may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of 
law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the 
Authority in relation to the acquisiton of property and 
the construction, improvement, maintenance, repair, op- 
eration and insurance of the airports, the rates or fees 
or other charges to be charged, and the custody, safe- 
guarding and application of all moneys. 
It shall be law- 
ful for any bank or trust company incorporated under 
the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia which may 
act as depositary of the proceeds of bonds or of revenues 
to furnish such indemnifying bonds or to pledge such 
securities as may be required by the Authority. Any such 
trust agreement may set forth the rights and remedies of 
the bondholders. 
In addition to the foregoing, any such 
trust agreement or resolution may contain such other pro- 
visions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper 
for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred 
in carrying out the provisions of such trust agreement 
or resolution may be treated as a part of the cost of the 
operation of the airports. 
§ 17. Revenues.—The Authority is hereby authorized 
to fix, revise, charge and collect fees or other charges for 
the use of the airports and to contract with any person, 
partnership, association or corporation desiring the use 
of any part thereof, including the right-of-way adjoining 
the airports for placing thereon telephone, telegraph, elec- 
tric light or power lines, and to fix the terms, conditions, 
rents and fees or other charges for such use. Such fees 
or other charges shall be so fixed and adjusted in respect 
of the aggregate of fees or other charges from the air- 
ports as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenues, 
if any, (i) to pay the cost of maintaining, repairing and 
operating 
the airports, (ii) to pay the principal 
of and 
interest on such bonds as the same shall become due and 
payable, 
and (iii) to create reserves for such purposes. 
The fees and other charges and all other revenues derived 
from the airports, except such part thereof as may be 

128a 
necessary to pay such cost of maintenance, repair and 
operation and provide such reserves as may be provided 
for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of such 
bonds or in the trust agreement securing the same, shall 
be set aside at such regular intervals as may be pro- 
vided in such resolution or such trust agreement in a 
sinking fund which is hereby pledged to, and charged 
with, the payment of the principal of and the interest on 
such bonds as the same shall become due, and the re- 
demption price or the purchase price of bonds retired by 
call or purchase as therein provided. Such pledge shall be 
valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made. 
The fees and other charges and other revenues or other 
moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the Au- 
thority shall immediately be subject to the lien of such 
pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further 
act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and 
binding as against all parties having claims of any kind 
in tort, contract or otherwise against the Authority, ir- 
respective of whether such parties have notice thereof. 
Neither the resolution nor any trust agreement by which 
a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the 
records of the Authority. 
The use and disposition of 
moneys to the credit of such sinking fund shall be sub- 
ject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the 
issuance of such bonds or of such trust agreement. 
Ex- 
cept 
as may otherwise 
be provided in such resolution or 
such trust agreement, such sinking fund shall be a fund 
for all such bonds without distinction or priority of one 
over another. 
§ 18. 
Trust funds.—All proceeds from the sale of 
bonds and revenues derived therefrom received pursuant to 
the provisions of this act shall be deemed to be trust funds 
to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
The Authority may, in the resolution authorizing the 
bonds or in the trust agreement securing such bonds, pro- 
vide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the 
bonds and the revenues of the Authority to a trustee, 

129a 
which may be any trust company or bank having the 
powers of a trust company within or without the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia, which shall act as trustee of the 
funds and hold and apply the same to the purposes of 
this act, subject to such regulations as this act and such 
resolution or trust agreement may provide. The trustee 
may invest and reinvest such funds in such securities as 
may be provided in the resolution authorizing the bonds 
or in the trust agreement securing such bonds. 
§ 19. Annual audit—The Authority shall keep suit- 
able records of all its financial transactions and shal have 
the same audited annually. Copies of such audit shall be 
furnished to the Governor of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and to the Mayor of the District of Columbia an 
shall be open to public inspection. 
§ 20. Remedies—Any holder of bonds issued under 
the provisions of this act or of any of the coupons apper- 
taining thereto, and the trustee under any trust agree- 
ment, except to the extent the rights herein given, may 
be restricted by such trust agreement, may either at law 
or in equity, by suit, action, injunction, mandamus or 
other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights 
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or 
granted by this act or under such trust agreement or the 
resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds and 
may enforce and compel the performance of all duties 
required by this act or by such agreement or resolution 
to be performed by the Authority or by any officer or 
agent thereof including the fixing, charging and collec- 
tion of fees or other charges. 
§ 21. Exemption from taxation.—The exercise of the 
powers granted by this act shall be in ail respects for the 
benefit of the inhabitants of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia, for the increase of their commerce, and for the 
promotion of their safety, health, welfare, convenience 
and prosperity, and as the operation and maintenance of 
the airports by the Authority will constitute the perform- 

130a 
ance of essential governmental functions, the Authority 
shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments 
upon the airports or any property acquired or used by 
the Authority under the provisions of this act or upon 
the income therefrom; and the bonds issued under the 
provisions. of this act, their transfer and the income there- 
from, including any profit made on the sale thereof, shall 
at all times be free and exempt from taxation by the 
Commonwealth of Virginia and by any municipality, 
county or other political subdivision thereof. 
§ 22. 
Jurisdiction of courts; liability for contracts and 
torts—A. The courts of the Commonwealth of Virginia 
shall have original jurisdiction of all actions brought by 
or against the Authority, which courts shall in all cases 
apply the law of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
B. The Authority shall be liable for its contracts and 
for its torts and those of its members, officers, employees, 
and agents committed in the conduct of any proprietary 
function, in accordance with the law of the Common- 
wealth of Virginia but shall not be liable for any torts 
occurring in the performance of a governmental func- 
tion. The exclusive remedy for such breach of contracts 
and torts for which the Authority shall be liable, as herein 
provided, shall be by suit against the Authority. Nothing 
in this act shall be construed as a waiver by the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia or the District of Columbia or of 
their political subdivisions of any immunity from suit. 
C. The Authority shall be responsible for all executory 
contracts entered into by the United States with respect 
to the former Metropolitan Washington Airports before 
the date of acquisition of those airports, except that the 
procedure for disputes resolution contained in any such 
contract shall continue to govern the performance of the 
contract unless otherwise agreed to by the parties to the 
contract. 
D. The Authority shall not be responsible for any tort 
claims arising before the date of transfer. 

131a 
§ 23. Procurement Act exemption.—In light of the 
multi-jurisdictional nature of the Authority, an exemption 
is hereby provided to the Authority from the provisions 
of the Virginia Public Procurement Act. 
§ 24. Act liberally construed.—This act, being neces- 
sary for the welfare of the Commonwealth of Virginia 
and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect 
the purposes thereof. 
§ 25. Constitutional construction.—The provisions of 
this act are severable and if any of its provisions shall 
be held unconstitutional by any court of competent juris- 
diction, the decision of such court shall not affect or im- 
pair any of the remaining provisions of this act. 
It is 
hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this act 
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional pro- 
visions not been included therein. 
§ 26. Inconsistent laws applicable-—All other general 
or special laws inconsistent with any provision of this 
act are hereby declared to be inapplicable to the provi- 
sions of this act. 
§ 27. Effective date-—This act shall only become effec- 
tive upon the enactment into law by the Congress of the 
United States of legislation that authorizes and directs 
the sale, lease, or other disposition of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports to an Airport Authority created by 
the legislatures of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the 
District of Columbia pursuant to an agreement or com- 
pact that is consistent with the provisions of this act: 
provided, however, the Governor may make appointments 
for initial Authority membership at such time or times 
following the passage of this act as he may deem appro- 
priate. 

1324 
1987 SESSION 
VIRGINIA ACTS OF ASSEMBLY—CHAPTER 665 
An Act to amend and reenact §§ 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 27 of 
Chapter 598 of the 1958 Acts of Assembly which 
created 
a regional airport authority 
to acquire 
Washington 
National 
Airport 
and 
Washington 
Dulles International Airport from the federal gov- 
ernment, 
relating 
to 
definitions; 
powers, 
duties, 
rules, regulations and police powers of the axthority; 
and the effective date of the chapter; penalty. 
[S 672] 
Approved Apr. 8, 1987 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
1. That §§ 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 27 of Chapter 598 of the 
1985 Acts of Assembly are amended and reenacted as 
follows: 
; 
§ 1. Definitions.—For the purposes of this act the fol- 
lowing terms and phrases shall have the following mean- 
ings: 
“Authority Facilities” shall mean any or all airport 
facilities now existing or hereafter 
acquired 
or con- 
structed or caused to be constructed by the Authority 
under this act, and together with any or all buildings, 
improvements, 
additions, 
extensions, 
replacements, 
ap- 
purtenances, 
lands, 
rights in land, water 
rights, 
air 
rights, 
franchises, 
machinery, 
equipment, 
furnishings, 
landscaping, easements, 
utilities, approaches, roadways 
and other facilities necessary or desirable in connection 
therewith or incidental thereto, including the existing 
Dulles Airport Access Road and its right-of-way, 
ac- 
quired or constructed by the Authority; 
“Authority” shall mean the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority [hereinafter]'*’ created by this act 
{*}] Bracketed material struck through on original. 

1334 
and by similar enactment by the District of Columbia or, 
if the Authority shall be abolished, the board, body, or 
commission ot agency succeeding to the principal func- 
tions thereof or upon whom the powers given by this act 
to the Authority shall be conferred by law; 
“Cost” shall mean, as applied to Authority Facilities, 
the cost of acquisition of all lands, structures, rights- 
of-way, franchises, easements and other property rights 
and interests, the cost of lease payments, the cost of con- 
struction, the cost of demolishing, removing or relocating 
any buildings or structures on lands acquired, including 
the cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings 
or structures may be moved or relocated, the cost of any 
extensions, enlargements, 
additions and improvements, 
the cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment, 
financing charges, interest on all bonds prior to and dur- 
ing construction and, if deemed advisable by the Au- 
thority, for a period not exceeding one year after com- 
pletion of such construction, 
the cost of engineering, 
financial and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, 
surveys, estimates of cost and of revenues, 
other ex- 
penses necessary or incident to determining the feasibil- 
ity or practicability of constructing the Authority Facili- 
ties, administrative 
expenses, 
provisions 
for working 
capital, reserves for interest and for extensions, enlarge- 
ments, additions and improvements, the cost of bond in- 
surance and other devices designed to enhance the credit- 
worthiness of the bonds, and such other expenses as may 
be necessary or incidental to the construction of the Au- 
thority Facilities, the financing of such construction and 
the placing of the Authority Facilities in operation. Any 
obligation or expenses incurred by the Commonwealth or 
any agency thereof, with the approval of the Authority, 
for studies, surveys, borings, preparation of plans and 
specifications or other work or materials in connection 
with the construction of the Authority Facilities may be 
regarded as part of the cost of the Authority Facilities 

134a 
and may be reimbursed to the Commonwealth or such 
agency out of any funds available therefor or the pro- 
ceeds of the revenue bonds issued for such Authority 
Facilities as hereinafter authorized. 
“Bonds” or “revenue bonds” 
shall mean bonds and 
notes or refunding bonds and notes or bond anticipation 
notes or other obligations of the Authority issued under 
the provisions of this act. 
§ 4. Membership; terms; officers—A. 
The Authority 
shall consist of eleven members: 
five appointed by the 
Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia, three ap- 
pointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia, two 
appointed by the Governor cf the State of Maryland, and 
one appointed by the President of the United States. 
Members 
representing 
the Commonwealth 
of Virginia 
shall be subject to confirmation by the Virginia General 
Assembly. For the purposes of doing business, six mem- 
bers shall constitute a quorum. 
The failure of a single 
appointing official to appoint one or more members, as 
herein provided, shall not impair the Authority’s creation 
when the other conditions thereof have been met. 
B. Members shall (i) not hold elective or appointive 
public office, (ii) serve without compensation, and (iii) 
reside 
within 
the Washington 
Standard 
Metropolitan 
Statistical Area, except that the member appointed by 
the President of the United States shall not be required 
to reside in that area. 
The members of the Authority 
shall be entitled to reimbursement for their expenses in- 
curred in attendance upon the meetings of the Authority 
or while otherwise engaged in the discharge of their 
duties. 
C. Appointments to the Authority shall be for a perod 
of six years. However, initial appointments shall be made 
as follows: 
each jurisdiction shall appoint one member 
for a full six-year term, a second member for a four- 
year term and in the case of the Commonwealth and the 
District of Columbia, a third member for a two-year 
, 2 ! 
. 5 oy P
Fa Bac
7 
_2 
taDe
ge
RE
Ce e
ee
ee 
SOOe
eee
eer
ee
e

% 
© 
3 
E. 
& 
¥ 
; 
d 
a: 
135a 
term. The Governor of Virginia shall make the final two 
Virginia initial appointments for one two-year and one 
four-year term. The President shall make initial and sub- 
sequent appointments for six-year terms. 
D. Seven affirmative votes shall be required to approve 
bond issues and the annual budget of the Authority. 
E. Each member may be removed or suspended from 
office only for cause, and in accordance with the laws of 
the jurisdiction from which he is appointed. 
F. The Authority shall annually elect one of its mem- 
bers as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall 
also elect annually a secretary and a treasurer, or a sec- 
retary-treasurer, who may or may not be member of the 
Authority, and prescribe their powers and duties. 
The 
Authority may also appoint from its staff an assistant 
secretary and an assistant treasurer, or an assistant sec- 
retary-treasurer, who shall, in addition 
to their duties, 
discharge such functions of the secretary and the treas- 
urer. 
G. The members of the Authority shall continue to 
serve until their successors shall be duly appointed. Any 
person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the un- 
expired term. 
Any member of the Authority shall be 
eligible for reappointment for one term. 
H. The members of the Authority, including any non- 
voting members, shall not be personally liable for any 
act done or action taken in their capacities as members 
of the Authority, or its board of review, nor shall they be 
personally liable for any bond, note or other evidence of 
indebtedness issued by the Authority. 
§ 5. Powers and duties of the Authority—A. For the 
purpose of acquiring, operating, maintaining, developing, 
promoting and protecting Washington National Airport 
and Washington Dulles International Airport together as 
primary airports for public purposes serving the metro- 

136a 
politan Washington 
area, the Authority shall have all 
necessary or convenient powers including, but not limited 
to, the power: 
1. To adopt and amend bylaws for the regulation of its 
affairs and the conduct of its business; 
2. To plan, establish, operate, develop, construct, en- 
large, maintain, equip, [operate] and protect the airports; 
3. To adopt and amend regulations to carry out the 
- 
power granted by this section; 
4. To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its 
pleasure; 
5. To appoint one or more advisory committees and to 
establish a board of review; 
6. To issue revenue bonds of the Authority for any of 
its purposes, payable solely from the fees and revenues 
pledged for their payment, and to refund its bonds, all as 
provided in this act; 
7. To borrow money on a short-term basis and issue 
from time to time its notes therefor payable on such terms, 
conditions or provisions as it may deem advisable; 
8. To fix, revise, charge, and collect rates, fees, rentals 
and other charges for the use of the airports; 
9. To acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal 
property in the exercise of its powers and the perform- 
ance of its duties under this act; 
10. To employ, in its discretion, consulting engineers, 
attorneys, accountants, construction and financial experts, 
superintendents, managers, and such other employees and 
agents as may be necessary, and to fix their compensation 
and benefits. [However, the] Employees of the Authority 
shall not participate in any strike or assert any right to 
strike against the Authority, and any employment agree- 
ment entered into by the Authority shall contain an ex- 

137a 
plicit prohibition against strikes by the employee or em- 
ployees covered by such agreement. 
The Authority shall 
comply with any Act of Congress concerning former em- 
ployees 
of the Federal 
Aviation 
Administration 
and 
Metropolitan Washington Airports; 
11. To sue and be sued in its own name, plead and be 
impleaded; 
12. To construct or permit the construction of com- 
mercial and other facilities consistent with the purposes 
of this act upon the airport property on terms established 
by the authority [and consistent with the purposes of this 
act]; 
13. To make and enter into all contracts and agree- 
ments necessary to desirable to the performance of its 
duties, the proper operation of the airports and the fur- 
nishing of services to the travelling public and airport 
users, including contracts for normal governmental serv- 
ices on a reimbursable basis with local political subdivi- 
sions where the Authority Facilities are situated and with 
the District of Columbia government; and any such con- 
tracts shall be exclusive or limited when it is necessary 
to further the public safety, improve the quality of service, 
avoid duplication of services, or conserve airport property 
and the airport environment; 
14. To apply for, receive and accept such payments, 
appropriations, grants, gifts, loans, advances, and other 
funds, properties, and services as may be transferred or 
made available to it by the United States government or 
any other public or private entity or individual; [and] 
15. To make payments to reimburse the local political 
subdivisions where the Authority Facilities are situated 
for extraordinary law enforcement costs incurred by such 
localities; and 
[15.] 
16. To do all acts and things necessary or con- 
venient to carry out the powers expressly granted in this 
act. 

138a 
B. Pursuant to Section 6007 (b) of the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Act of 1986, the Authority is estab- 
lished solely to operate and improve both metropolitan 
Washington 
airports 
as 
primary 
airports 
serving 
the 
metropolitan Washington area and shall be independent 
of the Commonwealth and its local political subdivisions, 
the District of Columbia and the federal government in 
the performance and exercise of the airport-related duties 
and powers enumerated in subdivisions 1 through 16 of 
subsection A of this section. 
Any conflict between the 
exercise of these enumerated powers by the Authority 
and the powers of any local political subdivision within 
which Authority Facilities are situated shall be resolved 
in favor of the Authority. 
§ 6. Authority rules and regulations—A. 
The Au- 
thority shall have the power to adopt, amend, and repeal 
rules and regulations pertaining to the use, maintenance 
and operation of its facilities and governing the conduct 
of persons and organizations using its facilities. 
B. Unless the Authority shall be unanimous vote of 
all members present determine that an emergency exists, 
the Authority shall, prior to the adoption of any rule 
or regulation or alteration, amendment or modification 
thereof: 
[a.] 7. Make such rule, regulation, alteration, amend- 
ment, or modification in convenient form available for 
public inspection in the office of the Authority for at 
least ten days; 
[b.] 2. Publish a notice in a newspaper or newspapers 
of general circulation in the District of Columbia and in 
the local political [subdivision] subdivisions of the Com- 
monwealth where the [Authority’s] Authority Facilities 
are located declaring the Authority’s intention to con- 
sider adopting such rule, regulation, alteration, amend- 
ment, or modification and informing the public that the 
Authority will hold a public hearing at which any person 

139a 
may appear and be heard for or against the adoption of 
such rule or regulation or such alteration, amendment, 
or modification, on a day and at a time to be specified 
in the notice, after the expiration of at least ten days 
from the day of the publication thereof; and 
[c.] 3. Hold the public hearing on the day and at the 
time specified in such notice or any adjournment thereof, 
and hear persons appearing for or against such rule, 
regulation, alteration, amendment or modification. 
C. The Authority’s rules and regulations shall be avail- 
able for public inspection in the Authority’s principal 
office. 
D. The Authority’s rules and regulations relating to: 
[a.] (i) Air operations and motor vehicle traffic, in- 
cluding but not limited to, motor vehicle speed limits 
and the location of and payment for public parking; 
[b.] (ii) Access to and use of Authority Facilities, in- 
cluding but not limited to solicitation, handbilling, pick- 
eting and the conduct of commercial activities; and 
[c.] (iii) Aircraft operation and maintenance; 
shall have the force and effect of law, as shall any other 
rule or regulation of the Authority which shall contain 
a determination by the Authority that it is necessary to 
accord the same force and effect of law in the public 
interest; provided, however, that with respect to motor 
vehicle traffic rules and regulations, the Authority shall 
obtain the approval of the traffic engineer or comparable 
official of the local political subdivision in which such 
rules or regulations are to be enforced. 
[The violation 
of any rule or regulation of the Authority relating to 
motor vehicle traffic shall be tried and punished in the 
same manner as if it had been committed on the public 
roads of the political subdivision in which such violation 
occurred; 
all other violations of the Authority’s rules 
and regulations having the force and effect of law shall 
be punishable as misdemeanors. ] 

140a 
E. The violation of any rule or regulation of the Au- 
thority establishing a noise limitation on aircraft that 
operate at the Authority Facility shall subject the vio- 
lator, in the discretion of the circuit court of any political 
subdvision where the facility is located to a civil penalty 
net to exceed $2,500 for each violation. 
Such penalty 
shall be paid to the Authority. 
With the consent of the 
violator or the accused violator of a rule establishing air- 
craft noise 
limits, 
the Authority may provide, 
in an 
order issued against the violator or accused violator, for 
the payment of civil charges in specific sums not to 
exceed the limit that could be imposed ‘by the court. Such 
civil charge when paid shall be in lieu of any civil pen- 
alty which could be imposed by the court. Any court pro- 
ceeding shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
circuit court and shall be a civil proceeding 
at law 
brought by the Authority. 
F. The violation of any Authority rule or regulation, 
having the force and effect of law, shall be a Class 1 mis- 
demeanor unless otherwise specified by this chapter or 
unless a lesser penalty is set by the Authority in the 
rule or regulation. 
The rules of criminal procedure and 
evidence that apply throughout the Commonwealth shall 
apply to the adjudication of any case involving the viola- 
tion of any Authority rule or regulation having the 
force and effect of law. 
G. The courts of this Commonwealth shall take judi- 
cial notice of the Authority’s regularly adopted rules and 
regulations. For the convenience of the courts which may 
regularly hear cases arising under the Authority’s rules 
and regulations, the Authority may certify to the clerk 
of such court a copy of its rules and regulations. 
Any 
such certification, when signed by the chairman of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, 
shall be 
accepted as evidence of the facts therein stated. 
H. With respect to the violation of any statute of the 
Commonwealth, local ordinance or Authority rules or reg- 

14la 
ulation having the force and effect of law occurring at the 
Authority Facilities: 
1. The matter shall be within the jurisdiction of the 
state courts of the political subdivision where the viola- 
tion occurred; violations occurring at Washington Na- 
tional Airport shall be within 
the jurisdiction of the 
courts for Arlington County; 
2. The attorney for the Commonwealth shall have au- 
thority to prosecute those offenses in the name of the 
Commonwealth or local government as appropriate; and 
the county or city attorney, 
if otherwise authorized to 
prosecute offenses in the name of the county or city, shall 
have authority to prosecute those offenses in the name of 
the county or city; and 
3. Sheriffs and clerks of the court shall provide those 
same services and exercise those same powers with re- 
spect to Authority Facilities within their jurisdiction as 
tor their political subdvisions. 
§ 7. Police—[The Authority’s employees meeting the 
minimum requirements of the Criminal Justice Officers 
Training Standards Commission may be given special 
police power by any of the circuit courts of the political 
subdivisions in which the Authority’s Facilities are lo- 
cated. The autherity conferred upon such special police- 
men shall be exercised only upon the Authority’s Facil- 
ities and shall be in all terms consistent with the re- 
quirements of Chapter 3 of Title 15.1 of the Code of 
Virginia.]. A. The Commonwealth hereby grants, accepts 
and agrees to concurrent police power authority over the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports as provided in Section 
6009 (c) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act 
of 1986. 
B. The Authority is authorized to establish and main- 
tain a regular police force and to confer police powers to 
be exercised with respect to offenses occurring on the 
Authority Facilities upon its employees meeting the min- 

142a 
imum requirements of the Department of Criminal Jus- 
tice Services. 
Such [special policemen] police offictrs shall have all 
powers vested in police officers under Chapter 3 of Title 
15.1, Chapter 11 of Title 16.1, Title 18.2 and Title 46.1 
of the Code of Virginia and shall be responsible upon the 
[Authority’s] Authority Facilities and within 300 yards 
of the Facilities for enforcing the laws of the Common- 
wealth, 
the Authority’s 
rules and regulations 
and 
all 
other applicable [statutes,] ordinances, rules, and regula- 
tions [of this Commonwealth and political subdivisions, 
agencies, and instrumentalities thereof]. 
Such [special policemen] police officers may issue sum- 
mons to appear, or arrest on view or on information 
without warrant as permitted by law, and conduct before 
any [court] judicial officer of competent jurisdiction any 
person violating, upon Authority Facilities, any rule or 
regulation of the Authority, any ordinance or regulation 
of any local political subdivision, or any other law of the 
Commonwealth. 
[For the purpose of enforcing such statutes, ordinances, 
rules and regulations, the court or courts having jurisdic- 
tion for the trial of criminal offenses of the political sub- 
division wherein the offense was committed shall have 
jurisdiction to try a person charged with the violation of 
any such statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. ] 
C. The Department of State Police shall exercise the 
same powers upon Authority Facilities as elsewhere in 
the Commonwealth. 
D. The Authority may enter into reciprocal or mutual 
aid agreements with the local political subdivisions in 
which the Authority Facilities are situated, any agency of 
the Commonwealth or of the federal government, or any 
combination of the foregoing, for cooperation in the fur- 
nishing of police services. 

143a 
E. The police force of Arlington County shall have 
concurrent jurisdiction with the police force established 
herein at Washington National Airport. 
The Authority 
shall enter into an agreement with Arlington County re- 
garding the exercise of police authority. 
F. The sheriffs and police forces of Loudoun and Fair- 
fax Counties shall continue to exercise concurrent juris- 
diction with the police force established herein over the 
Authority 
Facilities 
situated 
within 
their 
respective 
counties. 
§ 27. 
Effective date.—This act shall only become effec- 
tive upon the enactment into law by the Congress of the 
United States of legislation that authorizes and directs 
the sale, lease, or other disposition of the Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports 
to 
[an Airport] 
the 
Authority 
[created by the legislatures of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia and the District of Columbia pursuant to an agree- 
ment or compact that is consistent with the provisions of 
this act]; provided, however, the Governor may make 
appointments for initial Authority membership at such 
time or times following the passage of this act as he may 
deem appropriate. 
2. That an emergency exists and this act is in force 
from its passage. 

144a 
COUNCIL OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
NOTICE 
D.C. LAW 6-67 
“District of Columbia Regional Airports 
Authority Act of 1985”. 
Pursuant to Section 412 of the District of Columbia 
Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act, 
P. L. 93-198, “the Act”, the Council of the District of 
Columbia adopted Bill No. 6-200 on first and second read- 
ings, September 10, 1985, and September 24, 1985, re- 
spectively. Following the signature of the Mayor on Oc- 
tober 9, 1985, this legislation was assigned Act No. 6-90, 
published in the November 1, 1985, edition of the D.C. 
Register, (Vol. 32 page 6093) and transmitted to Con- 
gress on October 10, 1985 for a 30-day review, in accord- 
ance with Section 602 (c)(1) of the Act. 
The Council of the District of Columbia hereby gives 
notice that the 30-day Congressional Review Period has 
expired, and therefore, cites this enactment as D.C. Law 
6-67, effective December 3, 1985. 
/s/ David A. Clarke 
Davip A. CLARKE 
Chairman of the Council 
Dates Counted During the 30-day Congressional Review 
Period: 
October 
 10,11,16,17,18,21,22,23,24,25,28,29,30,31 
November 1,4,5,6,7,8,12,13,14,15,18,19,20,21,22 
December 
2 
ioe e

145a 
AN ACT 
D.C. ACT 6-90 
IN THE COUNCIL OF 
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Oct. 99, 1985 
To endorse on behalf of the District government 
the 
creation of a regional 
airport authority to acquire 
Washington National Airport and Washington Dulles 
International Airport from the federal government. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, That this act may be cited 
as the “District of Columbia Regional Airports Authority 
Act of 1985”. 
Sec. 2. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this act, the 
term: 
(1) “Authority 
facilities’ means any or 
all airport 
facilities now existing or subsequently acquired or con- 
structed or caused to be constructed by the Authority 
under this act, together with any or all buildings, im- 
provements, 
additions, 
extensions, 
replacements, 
appur- 
tenances, lands, rights in land, water rights, air rights, 
franchises, machinery, equipment, furnishings, landscap- 
ing, easements, utilities, approaches, roadways and other 
facilities necessary or desirable in connection with or in- 
cidental to the facilities, including the existing Dulles 
Airport access road and its right-of-way, acquired or con- 
structed by the Authority. 
(2) “Authority” means the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority to be created by the legislatures of 

146a 
the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of Colum- 
bia with an agreement or compact that is consistent with 
the provisions of this act, or, if the Authority to be 
created is later abolished, the board, body, or commission 
or agency succeeding to the principal functions of the 
Authority or upon whom the powers given by this act to 
the Authority shall be conferred by law. 
(3) “Cost” means, as applied to Authority facilities, 
the cost of acquisition of all lands, structures, rights of 
way, franchises, easements, and other property rights and 
interests, the cost of lease payments, the cost of con- 
struction, the cost of demolishing, removing, or relocating 
any buildings or structures on lands acquired, including 
the cost of acquiring any lands to which the buildings or 
structures may be moved or relocated, the cost of any 
extensions, 
enlargements, 
additions 
and improvements, 
the cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment, 
financing charges, 
interest on 
all bonds prior to and 
during construction and, if considered advisable by the 
Authority, for a period not exceeding ! year after com- 
pletion of construction, the cost of engineering, financial 
and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, 
estimates of cost and of revenues, other expenses neces- 
sary or incident to determining the feasibility or prac- 
ticability of constructing the Authority facilities, admin- 
istrative 
expenses, 
provisions for working 
capital, 
re- 
serves for interest and for extensions, enlargements, addi- 
tions and improvements, the cost of bond insurance and 
other devices designed to enhance the creditworthiness of 
the bonds, and other expenses necessary or incidental to 
the construction of the Authority facilities, the financing 
of this construction, and the placing of the Authority 
facilities in operation. 
Any obligation or expenses in- 
curred by the District of Columbia (“District”) or any 
agency of the District, with the approval of the Authority, 
for studies, surveys, borings, preparation of plans and 
specifications or other work or materials in connection 
with the construction of the Authority facilities may be 

147a 
regarded as part of the cost of the Authority facilities 
and may be reimbursed to the District or the agency out 
of any funds available for these purposes or the proceeds 
of the revenue bonds issued for Authority facilities as 
authorized by this act. 
(4) “Bonds” or “revenue bonds” means bonds and 
notes or refunding bonds and notes or bond anticipation 
notes or other obligations of the Authority issued under 
the provisions of this act. 
Sec. 3. Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority 
created. 
There is created the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Authority, (“Authority”), a public body corporate and 
politic and independent of all other bodies, having the 
powers and jurisdiction enumerated by this act, and other 
and additional powers 
as shall be conferred upon 
it 
jointly by the legislative authorities of the Commonwealth 
of Virginia and the District or by either of the jurisdic- 
tions and concurred in by the legislative authority of the 
other jurisdiction. 
Sec. 4. Authorization of the Authority. 
The Authority created by this act is authorized, when 
similarly authorized by the Commonwealth of Virginia, 
to acquire from the United States of America, by lease 
or otherwise, the 2 airports known as Washington Na- 
tional Airport and Washington Dulles International Air- 
port and 
all related 
properties now 
administered 
by 
Metropolitan Washington Airports, an agency of the Fed- 
eral Aviation Administration of the United States De- 
partment of Transportation, but only with the approval 
of the Mayor of the District of Columbia. Subject to this 
mayoral approval, general consent is given to conditions 
imposed by the Congress of the United States on acquisi- 
tions that are not inconsistent with this act. The Mayor 
shall procure the concurrence of the Council of the Dis- 
trict of Columbia, by resolution, prior to Mayoral ap- 

aaa 
a 
i 
aa 
148a 
proval of the terms of the compact, lease or other agree- 
ments which effectuate the acquisition. 
Sec. 5. Membership; terms; officers. 
The Authority shall consist of 11 members: 
Five ap- 
pointed by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia, 3 appointed by the Mayor of the District, 2 ap- 
pointed by the Governor of the State of Maryland, and 
1 appointed by the President of the United States. Mem- 
bers representing the District shall be subject to confir- 
mation by the Council of the District of Columbia. 
For 
the purposes of doing business, 6 members shall constitute 
a quorum. 
The failure of a single appointing official to 
appoint 1 or more members, 
as provided in this act, 
shall not impair the Authority’s creation when the other 
conditions of this creation have been met. 
(b) Members shall: 
(1) Not hold elective or appoin- 
tive public office; (2) serve without compensation; and 
(3) reside within the Washington Standard Metropolitan 
Statistical Area, except that the member appointed by the 
President of the United States shall not be required to 
reside in that area. 
The members of the Authority shall 
be entitled to reimbursement for their expenses incurred 
in attending the meetings of the Authority or while other- 
wise engaged in the discharge of their duties. 
(c) Appointments to the Authority shall be for a pe- 
riod of 6 years. 
However, initial appointment shall be 
made as follows: 
Each jurisdiction shall appoint 1 mem- 
ber for a full 6-year term, a second member for a 4-year 
term and in the case of the Commonwealth of Virginia 
and the District, a third member for a 2-year term. The 
Governor of Virginia shall make the final 2 Virginia 
initial appointments for one 2-year and one 4-year term. 
The President shall make initial and subsequent appoint- 
ments for 6-year terms. 
(d) Seven affirmative votes shall be required to ap- 
prove bond issues and the annual budget of the Authority. 

pe Seats 
Wha 
aM 
ae 
hg 
ec 
oir 
pig 
aR 
Pea 
tna 
on 
His 
: a 
149a 
(e) Each member may be removed or suspended from 
office only for cause, and in accordance with the laws of 
the jurisdiction from which the member is appointed. 
(f) The Authority shall elect annually 1 of its mem- 
bers 
as chairman 
and another 
as vice-chairman 
and 
shall also elect annually a secretary and a treasurer, or 
a secretary-treasurer, who may or may not be members 
of the Authority, and prescribe their powers and duties. 
The Authority may also appoint from its staff an assist- 
ant secretary and an assistant treasurer, or an assistant 
secretary-treasurer, who shall, in addition to other duties, 
discharge the functions of the secretary and the treasurer. 
(g) The members of the Authority shall continue to 
serve until their successors are duly appointed. Any per- 
son appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unex- 
pired term. Any member of the Authority shall be eligi- 
ble for reappointment for 1 term. 
(h) The members of the Authority shall not be per- 
sonally liable for any act done or action taken in their 
capacities as members of the Authority, nor shall they be 
personally liable for any bond, note, or other evidence of 
indebtedness issued by the Authority. 
Sec. 6. Powers and duties of the Authority. 
For the purpose of acquiring, operating, maintaining 
improving, promoting and protecting Washington 
Na- 
tional Airport and Washington Dulles International Air- 
port together as primary airports for public purposes 
serving the metropolitan Washington area, the Authority 
shall have all necessary or convenient powers including, 
but not limited to, the power: 
(1) To adopt and amend by-laws for the regulation of 
its affairs and the conduct of its business; 
(2) To plan establish, operate, develop, construct, en- 
large, maintain, equip, operate and protect the airports; 

150a 
(3) To adopt and amend regulations to carry out the 
powers granted by this section; 
(4) To adopt an official seal and alter this seal at its 
pleasure; 
(5) To appoint one or more advisory committees; 
(6) To issue revenue bonds of the Authority for any 
of its purposes, payable solely from the fees and revenues 
pledged for their payment, and to refund its bonds, all 
as provided in this act; 
(7) To borrow money on a short-term basis and issue 
from time to time its notes therefor payable on terms, 
conditions, or provisions as it may deem advisable; 
(8) To fix, revise, charge, and collect 
rates, 
fees, 
rentals and other charges for the use of the airports; 
(9) To acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal 
property in the exercise of its powers and the perform- 
ance of its duties under this act; 
(10) To employ, in its discretion, consulting engineers, 
attorneys, accountants, construction and financial experts, 
superintendents, 
managers, 
and 
other 
employees 
and 
agents as may be necessary, and to fix their compensa- 
tion and benefits. 
However, the Authority shall comply 
with any act of Congress concerning former employees of 
the Federal Aviation Administration 
and Metropolitan 
Washington Airports; 
(11) To sue and be sued in its own name, plead and 
be impleaded; 
(12) To construct or permit the construction of com- 
mercial and other facilities upon the airport property on 
terms established by the Authority and consistent with 
the purposes of this act; 
(13) To make and enter into all contracts and agree- 
ments necessary or desirable to the performance of its 
duties, the proper operation of the airports and the fur- 

151a 
nishing of services to the traveling public and airport 
users, and these contracts shall be exclusive or limited 
when it is necessary to further the public safety, improve 
the quality of service, avoid duplication of services; or 
conserve airport property and the airport environment; 
(14) To apply for, receive, and accept payments, ap- 
propriations, 
grants, 
gifts, loans, advances, 
and other 
funds, properties, and services as may be transferred or 
made available to it by the United States government or 
any other public or private entity or individual; and 
(15) To do all acts necessary or convenient to carry 
out the powers expressly granted in this act. 
Sec. 7. Authority rules and regulations. 
(a) The Authority shall have the power to adopt, 
amend, and repeal rules and regulations pertaining to the 
use, maintenance and operation of its facilities and gov- 
erning the conduct of persons and organizations using 
its facilities. 
(b) Unless the Authority shall by unanimous vote of 
all members present determine that an emergency exists, 
the Authority shall, before the adoption of any rule or 
regulation or alteration, amendment or modification; 
(1) Make the rule, regulation, alteration, amendment, 
or modification in convenient form available for public 
inspection in the office of the Authority for at least 10 
days; 
(2) Publish a notice in a newspaper or newspapers 
of general circulation in the political subdivision where 
the Authority’s facilities are located and the District de- 
claring the Authority’s intention to consider adopting the 
rule, regulation, alteration, amendment, or modification 
and informing the public that the Authority will hold a 
public hearing at which any person may appear and be 
heard for or against the adoption of the rule or regula- 
tion or the alteration, amendment, or modification, on a 

152a 
day and at a time to be specified in the notice, after the 
expiration of at least 10 days from the day of the publica- 
tion; and 
(3) Hold the public hearing on the day and at the time 
specified in the notice of any adjournment of the hearing, 
and hear persons appearing for or against the rule, regu- 
lation, alteration, amendment, or modification. 
(c) The Authority’s 
rules and regulations 
shall be 
available for public inspection in the Authority’s principal 
office. 
(d) The Authority’s rules and regulations relating to: 
(1) Air operations and motor vehicle traffic, including 
but not limited to, motor vehicle speed limits and the 
location of and payment for public parking; 
(2) Access to and use of Authority facilities, includ- 
ing but not limited to solicitation, handbilling, picketing 
and the conduct of commercial activities; and 
(3) Aircraft operation and maintenance, 
shall have 
the force and effect of law, as shall any other rule or 
regulation of the Authority that shall contain a deter- 
mination by the Authority that it is necessary to accord 
the same effect of law in the public interest; except, that, 
with respect to motor vehicle traffic rules and regulations, 
the Authority shall obtain the approval of the traffic en- 
gineer or comparable official of the political subdivision 
in which the rules or regulations are to be enforced. The 
violation of any rule or regulation of the Authority re- 
lating to motor vehicle traffic shall be tried and punished 
in the same manner as if it had been committed on the 
public roads of the political subdvisions in which, the 
violation occurred. 
All other violations of the Authority’s 
rules and regulations having the effect of law shall be 
punishable as misdemeanors. 

a 
Ee ea 
eT 
ath 
eee eo 
Coen 
ee 
Da 
Ne 
ee 
eee en 
153a 
Sec. 8. Police powers. 
(a) The Authority’s employees meeting the minimum 
requirements of the Commonwealth of Virginia’s Crimi- 
nal Justice Officer’s Training Standards Commission may 
be given special police power by any of the circuit courts 
of the political subdivisions in which the Authority's fa- 
cilities are located. 
The authority conferred upon these 
special police officcrs shall be exercised only upon the 
Authority’s facilities and shall be in all terms consistent 
with the requirements of chapter 3 of title 15.1 of the 
Code of Virginia. 
(b) These special police officers shall have all powers 
vested in police officers under chapter 3 of title 15.1 of 
the Code of Virginia and shall be responsible upon the 
Authority's facilities for enforcing the Authority’s rules 
and regulations and all other applicable statutes, ordi- 
nances, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth of 
Virginia and political subdivision, agencies, and instru- 
mentalities of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(c) These special police officers shall issue summonses 
to appear, or arrest on view or on information without 
warrant as permitted by law, and conduct before any 
court of competent jurisdiction any person violating any 
rule or regulation. 
(d) For the purpose of enforcing these statutes, ordi- 
nances, rules, and regulations, the court or courts having 
jurisdiction for the trial of criminal offenses of the po- 
litical subdivisions where the offense was committed shall 
have jurisdiction to try a person charged with the viola- 
tion of the statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
Sec. 9. Operation of foreign trade zone. 
The Authority. may establish, operate, and maintain a 
foreign trade zone and otherwise expedite and encourage 
foreign commerce. 

154a 
Sec. 10. Acquisition of property; eminent domain. 
(a) The Authority may acquire by purchase, lease, or 
grant additional lands, structures, property, rights, rights- 
of-way, franchises, easements and other interests in lands 
as it may consider necessary or convenient for construc- 
tion and operation of the airports, upon terms and at 
prices as may be considered by it to be reasonable and 
can be agreed upon between it and the owner. 
(b) The District may provide services, donate real or 
personal property, and make appropriations to the Au- 
thority for the acquisition, construction, maintenance, and 
operation of the Authority facilities. The Authority may 
agree to assume or reimburse the District for any indebt- 
edness incurred by the District with respect to facilities 
conveyed by the District to the Authority. 
With the 
consent of the Council of the District of Columbia, the 
agreement may be made subordinate to the Authority’s 
indebtedness to others. 
(c) The Authority is granted full power to exercise the 
right of eminent domain within the Commonwealth of 
Virginia in the acquisition of any lands, easements, privi- 
leges or other property interests that are necessary for 
airport and landing field purposes, including the right to 
acquire, by eminent domain, aviation easements over lands 
or water outside the boundaries of its airports or landing 
fields where necessary in the interests of safety for air- 
crafts to provide unobstructed air space for the landing 
and taking off of aircraft utilizing its airports and landing 
fields even though the aviation easement may be incon- 
sistent with the continued use of the land, or inconsistent 
with the maintenance, preservation and renewal of any 
Structure or any tree or other vegetation standing or 
growing on the land at the time of the acquisition. 
Pro- 
ceedings for the acquisition of lands, easements and privi- 
leges by condemnation may be instituted and conducted 
in the name of the Authority in accordance with title 25 
of the Code of Virginia. 

155a 
Sec. 11. Revenue bonds. 
(a) The Authority may provide by resolution for the 
issuance, at 1 time or from time to time, of revenue 
bonds of the Authority for the purpose of paying all or 
any part of the cost of Authority facilities, including the 
refunding of federal appropriations not reimbursed to the 
United States Treasury by the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports. 
The principal of and the interest on these 
bonds shall be payable solely from the funds provided for 
this payment. 
The bonds of each issue shall be dated, 
shall mature at times not exceeding 40 years from their 
dates, as may be determined by the Authority, and may 
be subject to redemption or repurchase before maturity, 
at the option of the Authority, at prices and under these 
terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority 
before the issuance of the bonds. 
The bonds may bear 
interest payable at times and at rates as determined by 
the Authority or as determined in the manner 
as the 
Authority may provide, including the determination by 
agents 
designated 
by the Authority 
under 
guidelines 
established by it. The Authority shall determine the form 
and the manner of execution of the bonds, including any 
interest coupons to be attached to the bonds, and shall fix 
the denominations of the bonds and the places of payment 
of principal and interest, which may be at any bank or 
trust company within or without the District of Columbia. 
In case any officer whose signature or a fascimile of 
whose signature appears on any bonds or coupons shall 
cease to be that officer before the delivery of the bonds, 
the signature or fascimile shall be valid and sufficient for 
all purposes the same as if the officer had remained in 
Office until delivery. Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this act or any recitals in any bonds issued under the 
provisions of this section, all bonds shall be considered 
to be negotiable instruments under the laws of the District. 
The bonds may be issued in coupon or in registered form, 
or both, as the Authority may determine, and provision 
may be made for the registration of any coupon bonds as 
S sgemannsicte 
tee 
pat 
Rt 

156a 
to principal alone and also as to both principal and in- 
terest, for the reconversion into coupon bonds of any 
bonds registered as to both principal and interest, and 
for the interchange of registered and coupon bonds. The 
Authority may sell bonds in the manner, either at public 
or negotiated sale, and for the price, as it may determine 
will best effect the purposes of this section. 
(b) The proceeds of the bonds shall be used solely for 
the payment of the cost of Authority facilities, including 
improvements, and shall be disbursed in the manner and 
under the restrictions, if any, as the Authority may pro- 
vide in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the 
bonds or in the trust agreement securing the bonds. 
If 
the proceeds of the bonds of any issue, by error of esti- 
mates or otherwise, shall be less than the cost, additional 
bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount 
of the deficit, and, unless otherwise provided in the reso- 
lution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the 
trust agreement securing the bonds, shall be considered to 
be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment 
from the same fund without preference or priority of the 
bonds first issued. 
If the proceeds of the bonds of any 
issue shall exceed the cost, the surplus shall be deposited 
to the credit of the sinking fund for the bonds. 
(c) Before the preparation of definitive bonds, the Au- 
‘thority may, under the same restrictions, issue interim 
receipts or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, 
exchangeable for definitive bonds when the bonds have 
been executed and are available for delivery. 
The Au- 
thority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds 
that become mutilated or have been destroyed or lost. 
Bonds may be issued under the provisions of this section 
without obtaining the consent of any agency of the District 
and without any other proceedings, conditions or things 
not specifically required by this section. 

157a 
Sec. 12. Refunding bonds. 
The Authority may provide by resolution for the issu- 
ance of its revenue refunding bonds for the purpose of 
refunding any bonds then outstanding which shall have 
been issued under the provisions of this act, including the 
payment of any redemption premium on the bonds and 
any interest accrued or to accrue to the date of redemp- 
tion of the bonds, and if considered advisable by the 
Authority, for either or both of the following additional 
purposes: 
constructing improvements, extensions or en- 
largement of the Authority facilities in connection with 
which the bonds to be refunded shall have been issued; 
and, paying all or any part of the cost of any additional 
Authority facilities. The issuance of bonds, the maturities, 
and other details of the issuance, the rights of the holders 
of the bonds, and the rights, duties and obligations of 
the Authority in respect to the bonds, shall be governed 
by the provisions of this act insofar as this act may be 
applicable. 
Revenue refunding bonds issued under this 
section may be sold or exchanged for outstanding bonds 
issued under this act and, if sold, the proceeds of the 
bonds may be applied to the purchase, redemption, or 
payment of outstanding bonds. 
Sec. 13. Pledge of funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the provisions of this 
act, whether as proceeds from the sale of bonds, as reve- 
nues, or aS grants, appropriations, or other funds pro- 
vided by federal, state, or local governments, may be 
pledged to the payment of bonds issued by the Authority 
and, if so pledged, shall be considered to be trust funds 
to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
Sec. 14. Marketability of bonds. 
The Authority may exercise all or any part of combi- 
nation of the powers granted by this act, including the 
power: To make covenants other than and in addition 

158a 
to the covenants expressly authorized, of like, or differ- 
ent character; to make covenants and to do all acts as 
may be necessary, convenient, or desirable in order to 
secure its bonds or, in the absolute discretion of the 
Authority, as will tend to make the bonds more market- 
able, notwithstanding that the covenants or acts may not 
be enumerated in this act. 
Sec. 15. Bonds as legal investments and security for 
public deposits. 
Bonds issued by the Authority under the provisions 
of this act are securities in which all public officers and 
public bodies of the District, 
all insurance companies, 
trust companies, banking associations, investment com- 
panies, executors, administrators, 
trustees and other fi- 
duciaries may properly and legally invest funds, includ- 
ing capital in their control or belonging to them. 
These 
bonds are securities that may properly and legally be 
deposited with and received by any municipal officer or 
any agency of the District for any purpose for which 
the deposit of bonds or obligations is now or may subse- 
quently be authorized by law. 
Sec. 16. Credits of the District not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act 
shall not constitute a debt of the District nor a pledge of 
the faith and credit of the District. The bonds shall be 
payable solely from funds provided for the bonds from 
revenues. 
The issuance of revenue bonds under the pro- 
visions of this act shall not directly, indirectly, or con- 
tingently obligate the District to any form of taxation 
whatever. 
Ail revenue bonds shall contain a statement 
on their face substantially to this effect. 
Sec. 17. Trust agreement. 
In the discretion of the Authority any bonds issued 
under the provisions of this act may be secured by a 

159a 
trust agreement by and between the Authority and a 
corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or 
bank having the power of a trust company within or 
without the District. 
The trust agreement or the resolu- 
tion providing for the issuance of the bonds may pledge 
or assign the fees and other revenues to be received, but 
shall not convey or mortgage the airports or any part 
of the airports. 
The trust agreement or resolution pro- 
viding for the issuance of the bonds may contain pro- 
visions for protecting and enforcing the rights and reme- 
dies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper 
and not in violation of law, including covenants setting 
forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the ac- 
quisition of property and the construction, improvement, 
maintenance, repair, operation and insurance of the air- 
ports, the rates or fees or other charges to be charged, 
and the custody, 
safeguarding 
the application 
of all 
monies. 
It shall be lawful for any bank or trust com- 
pany incorporated under the laws of the District that 
may act as depositary of the proceeds of bonds or of 
revenues to furnish indemnifying bonds or to pledge se- 
curities as may be required by the Authority. Any trust 
agreement may set forth the rights and remedies of the 
bondholders. 
In addition, any trust agreement or resolu- 
tion may contain other provisions the Authority con- 
siders reasonable and proper for the security of the bond- 
holders. 
All expenses incurred in carrying out the pro- 
visions 
of the trust agreement 
or resolution may be 
treated as a part of the cost of the operation of the 
airports. 
Sec. 18. Revenues. 
The Authority may fix, revise, charge, and collect fees 
or other charges for the use of the airports, contract 
with any person, partnership, association, or corporation 
desiring the use of any part of the airports, including 
the right-of-way adjoining the airports for placing on 

160a 
the airports telephone, telegraph, electric light or power 
lines, and fix the terms, conditions, rents and fees or 
other charges for use. 
Fees or other charges shall be 
so fixed and adjusted in respect of the aggregate of fees 
or other charges from the airports as to provide a fund 
sufficient with other revenues, if any, (1) to pay the 
cost of maintaining, 
repairing and operating the air- 
ports, (2) to pay the principal of and interest on bonds 
as they become due and payable, and (3) to create re- 
serves for these purposes. 
The fees and other charges 
and all other revenues derived from the airports, except 
the part as may be necessary to pay the cost of main- 
tenance, repair, and operation and provide reserves as 
may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the 
issuance of the bonds or in the trust agreement securing 
the bonds, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may 
be provided in the resolution or the trust agreement in a 
sinking fund, which is pledged to, and charged with, 
the payment of the principal of and the interest on the 
bonds as they become due, and the redemption price or 
the purchase price of bonds retired by call or purchase 
as provided in the bonds. The pledge shall be valid and 
binding from the time when the pledge is made. 
The 
fees, other charges, and other revenues or other monies 
so pledged and subsequently received by the Authority 
shall immediately be subject to the lien of the pledge 
without any physical delivery of the lien or further act, 
and the lien of the pledge shall be valid and binding as 
against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, 
contract or otherwise against the Authority, irrespective 
of whether the parties have notice of the lien. 
Neither 
the resolution 
nor any trust agreement by which 
a 
pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the 
records of the Authority. 
The use and disposition of 
monies to the credit of the sinking fund shall be subject 
to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the is- 
suance of the bonds or of the trust agreement. 
Except 
as may otherwise be provided in the resolution or the 

16la 
trust agreement, the sinking fund shall be a fund for 
all these bonds without distinction or priority of 1 over 
another. 
Sec. 19. Trust funds. 
All proceeds from the sale of bonds and revenues de- 
rived from the bonds received pursuant to the provisions 
of this act shall be considered to be trust funds to be 
held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
The 
Authority may, in the resolution authorizing the bonds 
or in the trust agreement securing the bonds, provide 
for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds 
and the revenues of the Authority to a trustee, which 
may be any trust company or bank having the powers of 
a trust company within or without the District, which 
shall act as trustee of the funds, and hold and apply the 
funds to the purposes of this act, subject to any regula- 
tions this act and the resolution or trust agreement may 
provide. 
The trustee may invest and reinvest the funds 
in securities as may be provided in the resolution au- 
thorizing the bonds or in the trust agreement securing 
the bonds. 
Sec. 20. Annual audit. 
The Authority shall prepare financial 
statements 
at 
the end of each of its fiscal years in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles. These financial 
statements shall be examined annually by an independent 
certified public accountant in accordance with generally 
accepted auditing standards. 
Copies of each audit re- 
port shall be furnished to the Governor of the Common- 
wealth of Virginia and to the Mayor of the District not 
later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of 
the Authority and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 21. Remedies. 
Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this 
act or of any of the coupons appertaining to the bonds, 

162a 
and the trustee under any trust agreement, except to the 
extent the rights given by this act, may be restricted by 
the trust agreement, may either at law or in equity, 
by suit, action, injunction, mandamus or other proceed- 
ings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the 
laws of the District, or granted by this act or under the 
trust agreement or the resolution authorizing the issu- 
ance of the bonds and may enforce and compel the 
performance of all duties required by this act or by the 
agreement or resolution to be performed by the Authority 
or by any officer or agent of the Authority including the 
fixing, charging, and collection of fees or other charges. 
Sec. 22. Exemption from taxation. 
The exercise of the powers granted by this act shall 
be in all respects for the benefit of the inhabitants of 
the District for the increase of their commerce, and for 
the promotion of their safety, health, welfare, conven- 
ience, and prosperity, and as the operation and main- 
tenance of the airports by the Authority will constitute 
the performance of essential governmental functions, the 
Authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or as- 
sessments upon the airports or any property acquired or 
used by the Authority under the provisions of this act 
or upon the income therefrom; and the bonds issued un- 
der the provisions of this act, their transfer and the in- 
come from the bonds, including any profit made on the 
sale of the bonds, shall at all times be free and exempt 
from taxation by the District. 
Sec. 23. 
Jurisdiction of courts; liability for contracts 
and torts. 
(a) The courts of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall 
have original jurisdiction over all actions brought by or 
against the Authority, which courts shall in all cases 
apply the law of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 

1634 
(b) The Authority shall be liable for its contracts and 
for its torts and those of its members, officers, employees, 
and agents committed in the conduct of any proprie- 
tary function, in accordance with the law of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia but shall not be liable for any 
torts occurring in the performance of a governmental 
function. 
The exclusive remedy for breach of contracts 
and torts for which the Authority shall be liable, 
as 
provided by this act, shall be by suit against the Au- 
thority. Nothing in this act shall be construed as a waiver 
by the District or the Commonwealth of Virginia or its 
political subdivisions of any immunity from suit. 
(c) The Authority shall be responsible for all execu- 
tory contracts entered into by the United States with 
respect to the former Metropolitan Washington Airports 
before the date of acquisition of those airports, except 
that the procedure for disputes resolution contained in 
any contract shall continue to govern the performance 
of the contract unless otherwise agreed to by the parties 
to the contract. 
(d) The Authority shall not be responsible for any 
tort claims arising before the date of transfer. 
Sec. 24. Procurement exemption. 
In light of the multi-jurisdictional nature of the Au- 
thority, an exemption is provided to the Authority from 
all laws and regulations of the District governing public 
procurement. 
Sec. 25. Act liberally construed. 
This Act, being necessary for the welfare of the Dis- 
trict and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to 
effect its purposes. 
Sec. 26. Constitutional construction. 
The provisions of this act are severable and if any of 
its provisions are held unconstitutional by any court of 

164a 
competent jurisdiction, the decision of that court shall 
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of 
this act. 
It is declared to be the legislative intent that 
this act would have been adopted had any unconstitu- 
tional provisions not been included. 
Sec. 27. Inconsistent laws inapplicable. 
All other general or special laws inconsistent with any 
provision of this act are declared to be inapplicable to the 
provisions of this act. 
Sec. 28. 
Effective date. 
This act shall take effect after a 30-day period of Con- 
gressional review following approval by the Mayor (or in 
the event of vote by the Mayor, action by the Council of 
the District of Columbia to override the veto) as provided 
in section 602(c)({1) of the District of Columbia Self- 
Government and Governmental Reorganization Act, ap- 
proved December 24, 1973 (87 Stat. 813; D.C. Code, sec. 
1-233(c)(1)), and upon the enactment into law by the 
Congress of the United States of legislation that author- 
izes and directs the sale, lease, or other disposition of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports to an Airports Au- 
thority created by the legislatures of the Commonwealth 
of Virginia and the District pursuant to an agreement 
or compact that is consistent with the provisions of this 
act, whichever occurs later. 
/s/ David A. Clarke 
Chairman 
Council of the District of Columbia 
/s/ Marion Barry 
Mayor 
District of Columbia 
APPROVED: October 9, 1985 

165a 
COUNCIL OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
NOTICE 
D.C. Law 7-18 
“District of Columbia Regional Airports Authority Act 
of 1985 Amendment Act of 1987”. 
Pursuant to Section 412 of the District of Columbia 
Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act, 
P.L. 93-198, “the Act”, the Council of the District of 
Columbia adopted Bill No. 7-172 on first and second read- 
ings, April 14, 1987, and May 5, 1985, respectively. Fol- 
lowing the signature of the Mayor on June 1, 1987, this 
legislation was assigned Act 7-32, published in the June 
12, 1987, edition of the D.C. Register, (Vol. 34 page 
3804) and transmitted to Congress on June 10, 1987, for 
a 30-days review, in accordance with Section 602(c)(1) 
of the Act. 
The Council of the District of Columbia hereby gives 
notice that the 30-day Congressional Review Period has 
expired, and therefore, cites this enactment as D.C. Law 
7-18, effective July 25, 1987. 
/s/ David A. Clarke 
Davip A. CLARKE 
Chairman of the Council 
Dates Counted During the 30-day Congressional Review 
Period: 
June 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
29, 30 
Saar tp ts Ge Go Ute Edy WR Ee 10, 32, BO, 2h,’ 24s 
23, 24 

166a 
AN ACT 
D.C. ACT 7-32 
IN THE COUNCIL OF THE DISTRICT OF 
COLUMBIA 
Jun. 01, 1987 
To amend the District of Columbia Regional Airports 
Authority Act of 1985 to conform with legislation 
passed by the legislature of the Commonwealth of 
Virginia and by the United States Congress, to au- 
thorize the Metropolitan Washington Airports Au- 
thority to establish a board of review, and to estab- 
lish civil penalties for violations 
of rules of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, That this act may be cited 
as the “District of Columbia Regional Airports Authority 
Act of 1985 Amendment Act of 1987”. 
Sec. 2. Findings. 
The Council of the District of Columbia (“Council”) 
finds that: 
(1) Congress adopted the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Act of 1986, approved October 30, 1986 (100 
Stat. 3341; 49 U.S.C. 
app. 2456) 
(“Airports Act”), 
which authorized the transfer of operating responsibility 
of Washington Dulles International Airport and Washing- 
ton National Airport to a local authority under a 50-year 
lease. 

167a 
(2) Section 6007 of the Airports Act requires that the 
powers and jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Authority be conferred jointly by the legislative 
authority of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the Dis- 
trict of Columbia or by either of the jurisdictions and 
concurred in by the legislative authority of the other 
jurisdiction. 
(3) The Council adopted legislation in 1985 which 
conformed to the original Virginia Statute authorizing a 
local authority, and it is therefore appropriate to adopt 
amendments in conformity with amendments recently ap- 
proved by the legislature of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia in S. 672, 169 Leg., 1987 Sess. (1987) in response 
to the Airports Act. 
Sec. 3. The District of Columbia Regional Airports 
Authority Act of 1985, effective December 3, 1985 (D.C. 
Law 6-67; D.C. Code, sec. 7-1101 note) (“District act”), 
is amended as follows: 
(a) Section 2 is amended by striking in paragraph (2) 
the phrase “to be created by the legislatures of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia and the District pursuant to an 
agreement or compact that is consistent with the provi- 
sions of this act, or, if the Authority to be created is 
later abolished,” and inserting in its place the phrase 
“created by this act and by similar enactment by the 
Commonwealth 
of Virginia, 
or 
if the Authority 
is 
abolished,”. 
(b) Section 5(h) is amended to read as follows: 
“(h) The members of the Authority and its board of 
review, including any nonvoting members, shall not be 
personally liable for any act done or action taken in their 
Capacities as members of the Authority or its board of | 
review, nor shall they be personally liable for any bond, 
note, or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the 
Authority.”. 

168a 
(c) Section 6 is amended: 
(1) By striking from paragraph (2) the second ap- 
pearance of the word “operate”; 
(2) By inserting in paragraph (5) after the word 
“committees” the phrase “and to establish a board of 
review”; 
(3) By striking from paragraph 
(10) 
the phrase 
“However, the” and inserting in its place the phrase 
“Employees of the Authority shall not participate in any 
strike or assert any right to strike against the Authority, 
and any employment agreement entered into by the Au- 
thority shall contain an explicit prohibition against strikes 
by the employee or employees covered by such agreement. 
The”; 
(4) By inserting in paragraph (12) after the word 
“facilities” the phrase “consistent with the purposes of 
this act”, and by striking from paragraph (12) after the 
word “Authority” the phrase “and consistent with the 
purposes of this act”; 
(5) By inserting in paragraph (13) after the word 
“users,” the phrase “including contracts for normal gov- 
ernmental services on a reimbursable basis with local 
political subdivisions where the Authority facilities are 
situated and with the District of Columbia government,”; 
(6) By striking at the end of paragraph (14) the word 
“and”; 
(7) By adding a new paragraph (15a) to read as 
follows: 
“(15a) To make payments to reimburse the local po- 
litical subdivisions where the Authority facilities are sit- 
uated for extraordinary law enforcement costs incurred 
by such localities; and”; and 
(8) By adding a new subsection 
(a-1) to read as 
follows: 

169a 
“(a-1) Pursuant to section 6007(b) of the Metropoli- 
tan Washington Airports Act of 1986, approved October 
30, 1986 (100 Stat. 3341; 49 U.S.C. app. 2456), the 
Authority is established solely to operate and improve 
both metropolitan Washington airports as primary air- 
ports serving the metropolitan Washington area and shall 
be independent of the Commonwealth of Virginia and its 
local political subdivisions, the District of Columbia, and 
the federal government in the performance and exercise 
of the airport-related duties and powers enumerated in 
this section. Any conflict between the exercise of these 
enumerated powers by the Authority and the powers of 
any local political subdivision 
within which Authority 
facilities are situated shall be resolved in favor of the 
Authority.”. 
(d) Section 7 is amended: 
(1) By striking in paragraph (b)(2) the phrase “in 
the political subdivision where the Authority’s facilities 
are located and the District” and inserting in its place 
the phrase “in the District of Columbia and in the local 
political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Virginia 
where the Authority facilities are located”; 
(2) By striking in subsection 
(d) the last sentence; 
and 
(3) By adding new subsections 
(e), (f), (g), (h), 
and (i) to read as follows: 
“(e) The violation of any rule or regulation of the 
Authority establishing a noise limitation on aircraft that 
operate at the Authority Facilities shall subject the vio- 
lator, in the discretion of the circuit court of any po- 
litical subdivision where the facility is located to a civil 
penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each violation. The pen- 
alty shall be paid to the Authority. With the consent of 
the violator or the accused violator of a rule establishing 
aircraft noise limits, the Authority may provide, in an 
order issued against the violator or accused violator, for 
the payment of civil charges in specific sums not to ex- 

170a 
ceed the limit that could be imposed by the court. 
Such 
civil charge when paid shall be in lieu of any civil pen- 
alty that could be imposed by the court. Any court pro- 
ceeding shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
circuit court and shall be a civil proceeding 
at law 
brought by the Authority. 
“(f) The violation of any Authority rule or regulation, 
having the force and effect of law, shall be a Class 1 
misdemeanor unless otherwise specified by chapter 598 
of the 1985 Acts of Assembly or unless a lesser penalty 
is set by the Authority in the rule or regulation. 
The 
rules 
of criminal 
procedure and evidence 
that apply 
throughout the Commonwealth of Virginia (“Common- 
wealth”) 
shall apply to the adjudication of any case 
involving the violation of any Authority rule or regula- 
tion having the force and effect of law. 
“(g) The courts of the Commonwealth shall take judi- 
cial notice of the Authority’s regularly adopted rules and 
regulations. For the convenience of the courts which may 
regularly hear cases arising under the Authority’s rules 
and regulations, the Authority may certify to the clerk 
of such court a copy of its rules and regulations. 
Any 
such certification, when signed by the chairman of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airport Authority, shall be ac- 
cepted as evidence of the facts therein stated. 
“(h) With respect to the violation of any statute of 
the Commonwealth, local ordinance, or Authority rule or 
regulation having the force and effect of law occurring at 
the Authority Facilities: 
“(1) The matter shall be within the jurisdiction of the 
state courts of the political subdivision where the viola- 
tion occurred; violations occurring at Washington Na- 
tional Airport shall be within the jurisdiction of the 
courts for Arlington County; 
“(2) The attorney for the Commonwealth shall have 
authority to prosecute those offenses in the name of the 
Commonwealth or local government as appropriate; and 

17la 
the county or city attorney, if otherwise authorized to 
prosecute offenses in the name of the county or city, shall 
have authority to prosecute those offenses in the name of 
the county or city; and 
“(3) Sheriffs and clerks of the court shall provide 
those same services and exercise those same powers with 
respect to Authority Facilities within their jurisdiction 
as for their political subdivisions.”. 
(e) Section 8 is amended to read as follows: 
“Sec. 8. Police powers. 
“(a) The Authority is authorized 
to establish and 
maintain 
a regular police force and to confer police 
powers to be exercised with respect to offenses occurring 
on the Authority Facilities upon its employees meeting 
the minimum requirements of the Commonwealth of Vir- 
ginia’s Department of Criminal Justice Services. 
“(b) Such police officers shall have all powers vested 
in police officers under Chapter 3 of Title 15.1, Chapter 
11 of Title 16.1, Title 18.2, and Title 46.1 of the Code of 
Virginia and shall be responsible upon the Authority 
Facilities and within 300 yards of the Facilities for en- 
forcing the laws of the Commonwealth, the Authority’s 
rules and regulations, and all other applicable ordinances, 
rules, and regulations. 
“(c) The police officers may issue summons to appear, 
or arrest on view or on information without warrant as 
permitted by law, and conduct before any judicial officer 
of competent jurisdiction any person violating, upon Au- 
thority Facilities, any rule or regulation of the Authority, 
any ordinance or regulation of any local political sub- 
division, or any other law of the Commonwealth. 
“(d) The Department of State Police shall exercise the 
same powers upon Authority Facilities as elsewhere in 
the Commonwealth. 
“(e) The Authority may enter into reciprical or mu- 
tual aid agreements with the local political subdivisions 
in which the Authority Facilities are situated, any agency 

172a 
of the Commonwealth, or of the federal government, or 
any combination of the foregoing, for cooperation in the 
furnishing of police services. 
“(f) The police force of Arlington County shall have 
concurrent jurisdiction with the police force established 
herein at Washington National Airport. 
The Authority 
shall enter into an agreement with Arlington County re- 
garding the exercise of police authority. 
“(g) The sheriffs and police forces of Loudon and 
Fairfax Counties 
shall continue to exercise concurrent 
jurisdiction with the police force established herein over 
the Authority Facilities situated within their respective 
counties.”. 
(f) Section 28 is amended by striking the phrase “an 
Airports Authority created by the legislatures of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia and the District pursuant to an 
agreement or compact that consistent with the provisions 
of this act, whichever occurs later.”, and inserting in its 
place the phrase “the Authority.”. 
Sec. 4. This act shall take effect after a 30-day period 
of Congressional review following approval by the Mayor 
(or in the event of veto by the Mayor, action by the 
Council of the District of Columbia to override the veto) 
as provided in section 602(c)(1) 
of the District 
of 
Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorgani- 
zation Act, approved December 24, 1973 (87 Stat. 813; 
D.C. Code, sec. 1-233(c)(1)). 
/s/ David Clarke 
Chairman 
Council of the District of Columbia 
/s/ Marion Barry 
Mayor 
District of Columbia 
Approved: June 1, 1987 

173a 
LEASE 
of the 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
between 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
acting by and through 
THE SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION 
and 
THE METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 
ENTERED INTO AT WASHINGTON, 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
THIS SECOND DAY OF MARCH, 
1987 
[In Relevant Part] 

174a 
AGREEMENT 
AND DEED OF LEASE 
March 2, 1987 
Agreement and Deed of Lease between the United States 
of America, 
acting by and through the Secretary of 
Transportation (“the Secretary”), and the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Authority 
(“the Airports Author- 
ity”), a public body politic and corporate created by com- 
pact between the Commonwealth of Virginia and the 
District of Columbia with the consent of the Congress. 
WHEREAS, in the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
Act of 1986, Title VI of Public Law 99-591 (“the Act”), 
the Congress declared its purpose to be to authorize the 
transfer of operating responsibility under 
a long-term 
lease of the Metropolitan Washington Airport properties 
as a unit, including access highways and other related 
facilities, to a properly constituted independent airport 
authority created by the Commonwealth of Virginia and 
the District of Columbia, in order to achieve local con- 
trol, management, operation, and development of these 
important transportation assets; 
WHEREAS, the Act authorized the Secretary to enter 
into such a lease in order to enable the financing of badly 
needed capital improvements; 
WHEREAS, 
in Chapter 598, Virginia Acts of As- 
sembly, 1985, as it may be amended, and in the District 
of Columbia Regional Airports Authority Act of 1985, 
D.C. Law 6-67, as it may be amended, the Commonwealth 
of Virginia and the District of Columbia, respectively, 
enacted essentially identical laws to create the Airports 
Authority to acquire the Metropolitan Washington Air- 
ports from the United States, by lease or otherwise; 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that the two fed- 
erally owned airports in the metropolitan area of Wash- 
ington, District of Columbia constitute an important and 

175a 
growing part of the commerce, transportation and eco- 
nomic patterns of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the 
District of Columbia, and the surrounding region; 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that the Federal 
Government has a continuing but limited interest in the 
operation of the two federally owned airports serving the 
travel and cargo needs of the entire Metropolitan Wash- 
ington region as well as the District of Columbia as the 
national seat of government; 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that operation of 
the Metropolitan Washington Airports by an independent 
local agency will facilitate timely improvements at both 
airports to meet the growing demand of interstate 
air 
transportation occasioned by the Airline Deregulation Act 
of 1978; 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that all other 
major air carrier airports in the United States are oper- 
ated by public entities at the State, regional or local level: 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that any change 
in the status of the two airports must take into account 
the interest of nearby communities, the traveling public, 
air carriers, 
general 
aviation, 
airport employees, 
and 
other interested groups, as well as the interests of the 
Federal Government and the State governments involved; 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that an operating 
authority with representation 
from 
local 
jurisdictions, 
similar to authorities at all major airports in the United 
States, will improve communications with local officials 
and concerned residents regarding noise at the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports; and 
WHEREAS, the Congress has found that the Federal 
interest in these airports can be provided through a lease 
mechanism which provides for local control and operation. 
NOW THEREFORE, under the authority of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports Act of 1986, Title VI of 
Public Law 99-591, 100 Stat. 3341; Chapter 598, Virginia 

176a 
Acts of Assembly, 1985, as it may be amended; and the 
District of Columbia Regional Airiports Authority Act 
of 1985, D.C. Law 6-67, as it may be amended; the par- 
ties do hereby agree as follows, for themselves and for 
their successors: 
Article 1. 
Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this lease shall have 
the meanings indicated below: 
1A. 
Act 
The term “Act” means the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Act of 1986, Title VI of Public Law 99-591, 
100 Stat. 3341. 
1.B. 
Airports 
The term “Airports” means the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports. 
1.C. 
Airports Authority 
The term “Airports Authority” means the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports Authority, a public body created by 
the Commonwealth 
of Virginia 
and 
the 
District 
of 
Columbia. 
1.D. 
Airport Purposes 
The term “Airport Purposes” means a use of property 
interests 
(other than a sale) for aviation business 
or 
activities, or for activities necessary or appropriate to 
serve passengers or cargo in air commerce, or for non- 
profit, public use facilities. 
1.E. 
Board of Directors 
The term “Board of Directors” means the Board of 
Directors of the Airports Authority. 
1.F. 
Board of Review 
The term “Board of Review” means 
the Board of 
Review of the Airports Authority established by the 
Board of Directors. 

177a 
1.G. 
Employees 
The term “Employees” means all permanent Federal 
Aviation Administration personnel employed on the date 
this lease takes effect by the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports, an organization within the Federal Aviation 
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation. 
1.H. 
Leased Premises 
The term “Leased Premises” means the real property 
described in paragraph 3.A. hereot. 
1.1. 
Master Plan 
The term “Master Plan” means a generalized, compre- 
hensive plan for the physical development of Washington 
National 
Airport 
or Washington 
Dulles 
International 
Airport as may be revised from time to time by the Air- 
ports Authority. 
1.J. 
Metropolitan Washington Airports 
The term “Metropolitan Washington Airports means 
Washington National Airport and Washington Dulles In- 
ternational Airport. 
1.K. 
Secretary 
The term “Secretary” means the Secretary of Trans- 
portation of the United States, or her successor. 
1.L. 
Washington Dulles International Airport 
The term “Washington Dulles International Airport” 
means the airport constructed under the act entitled “An 
Act to auhorize the construction, protection, operation, 
and maintenance of a public airport in or in the vicinity 
of the District of Columbia”, approved September 7, 1950 
(64 Stat. 770), and includes the Dulles Airport Access 
Highway and Right-of-way, including the extension be- 
tween the Interstate Routes I-495 and I-66. 

178a 
1.M. 
Washington National Airport 
The term “Washington National Airport” means the 
airport described in the act entitled “An Act to provide 
for the administration of the Washington National Air- 
port, and for other purposes”, approved June 29, 1940 
(54 Stat. 686). 
Article 2. 
Purpose. 
The purpose of this lease is to transfer the operating 
responsibility for the Metropolitan Washington Airports 
to the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority pur- 
suant to the Act and to make the conditions imposed 
therein upon the authority of the Secretary to enter into 
a lease of the Metropolitan Washington Airports appli- 
cable to the Airports Authority. 
Article 3. 
Leased Premises. 
3.A. 
Grant of Lease. 
The Secretary, 
on 
behalf 
of the United 
States 
of 
America, hereby demises and leases to the Airports Au- 
thority the two Metropolitan Washington Airport proper- 
ties as a unit, including access highways and other related 
facilities, being the parcels of land, together with all 
right, title and interest, if any, of the Secretary in and 
to any street or road abutting or included within the 
described land, and all rights of way, easements, licenses 
and 
permits 
relating 
thereto, 
and 
all improvements 
thereon, bounded and described in Appendix A. 
~ 
3.B. 
Scope. 
The Airports Authority is hereby authorized to occupy, 
operate, control and use, for the term of this lease, all 
land, improvements, buildings, fixtures, easements, rights 
of ingress and egress and appurtenances thereto belong- 
ing, owned by, used or controlled by or assigned to the 
United States of America on or at the Leased Premises. 
Subject to the provisions of this lease, the Airports Au- 
thority shall have, consistent with the 50-year minimum 

179a 
term of this lease, full power and dominion over, and 
complete discretion in, operations and development of the 
Airports, and shall have the same proprietary powers 
and be subject to the same restrictions with respect to 
federal law as any other airport, except as otherwise pro- 
vided herein. 
3.C. 
Warranty of Title. 
The Secretary hereby warrants and covenants on be- 
half of the United States of America that the United 
States of America is the owner of good, fee simple and 
marketable title to all of the Leased Premises, free and 
clear of all liens, debts, encumbrances or restrictions of 
whatsoever 
kind, 
nature 
and 
description, 
other 
than 
leases and easements presently in effect that do not ad- 
versely affect the operation of the Airports, and the Sec- 
retary has full power and authority to convey the inter- 
ests described in this lease in accordance with the pro- 
visions hereof. 
3.D. 
Quiet Enjoyment. 
The Secretary covenants on behalf of the United States 
of America that, during the period commencing on the 
effective date of this lease and ending on the expiration 
of the term of this lease in accordance with the terms 
hereof, the Airports Authority shall fully, peaceably and 
quie*ly occupy and enjoy the full possession of the Leased 
Premises without hinderance or interference by the Secre- 
tary or any other person or entity. 
Article 4. 
Transfer of Personal Property. 
The Secretary, on behalf of the United States of Amer- 
ica, hereby grants, transfers and conveys to the Airports 
Authority, without condition (and not as a lease), all 
right, title and interest in and to all equipment, materials, 
furnishings and all other personal property appurtenant 
to or located on the Leased Premises, excluding personal 
property necessary for the Secretary’s Air Traffic Control 

wee 
: 
180a 
responsibilities, and including, but not limited to, the 
items specifically described in the inventory to be com- 
pleted before the effective date of this lease and identified 
as “Inventory for Metropolitan Washington 
Airports.” 
Such personal property is transferred in “as is” condition 
and the Secretary makes no warranties as to the suit- 
ability of any such property for any particular use. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Article 9. 
Effective Date. 
This lease shall be effective on the date on which the 
Secretary and the Airports Authority certify that the 
Governor of Virginia and the Mayor of the District of 
Columbia have approved the lease and that all conditions 
in Articles 15 and 20 have been satisfied. 
Article 10. 
Term and Extensions. 
10.A. 
Term. 
The term of this lease shall be for fifty years com- 
mencing on the effective date as determined under Article 
9. 
10.B. 
Lease Extensions. 
The Secretary and the Airports Authority may at any 
time negotiate an extension of this lease. 
10.C. 
Good Faith Negotiation. 
In the event that the Airports Authority reasonably 
shall determine that an extension of the term of this 
lease is required in order to entitle the Airports Author- 
ity to amortize the indebtedness that will result from the 
financing of any improvements at the Airports over a 
period equal to the estimated useful life of such improve- 
ments, the parties agree to negotiate in good faith a 
commensurate extension of such term. 
10.D. 
Expiration. 
Upon the expiration of this lease, the Airports Author- 
ity covenants and agrees that it will give up, surrender 

181a 
and deliver to the Secretary the Leased Premises 
to- 
gether with all buildings, structures and improvements 
thereon 
(as the same may have been altered 
or 
re- 
placed), as well as all personal property, furniture, fix- 
tures and other equipment contained therein and used ex- 
clusively in connection with the operation of the Airports, 
the intent being that when the Leased Premises are re- 
turned to the Secretary, such Leased Premises shall be 
in good condition as operating airports, depreciation, ob- 
solescence, and ordinary wear and tear excepted, all of 
which shall be free and clear of any and all liens, debts 
or encumbrances which would necessitate payment by the 
Secretary. 
Article 11. 
11.A. 
Airports Authority’s Legal Status. 
The Airports Authority is a public body corporate and 
politic that meets the requirements of section 6007 of the 
Act. 
The Airports Authority 
agrees 
to refrain 
from 
action that would alter such status and to use its best 
efforts to maintain this status. 
Continuing Obligations. 
11.B. 
Operation of Airports. 
The Airports Authority shall operate, maintain, pro- 
tect, promote, and develop the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports as a unit and as primary airports serving the 
Metropolitan Washington area. 
11.C_ 
Airport Improvement Program Requirements 
The Airports Authority shall be subject to the require- 
ments of section 511(a) of the Airport and Airway Im- 
provement Act of 1982 (hereinafter the “1982 Act”) and 
the assurances and conditions required of grant recipients 
under the 1982 Act as of the date the lease takes effect, 
to the same extent as would be an airport that received a 
grant under the 1982 Act on the effective date of this 
lease. 
As in the case of any other airport, any such 
assurance which, by its terms, is project specific shall 

182a 
apply only to projects on which Federal grant funds are 
expended. 
Notwithstanding section 511(a)(12) 
of the 
1982 Act, all revenues generated by the Metropolitan 
Washington Airports shall be expended for the capital 
and operating costs of the Airports. 
11.D. 
Contracts. 
In acquiring by contract supplies or services for an 
amount estimated to be in excess of $200,000, or award- 
ing concession contracts, the Airports Authority shall ob- 
tain, to the maximum extent practicable, full and open 
competition through the use of published competitive pro- 
cedures. 
By a vote of seven members, the Airports Au- 
thority may grant exceptions to the requirements of this 
paragraph. 
11.E. 
Continuation of Regulations. 
All regulations applicable to the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports and included in Part 159 of the Federal 
Aviation Regulations, 14 C.F.R. Part 159, on the effective 
date of this lease shall become regulations of the Airports 
Authority on that date and shall remain in effect until 
modified or revoked by the Airports Authority in accord- 
ance with procedures of the Airports Authority. 
11.F. 
Limitations on Aircraft Operations. 
(1) The Airports Authority shall not increase or de- 
crease the number of instrument flight rule takeoffs and 
landings authorized by the High Density Rule (14 C.F.R. 
93.121 
et seq.) at Washington National Airport as in 
effect on October 18, 1986, and shall not, after the effec- 
tive date of this lease, impose a limitation on the number 
of passengers taking off or landing at Washington Na- 
tional Airport. 
(2) The Airports Authority agrees that any action 
changing or having the effect of changing the hours of 
operation of or the type of aircraft serving either of the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports may be taken only by 

183a 
adoption of or amendment to regulations of the Airports 
Authority. 
11.G. 
Assumption of Rights, Liabilities and Obliga- 
tions. 
(1) In General. 
Except as provided in subparagraph 
2 of this paragraph, the Airports Authority hereby agrees 
that it shall assume all rights, liabilities, and obligations 
(tangible and incorporeal, present and executory) of the 
Secretary with respect to the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports organization of the Federal Aviation Admin- 
istration on the effective date of this lease, including 
leases, permits, 
licenses, contracts, 
agreements, 
claims, 
tariffs, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and litiga- 
tion relating to such rights and obligations, regardless 
whether judgment has been entered, damages, awarded, or 
appeal taken. 
To the extent practicable, the Secretary 
Shall provide at the effective date of this lease a summary 
list of the foregoing which involve material obligations. 
(2) Exceptions. The procedure for disputes resolution 
contained in any contract entered into on behalf of the 
United States before the effective date of this lease shall 
continue to govern the performance of the contract unless 
otherwise agreed to by the parties to the contract. Claims 
for monetary damages founded in tort, by or against the 
United States as the owner and operator of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports, arising before the date the 
lease takes effect shall be adjudicated as if the lease had 
not been entered into. 
(3) Payments 
Into Employee 
Compensation 
Fund. 
The Federal Aviation Administration, and not the Air- 
ports Authority, shall be responsible for reimbursing the 
Employees’ Compensation Fund, pursuant to section 8147 
of title 5, United States Code, for compensation paid or 
payable after the effective date of this lease in accordance 
with chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, with re- 
gard to any injury, disability, or death due to events aris- 

184a 
ing before such date, whether or not a claim has been 
filed or is final on such date. 
L1.H. 
Use of Certain Revenues. 
No landing fee imposed for operating an aircraft or 
revenues derived from parking automobiles— 
(1) at Washington Dulles International Airport may 
be used for maintenance or operating expenses (excluding 
debt service, depreciation, and amortization) at Washing- 
ton National Airport; or 
(2) at Washington National Airport may be used for 
maintenance or operating expenses (excluding debt serv- 
ice, depreciation, and amortization) at Washington Dulles 
International Airport. 
11.1. 
General Aviation Fees. 
The Airports Authority shall compute the fees and 
charges 
for landing 
general 
aviation 
aircraft 
at the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports on the same basis as 
the landing fees for air carrier aircraft, except that the 
Airports Authority may require a minimum landing fee 
not in excess of the landing fee for aircraft weighing 
12,500 pounds. 
11.J. 
Reporting Requirement. 
The Airports Authority agrees to provide annually to 
the Secretary a written report of any demolition during 
the previous year of structures conveyed under this lease. 
Article 12. 
Capital Improvements. 
12.A. 
Master Plans. 
The Airports Authority shall assume responsibility for 
the Federal Aviation Administration’s Master Plans for 
the Metropolitan 
Washington 
Airports, 
including 
the 
adoption of the Dulles Master Plan and the Completion 
of a Master Plan for Washington National Airport, and 
may revise such Master Plans from time to time or 

185a 
adopt subsequent Master Plans for the development of 
the Airports. Major improvements to the Airports shall 
be consistent 
with the most 
recently adopted Master 
Plans. 
12.B. 
Improvement Schedule. 
The Airports Authority acknowledges its intent, to the 
extent practicable, to: 
' 
(1) pursue the improvement, construction and reha- 
bilitation of the facilities 
at Washington Dulles Inter- 
national Airport and Washington National Airport 
si- 
multaneously; and 
(2) cause the improvement, construction, and rehabili- 
tation proposed by the Secretary to be completed at both 
of such Airports within five years of the earliest date on 
which the Airports Authority issues bonds or other long- 
term evidences of indebtedness. 
Article 13. 
Board of Review. 
13.A. 
Establishment and Composition. 
Before taking any actions listed in paragraph 13.D. of 
this Article, the Board of Directors shall establish a nine- 
member Board of Review of the Airports Authority and 
appoint to it representatives of the users of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports who will serve in their in- 
dividual capacities. The Board of Directors shall appoint: 
(1) two members of the Public Works and Transpor- 
tation Committee and two members of the Appropriations 
Committee of the U.S. House of Representatives from a 
list or lists of recommended appointees provided by the 
Speaker of the House; 
(2) two members 
of the Commerce, 
Science, 
and 
Transportation Committee and two members of the Ap- 
propriations Committee of the U.S. Senate from a list 
or lists of recommended appointees provided by the Presi- 
dent pro tempore of the U.S. Senate; and 

186a 
(3) one member chosen alternatively from a list pro- 
vided by the Speaker of the House or the President pro 
tempore of the Senate, respectively. 
The members of the Board of Review shall elect a chair- 
man. The Board of Directors may not appoint a member 
of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate from 
Maryland or Virginia, or the Delegate from the District 
of Columbia, to the Board of Review. 
13.B. 
Terms. 
Members of the Board of Review appointed under sub- 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph 13.A. above shall 
be appointed for six years, except that of the members 
first appointed, one member under each of subparagraphs 
(1) and (2) shall be appointed for a term of two years 
and one member under each of subparagraphs (1) and 
(2) shall be appointed for a term of four years. Mem- 
bers of the Board of Review appointed under subpara- 
graph (3) of paragraph 13.A. shall be appointed for 
terms of two years. A vacancy in the Board of Review 
shall be filled in the same manner in which the original 
appointment was made. Any member appointed to fill a 
vacancy before the expiration of the term for which his 
or her predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only 
for the remainder of such term. 
13.C. 
Procedures. 
The Board of Review shall establish procedures for 
conducting its business. 
The procedures may include re- 
quirements for a quorum 
at meetings and for proxy 
voting. The Board of Review shall meet at least once 
each year and shall meet at the call of the chairman or 
three members of the Board. Any decision of the Board 
of Review under paragraph 13.D. or 13.F. shall be by a 
vote of five members. 
13.D. 
Disapproval Procedure. 
The Board of Directors shall submit the following ac- 
tions to the Board of Review at least thirty days (or at 

187a 
least sixty days in the case of the annual budget) before 
they are to become effective: 
(1) the adoption of an annual budget; 
(2) the authorization for the issuance of bonds; 
(3) the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regula- 
tion; 
(4) the adoption or revision of a Master Plan, includ- 
ing any proposal for land acquisition; and 
(5) the appointment 
of the chief executive 
officer. 
If the Board of Review does not disapprove an action 
within thirty days of its submission under this Article, 
the action may take effect. 
If the Board of Review dis- 
approves any such action, it shall notify the Board of 
Directors and shall give reasons for the disapproval, and 
that action 
shall 
not take 
effect. 
Unless 
an annual 
budget for a fiscal year has taken effect in accordance 
with paragraph 13.D., the Airports Authority shall not 
obligate or expend any money in such fiscal year, except 
for (1) debt service on previously authorized obligations, 
and (2) obligations and expenditures for previously au- 
thorized capital expenditures and routine operating ex- 
penses. 
13.E. 
Request for Consideration of Other Matters. 
The Board of Review may request the Board of Di- 
rectors to consider and vote, or to report, on any matter 
related to the Metropolitan Washington Airports. Upon 
receipt of such a request the Board of Directors shall 
consider and vote, or report, on the matter as promptly 
as feasible. 
13.F. 
Participation in Meetings of the Airports Au- 
thority. 
Members of the Board of Review shall be permitted to 
participate 
as nonvoting members 
in meetings of the 
Board of Directors. 
Bin 
es 
Dirge 
gh 
iit 
a em 
mat wo
Fie. 
m 
tempts
te 
; 

188a 
13.G. 
Staff. 
The Board of Review may hire two staff persons to be 
paid by the Airports Authority. The Airports Authority 
shall provide such clerical and support staff as the Board 
of Review may require. All such staff shall be employees 
of the Airports Authority. 
13.H. 
Effect of Litigation. 
The Airports Authority agrees that if the Board of 
Review is unable to carry out its functions described in 
this Article by reason of a judicial order, the Airports 
Authority will not take any action that must be sub- 
mitted to the Board of Review under paragraph 13.D. 
above. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Article 16. 
Payments. 
16.A. 
Lease Payments. 
The Airports Authority shall pay an annual rental to 
the account of the United States Treasury. For the first 
year of this lease, such annual rental shall be $3,000,000. 
Subsequent annual rental payments shall be adjusted as 
of each anniversary of the effective date of this lease so 
as to equal $3,000,000.00 in 1987 dollars by applying 
the Implicit Price Deflator for the Gross National Prod- 
uct published by the Department of Commerce in the 
March edition of the Survey of Current Business, or the 
appropriate successor index, as determined by the Sec- 
retary of Commerce. 
The parties may renegotiate the 
level of lease payments 
attributable 
to inflation 
costs 
every ten years. Lease payments shall be made from any 
moneys of the Authority legally available for such pur- 
pose, after the Authority shall have first 
(i) satisfied 
its contractual obligations in respect of debt service on 
its bonds and other indebtedness and (ii) paid or set 
aside the amounts required for payment of the operating 
and maintenance expenses of the Airports. 
Subject to 
the foregoing, the Airports Authority shall make lease 

189a 
payments 
in semiannual 
installments 
commencing 
six 
months after the effective date of this lease. At the end 
of each month, the Airports Authority shall direct avail- 
able funds into a reserve of the Airports Authority for 
purposes of making such lease payments, intended to ac- 
cumulate on as equal a basis as possible the amounts due 
on the next lease payment date, which reserve shall be 
deposited in interest-bearing accounts or investment 
se- 
lected by the Airports Authority, with the rent payment 
and the interest actually accrued on the reserve account 
to be payable to the Treasury on the next lease payment 
date. 
16.B. 
Retirement Obligations. 
(1) Not later than one year after the effective date 
of this lease, the Airports Authority shall pay to the 
account of the United States Treasury an amount deter- 
mined by the Office of Personnel Management to repre- 
sent the actual added costs incurred by the Civil Service 
Retirement and Disability Fund due to discontinued serv- 
ice retirement 
under section 8336(d)(1) 
of Title 
5, 
United States Code, of Employees who elect not to trans- 
fer to the Airports Authority. 
(2) Not later than one year after the effective date of 
this lease, the Airports Authority shall pay to the Treas- 
ury of the United States an amount determined by the 
Office of Personnel Management to represent the present 
value of the difference between (a) the future cost of 
benefits payable from the Civil Service Retirement and 
Disability Fund and due the Employees covered under 
section 6008(e) of the Act that are attributable to the 
period of employment following the effective date of this 
lease, and (b) the contributions made by the Employees 
and the Airports Authority under section 6008(e) of the 
Act. In determining the amount due, the Office of Per- 
sonnel Management shall take into consideration the ac- 
tual interest such amount can be expected to earn when 
invested in the Treasury of the United States. 

190a 
16.C. 
Delinquent Payments. 
In the event payments under this lease are delinquent 
so as to constitute an Event of Default under subpara- 
eraph B.(1) of Article 23, the Secretary may, in addi- 
tion to other rights available under this lease, assess in- 
terest at the Treasury Current Value of Funds Rate as 
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury on the date 
payment was due. 
In addition to this interest, penalty 
charges not to exceed six percent per year shall be as- 
sessed on any portion of a payment which is over 90 
days past delinquent. 
Penalty charges shall accrue from 
the date the payment became delinquent and shall con- 
tinue to accrue until payment is received. 
Delinquent 
payments may be collected by administrative offset when- 
ever possible. 
* 
% 
* 
* 
Article 19. 
Hold Harmless. 
To the extent permitted by applicable law, the Air- 
ports Authority shall indemnify, defend, and hold harm- 
less the Secretary, her agents and employees, from any 
and all claims, liability, damage and expense incurred 
by reason of death, injury, loss or damage of or to per- 
sons or property arising out of the Airport Authority’s 
operation, use and occupancy of the Metropolitan Wash- 
ington Airports after the effective date of this lease. As 
between the parties hereto, the Airports Authority as- 
sumes all risk and liability for itself, its agents, employ- 
ees, or contractors for any injury to persons or property 
resulting in any manner from the conduct of its opera- 
tions, and the operations of its agents, or employees, and 
for any loss, cost, damage or expense resulting at any 
time from any cause due to any act or acts, negligence, 
or the failure to exercise proper precautions, of or by 
itself or its agents, or its employees, while occupying or 
operating the Metropolitan Washington Airports. 
Noth- 
ing herein shall be construed to indemnify the Secretary, 
her agents and employees for claims, liability, damage 

19la 
and expense arising in whole or in part from their own 
negligent or intentional acts or omissions. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Article 22. 
No Assignment. 
The Airports Authority shall not, through assignment 
of this lease or otherwise, substitute any other person for 
the Airports Authority 
as the party obligated as the 
tenant under this lease. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, 
the Airports Authority shall be entitled from time to 
time and in its discretion 
to create easements, 
grant 
licenses, and sublease portions of the Leased Premises 
for use by subtenants, for purposes consistent with, and 
subject to the provisions of, this lease. 
No such sub- 
lease shall relieve the Airports Authority from any of 
its obligations pursuant to this lease. 
Article 23. 
Defaults, Events of Defaults and Remedies. 
23.A. 
Defaults. 
Each of the following shall constitute a default by the 
Airports Authority: 
(1) failure by the Airports Authority to pay when due 
any lease payment required to be made by Article 16 
hereof; 
(2) use of the Leased Premises for other than Airport 
Purposes; and 
(3) breach by the Airports Authority of any provi- 
sion, other than those covered above, of this lease. 
23.B. 
Events of Default. 
Each of the following shall constitute an Event of 
Default: 
(1) the continuation of a default described in sub- 
paragraph A.(1) of this Article for 30 days after the 
due date of such payment; 

192a 
(2) the continuation of a default described in sub- 
paragraph A.(2) of this Article for 30 days after the 
receipt by the Airports Authority of a written notice 
from the Secretary specifying the claimed default, the 
affected portion of the Leased Premises, and the nature 
of the uses asserted not to be for Airport Purposes, pro- 
vided that no Event of Default shall occur if the Airports 
Authority shall in good faith have commenced, within 
such 30 day period, to remedy such default and shall 
diligently and continuously proceed to cure such default; 
or 
(3) the continuation of a default described in sub- 
paragraph A.(3) of this Article for 30 days after the 
receipt by the Airports Authority of a written notice 
from the Secretary specifying the claimed default, pro- 
vided that no Event of Default shall occur if the Air- 
ports Authority shall in good faith have commenced, 
within such 30 day period, to remedy such default and 
shall diligently and continuously proceed to cure such 
default. 
23.C. 
Remedies. 
Upon the occurrence and during the continuation of 
any Event of Default 
(1) described in subparagraph B.(1) or B.(3), of this 
Article, the Secretary may request the Attorney General 
to bring an appropriate action to compel the Airports 
Authority and its officers and employees to comply with 
the terms of this lease, and 
(2) described in subparagraph B.(2) of this Article, 
the Secretary shall (a) direct that appropriate measures 
be taken by the Airports Authority to bring the use of 
such portion of the Leased Premises in conformity with 
Airport Purposes, and (b) .retake possession of such 
portion of Leased Premises if the Airports Authority 
fails to bring the use of such portion into a conforming 

193a 
use within a reasonable period of time, as determined by 
the Secretary. 
23.D. 
Rights and Remedies. 
The rights and remedies of the Secretary in this Article 
are exclusive of any other rights and remedies. 
Article 24. Disputes. 
24.A. 
Litigation Procedure. 
Under section 6005(e) of the Act, the district courts 
of the United States shall have jurisdiction to compel the 
Airports Authority and its officers and employees 
to 
comply with the terms of this lease. An action may be 
brought on behalf of the United States by the Attorney 
General, or by any aggrieved party. An action to enforce 
the terms and conditions of this lease may also be brought 
on behalf of the Airports Authority in a district court of 
the United States. 
Except as a court may order or the parties to this lease 
may otherwise agree in writing, pending resolution of 
any action under this Article, the parties shall proceed 
diligently with performance of all obligations under this 
lease. 
24.B. 
Litigation Records. 
Records relating to matters litigated under this Article 
or to litigation or the settlement of claims arising under 
or relating to this lease shall be retained until such litiga- 
tion (including any appeals) or claims are disposed of. 
* 
* 
x 
* 
Article 27. Lease Not Affected by Oral Agreement. 
No oral statement of any person shall modify or other- 
wise affect the terms, conditions, or limitations stated in 
this lease. All modifications 
to this lease must be made 
in writing by the Secretary and the Airports Authority 
or their authorized representatives. 

194a 
Article 28. Law of Agreement. 
This lease shall be governed by and construed in ac- 
cordance with federal law. To the extent that the appli- 
cation of federal law requires or permits the application 
or consideration of state law, the parties agree that the 
law of the Commonwealth of Virginia is most relevant 
to this lease and shall be applied or considered. 
The 
powers of the Secretary with respect to this lease shall 
be construed in accordance with and governed by Federal 
law, and the powers of the Airports Authority with respect 
to this lease shall be construed in accordance with and 
governed by Virginia law. 
Article 29. No Waiver. 
No failure by either party to insist upon the strict 
performance of any agreement, term, covenant or condi- 
tion hereof or to exercise any right or remedy consequent 
upon a breach thereof, and no payment or acceptance of 
full or partial payments during the continuance of any 
such breach, shall constitute a waiver of any such breach 
or of such agreement, term, covenant or condition. 
No 
waiver of any breach shall affect or alter this lease, but 
each and every agreement, term, covenant and condition 
hereof shall continue in full force and effect with respect 
to any other then-existing or subsequent breach thereof. 
Article 30. Captions. 
The captions and headings in this lease are inserted 
only as a matter of convenience and for reference, and 
they in no way define, limit or describe the scope of this 
lease or the intent of any provision thereof. 
Article 31. Partial Invalidity. 
If any term or provision of this lease, or the applica- 
tion thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any 
extent be determined by a court of competent jurisdic- 
tion to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this 

195a 
lease, or the application of such term or provision to 
persons or circumstances other than those as to which it 
is invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby, 
and each term and provision of the lease shall be valid 
and be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
Article 32. 
Certificate of the Secretary. 
The Secretary agrees to execute and deliver to the 
Airports Authority and/or any other person 
or entity 
designated by the Airports Authority, at any time and 
from time to time, upon not less than 30 days’ prior 
written notice by the Airports Authority (which notice 
shall state that the Airports Authority requires same in 
connection 
with a financing or other undertaking), 
a 
Statement in writing: 
(i) certifying that this lease is unmodified and in full 
force and effect (or if there have been modifications, that 
the lease is in full force and effect as modified and stating 
the modifications); 
(ii) stating the dates to which lease payments and 
other charges hereunder have been paid by the Airports 
Authority; 
(iii) stating whether, to the best knowledge of the 
Secretary, the Airports Authority is in default in the 
performance of any covenant, agreement 
or condition 
contained in this lease, and if so, specifying the nature 
of such default; and 
(iv) stating the address to which notices to the Secre- 
tary are to be sent. 
Any such statement delivered by the Secretary may be 
relied upon by any lender, bond holder, trustee or other 
person proposing to enter into agreements with the Air- 
ports Authority as an estoppel of the Secretary’s right to 
assert a position inconsistent with such position. 
* 
* 
x 
* 

196a 
Article 35. Memorandum of Lease. 
Upon the request of the Airports Authority, the Secre- 
tary agrees to execute, in recordable form, a short-form 
memorandum of this lease, which memorandum may be 
recorded at the Airports Authority’s expense in appro- 
priate land records. 
ENTERED INTO THIS SECOND DAY OF MARCH, 1987 
For the United States of America: 
/s/ Elizabeth Hanford Dole 
ELIZABETH HANFORD DOLE 
Secretary of Transportation 
For the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority: 
/s/ Linwood Holton 
A. Linwoop HOoLtTon, Jr. 
Chairman, Board of Directors 
[Notary Stamp Omitted in Printing] 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 3 of Chapter 598, 
Virginia Acts of Assembly, 1985 Session: 
/s/ Gerald L. Baliles 
GERALD L. BALILES 
Governor of Virginia 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 4 of D.C. Law 6-67: 
/s/ Marion Barry, Jr. 
MARION Barry, Jr. 
Mayor of the District of Columbia 

1978 
AMENDMENT NO. 1 
to the 
LEASE 
of the 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS 
between 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
acting by and through 
THE SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION 
and 
THE METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 

198a 
WHEREAS, the Metropolitan Washington Airports Au- 
thority (the “Airports Authority”) and the United States 
of America, acting by and through the Secretary of Trans- 
portation (the “Secretary”), entered into a lease dated 
March 2, 1987 
(the “Lease”), whereby the Secretary 
leased to the Airports Authority Washington National 
Airport 
and Washington 
Dulles 
International 
Airport 
(the “Metropolitan Washington Airports”) 
for a term 
of fifty (SO) years, effective June 7, 1987; 
WHEREAS, the Airports Authority has a continuing 
obligation to comply with the Act; 
WHEREAS, The Act has been amended and it is 
necessary to clarify that the Airports Authority’s obliga- 
tion extends to the Act as amended; 
IT IS NOW, THEREFORE, agreed that the Lease is 
amended as follows: 
1. In Article 
1, Definitions, paragraph 
1.A. “Act” 
is 
amended by inserting at the end thereof, the words 
“as amended by Title VII of Public Law 102-240.” 
2. In Article 
11, paragraphs 
11.A. through 
11.J. are 
redesignated as paragraphs 11.B. through 11.K. 
3. In Article 11, add new paragraph 11.A. to read as 
follows: 
“11.A. 
Obligation to Comply with the Act. 
The Airports Authority agrees to comply with the 
conditions imposed by the Act.” 
4. Article 13 is deleted in its entirety. 
All other provisions of the Lease shall remain unchanged. 

199a 
ENTERED INTO THIS 30th DAY OF DECEMBER, 
1991 
For the United States of 
For the Metropolitan 
America: 
Washington Airports Authority: 
/8/ James B. Busey 
/8/ A. Linwood Holton, Jr. 
ADMIRAL JAMEs B. Busry 
A. LINwoop HOo.Ton, Jr. 
Acting Secretary of 
Chairman, Board of Directors 
Transportation 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 3 of Chapter 598, Vir- 
ginia Acts of Assembly, 1985 Session: 
THE HONORABLE L. DOUGLAS WILDER 
Governor of Virginia 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 4 of D.C. Law 6-67: 
/s/ Sharon Pratt Kelly 
THE HONORABLE SHARON PRATT KELLY 
Mayor of the District of Columbia 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 3 of Chapter 598, Vir- 
ginia Acts of Assembly, 1985 Session: 
/s/ L. Douglas Wilder 
THE HONORABLE L. DouGLas WILDER 
Governor of Virginia 
APPROVED, pursuant to section 4 of D.C. Law 6-67: 
THE HONORABLE SHARON PRATT KELLY 
Mayor of the District of Columbia 

200a 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 
44 Canal Center Plaza 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314-1562 
BYLAWS 
ARTICLE I 
Organization of the Authority 
Section 1. Board of Directors. As created on October 
18, 1986, by Chapter 598 of the 1985 Virginia Acts of 
Assembly, as amended, and the Regional Airports Au- 
thority Act of 1985, D.C. Law 6-67, as amended, the 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority consists of 
eleven members. 
All powers, rights and duties of the 
Authority are thus conferred upon its members, who are 
collectively known as “the Board of Directors”, herein- 
after referred to as “the Board.” 
Individual members of 
the Authority are known as “Directors.” 
a. There shall be eleven Directors: five appointed by 
the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia, three 
appointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia, two 
appointed by the Governor of the State of Maryland, and 
one appointed by the President of the United States. 
b. Directors shall (i) not hold elective or appointive 
public office, (ii) serve without compensation except that 
the Directors shall be entitled to reimbursement of their 
expenses incurred in attendance upon the meetings of the 
Authority or while otherwise engaged in the discharge of 
their duties, and (iii) reside within the Washington Stand- 
ard Metropolitan Statistical Area, except that the Director 
appointed by the President of the United States shall not 
be required to reside in that area. 

20la 
c. Appointments to the Authority shall be for a period 
of six years. However, initial appointments shall be made 
as provided by law. 
d. Each Director may be removed or suspended from 
office only for cause, and in accordance with the laws of 
the jurisdiction from which he or she is appointed. 
e. The Directors shall continue to serve until their 
successors shall be duly appointed and qualified. 
‘Any 
person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the 
unexpired term. 
Any Director shall be eligible for re- 
appointment for one term. 
Section 2. Officers. 
The Board shall annually elect 
from its membership a Chairman and Vice-Chairman and 
may elect from its membership, or appoint or employ 
from its staff, a Secretary and a Treasurer or a Secretary/ 
Treasurer, and prescribe the powers and duties of each 
Officer, and it may appoint from the staff an Assistant 
Secretary and an Assistant Treasurer, or an Assistant 
Secretary/Treasurer, who shall, in addition to other duties, 
discharge such functions of the Secretary and Treasurer, 
respectively, as may be directed by the Board. The Chair- 
man and the Vice-Chairman may use any reasonable titles 
of their own choosing, such as Chair, Chairwoman, or 
Chairperson. 
Section 3. Term of Office. All Officers, as long as they 
continue to serve as a Director or staff, shall hold office 
until the next annual meeting of the Board, of until their 
successors are elected or appointed and qualified, which- 
ever may be the later. 
Section 4. Standing Committees. There shall be three 
standing Committees, on Finance, Operations and Plan- 
ning. 
ARTICLE II 
Duties of the Board 
The Board shall provide direction to the Authority in 
order to acquire, maintain, develop, promote and protect 

202a 
Washington 
National 
and Washington 
Dulles 
Interna- 
tional Airports. The Board shall promote good air trans- 
portation facilities with timely improvements at both Air- 
ports. 
The Board shall see that the laws pertaining to 
the purposes and functions of the Authority are faithfully 
observed and executed. The Board will employ staff and 
adopt appropriate procedures to carry out these duties. 
ARTICLE III 
Powers and Duties of the Officers of the Board 
Section 
1. The Chairman. 
The Chairman shall pre- 
side at all meetings of the Board; shall establish and 
appoint all Committees and the Chairmen thereof; shall 
determine the jurisdiction of all Committees; shall serve 
as an ex officio member of all Committees; shall execute 
documents on behalf of the Authority as prescribed by 
the Board; and shall perform such other duties as the 
Board may from time to time direct. 
Section 2. The Vice-Chairman. 
The Vice-Chairman 
shall perform the duties and have the powers of the Chair- 
man during the absence or incapacity of the Chairman 
from any cause. 
A certification by any six Directors as 
to such absence or incapacity from any regular or special 
meeting shall be conclusive evidence thereof. 
Section 3. The Secretary. The Secretary shall be the 
custodian of all records and of the Seal of the Authority 
and shall keep accurate minutes of the meetings of the 
Board and its Committees. The Secretary shall have the 
authority to cause copies to be made of all minutes and 
other records and documents of the Authority and to 
certify under the official seal of the Authority that such 
copies are true copies. The Secretary shall affix the Seal 
of the Authority to legal instruments and documents as 
required. 
Secretary shall cause notice to be given to all 
meetings of the Authority as required by law or by these 
Bylaws and distribute the agenda and related materials 

203a 
not less than 48 hours before the regular meetings of the 
Board. 
The Secretary, if a Director, shall become, ex 
officio, the Acting Chairman in the event the offices of 
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman 
are both vacant, or 
in the event that the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman 
are both unable to perform their duties by reason of 
absence or incapacity. 
Section 4. The Treasurer. 
Except as may be required 
in any instrument under which any revenue 
or other 
bonds are issued by the Authority, the Treasurer shall 
have the care and custody of and shall be responsible for 
all monies of the Authority from whatever sources 
re- 
ceived. 
The Treasurer shall be responsible for the de- 
posit of such monies in the name of the Authority in a 
bank or banks approved by the Board and shall be re- 
sponsible for disbursements of such funds for purposes 
authorized or intended by the Board. The Treasurer, and 
any Assistant Treasurer, shall be bonded in an amount 
and with surety acceptable to the Board and shall make 
periodic accounting for all such funds as determined by 
the Board. The Treasurer’s books shall be available for 
inspection by any Director of the Board during business 
hours. 
Section 5. Other Duties. In addition to the duties and 
powers herein set forth, the Chairman, the Vice Chair- 
man, the Secretary and the Treasurer shall each have 
the duties and powers as are commonly incident to their 
offices and such duties as may be imposed by law or as 
the Authority may from time to time by resolution 
specify. 
ARTICLE IV 
Board of Review 
Section 
1. Establishment and composition. 
There is 
hereby established a Board of Review of the Airports 
Authority to represent the interests of users of the Metro- 
politan Washington Airports. 
This Board has the re- 

204a 
sponsibility of reviewing certain actions taken by the 
Board of Directors, as set forth below. 
The Board of 
Review shall be composed of nine Members, appointed 
by the Board of Directors as follows: 
a. Four individuals from a list provided by the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives; 
b. Four individuals from a list provided by the Presi- 
dent pro tempore of the Senate; and 
c. One individual chosen alternatively from a list pro- 
vided by the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
and from a list provided by the President pro tempore 
of the Senate. 
d. The Board of Directors may request additional rec- 
ommendations from the Speaker and the President pro 
tempore. 
Section 2. Qualifications. 
Members of the Board of 
Review shall be individuals who have experience in avia- 
tion matters and in addressing the needs of airport users, 
and who themselves are frequent users of either or both 
of the Metropolitan Washington Airports. 
A Member 
of the Board of Review shall be a registered voter of 
a jurisdiction other than Maryland, Virginia, or the Dis- 
trict of Columbia. 
Section 3. Terms. Members of the Board of Review 
shall be appointed for six years. Members of the Board 
of Review appointed under paragraph c. of section 
1 
shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
The Board 
of Directors shall fill a vacancy on the Board of Review 
in the same manner in which the original appointment 
was made. 
Any Member appointed to fill a vacancy 
before the expiration of the term for which the Member’s 
predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for 
the remainder of such term. 
Section 4. Removal. 
Members of the Board of Re- 
view are subject to removal only for cause by a two- 
thirds vote of the Board of Directors. 

205a 
Section 5. Effect of more than four vacancies. At any 
time that the Board of Review has more than four vacan- 
cies and lists have been provided for appointments to fill 
such vacancies, the Authority will not take any of the 
actions required under section 7 below to be submitted 
to the Board of Review. 
Section 6. Procedures. 
The Board of Review shall 
establish procedures for conducting 
its business. 
The 
procedures may include requirements for a quorum at 
meetings, for voting by proxy, and for the selection of 
a Chairman. 
Proxies may be given only to other Mem- 
bers of the Board of Review. 
The Board of Review 
shall meet at least once each year and shall meet at the 
call of its Chairman or three of its Members. 
With at 
least one week’s notice, the Board of Directors may also 
call meetings of the Board of Review. Any recommenda- 
tion of the Board of Review under section 7 and any 
request under section 
11 shall be by a vote of five 
members. 
— 
Section 7. Review procedure. The Board of Directors 
shall submit the following actions to the Board of Re- 
view at least thirty days (or at least sixty days in the 
case of the annual budget) before they are to become 
effective: 
a. 
the adoption of an annual budget, and any amend- 
ments thereto; 
b. the authorization for the issuance of bonds and an 
annual plan for the issuance of bonds and any 
amendments to such plan; 
the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation; 
the adoption or revision of a master plan; - 
the appointment of the chief executive officer; 
mo 
9 the award of a contract (other than a contract in 
connection with the issuance or sale of bonds which 

206a 
is executed within thirty days of the date of issu- 
ance of the bonds) which has been approved by 
the Board of Directors; 
g. any action of the Board of Directors approving a 
terminal design or airport layout or modification 
of such design or layout; and 
h. the authorization for the acquisition or disposal of 
land and the grant of a long-term easement. 
The Board of Review may make recommendations to the 
Board of Directors regarding an action (1) within thirty 
calendar days of its submission or (2) ten calendar days 
(excluding Saturdays, and holidays, and any day on 
which neither House of Congress is in session because of 
an adjournment sine die, a recess of more than three 
days, or an adjournment of more than three days) of its 
submission, whichever period is longer. Such recommen- 
dations may include a recommendation that the action 
not take effect. 
If the Board of Review does not make 
a recommendation in the applicable review period under 
this section, or if at any time in such review period the 
Board of Review decides that it will not make a recom- 
mendation on an action, the action may take effect. 
Section 8. Effect of recommendation. An action with 
respect to which the Board of Review has made a recom- 
mendation in accordance with section 7 may only take 
effect if the Board of Directors adopts such recommenda- 
tion or if the Board of Directors has evaluated and re- 
sponded, in writing, to the Board of Review with respect 
to such recommendation and transmits such action, evalu- 
ation, and response to the Congress in accordance with 
section 9 and the sixty-calendar-day period prescribed in 
section 9 expires. 
Section 9. Nonadoption of recommendation. 
If the 
Board of Directors does not adopt a recommendation of 
the Board of Review regarding an action, the Board of 
Directors shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of 

207a 
Representatives and the President of the Senate a detailed 
description of the action, the recommendation 
of the 
Board of Review regarding the action, and the evaluation 
and response of the Board of Directors to such recom- 
mendation, and the action may not take effect until the 
expiration of sixty calendar days ( excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays, and holidays, and any day on which neither 
House of Congress is in session because of an adjourn- 
ment sine die, a recess of more than three days, or an 
adjournment of more than three days) beginning on the 
day on which the Board of Directors makes such trans- 
mission to the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
and the President of the Senate. 
Section 
10. Limitation on expenditures. 
Unless an 
annual budget for a fiscal year has taken effect in accord- 
ance with either section 7 or 9, the Authority shall not 
obligate or expend any money in such fiscal year, except 
for (1) debt service on previously authorized obligations, 
and 
(2) obligations 
and 
expenditures 
for previously 
authorized 
capital expenditures 
and routine 
operating 
expenses. 
Section 11. Request for consideration of other matters. 
The Board of Review may request the Board of Directors 
to consider and vote, or to report, on any matter related 
to the Metropolitan Washington Airports. Upon receipt 
of such a request, the Board of Directors will consider 
and vote, or report, on the matter as promptly as feasible. 
Section 12. Participation in meetings of the Board of 
Directors. Members of the Board of Review may partici- 
pate as nonvoting members in meetings of the Board of 
Directors. 
Section 13. Staff. The Board of Review may hire two 
staff persons to be paid by the Authority. The Authority 
shall provide such clerical and support staff as the Board 
of Review may require. The staff shall be employees of 
the Authority. 
Section 14. Limitation on Board actions. 
If the Board 
of Review is unable to function 
as described in this 

208a 
Article by reason of a judicial order, the Board of Di- 
rectors thereafter may not take any actions that must be 
submitted to the Board of Review under section 7, but 
may continue to take all actions other than those that 
must be submitted. 
ARTICLE V 
Chief Executive Officer, and Other Employees 
Section 1. Chief Executive Officer. 
The Board shall 
appoint a Chief Executive Officer who shall be the Chief 
Executive Officer of the Authority. 
He or she shall, 
except as otherwise provided by the Board, be in charge 
of management and all operations of the Airports and 
any other activities of the Authority as prescribed by the 
Board. 
The Chief Executive Officer 
shall sign docu- 
ments on behalf of the Authority as prescribed by the 
Board. 
The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge his 
or her duties as directed by the Board. 
Section 2. Employees. 
The Chief Executive Officer 
shall present the Board with a plan for staffing the Au- 
thority. 
All selections for positions reporting directly to 
the Chief Executive Officer shall be subject to approval 
by the Board. 
ARTICLE VI 
Offices, Books and Records 
Section 1. Offices. The Board shall establish the prin- 
cipal office of the Authority at or near either Washington 
National 
Airport 
or Washington 
Dulles 
International 
Airport. 
Section 2. Books and Records. 
Except as may be 
otherwise required or permitted by resolution of the 
Board, or as the business of the Authority may from 
time to time require, all of the books and records of the 
Authority shall be kept at its principal office. Such books 
and records shall be available during ordinary business 
hours for inspection by any member of the public. 

209a 
Section 3. Minutes. 
All approved minutes of Board 
or Committee meetings other than those of an executive 
session shall be open to public inspection during ordinary 
business hours. 
: 
ARTICLE VII 
Meetings of the Board 
Section 1. Meetings Open to the Public. All meetings 
of the Board and its Committees shall be open to the 
public, except during executive sessions. 
Section 2. Regular Meetings. 
A regular meeting of 
the Board shall be held without call or formal notice at 
the principal office of the Authority on the first Wednes- 
day of every month at 9 a.m., except that in any case in 
which such day shall be a legal holiday, or for any other 
reason inappropriate as a meeting day, the regular meet- 
ing shall be held on such other day as may be determined 
by at least six Directors after consultation with all of the 
Directors and upon the provision of seventy-two hours 
notice to the Secretary. The Secretary shall notify all of 
the Directors upon receipt of such notice. 
Section 3. Annual Meeting. The regular meeting held 
in the month of September in each year shall be the an- 
nual meeting for the election of a Chairman, Vice-Chair- 
man, Secretary and a Treasurer. 
If the annual meeting 
is omitted, a special meeting shall be held in lieu thereof 
as soon as practicable, and all elections held and action 
taken thereat shall have the same effect as if held or 
taken at the annual meeting. 
Section 4. Special Meeting. 
Special meetings may be 
called at any time by the Chairman. Upon receipt of a 
written request for a special meeting from any. six Di- 
rectors, the Chairman must call a meeting. Written notice 
of each special meeting, specifying the time and place of 
the meeting, and the Purpose or purposes of the meeting, 
shall be given to the Directors by the Secretary. Notice 
shall be deemed sufficient if sent by mail at least seventy- 

210a 
two hours in advance of the date and time of the meeting 
or by telegram or otherwise in writing within twenty-four 
hours before the time of the meeting, if given to the 
Directors in person. 
Formal notice to any person shall 
not be required provided all Directors are present or those 
not present shall have waived notice in writing, filed with 
the records of the meeting, either before or after the 
meeting. 
Section 5. 
Information. 
Information as to the time 
and place of each meeting shall be furnished to any person 
who requests such information. 
Requests to be notified 
on a continuing basis shall be made at least once a year in 
writing. 
ARTICLE VIII 
Quorum 
Section 1. 
Quorum. 
Six Directors shall constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of all business at a regular or 
special meeting. A majority of the members of a Com- 
mittee, not including the ex officio member, shall consti- 
tute a quorum for the transaction of all Committee busi- 
ness. 
Section 2. 
Majority Voting. Action by the Board shall 
be by a simple majority vote of the Directors present and 
voting except where otherwise provided by the Bylaws. 
Seven affirmative votes shall be required to approve bond 
issues and the annual budget of the Authority. 
ARTICLE IX 
Trasaction of Business 
Section 1. 
Regular, Special and Committee Meetings. 
Any business of the Agency may be considered at any 
regular meeting of the Board. 
Only items of business 
identified in the agenda distributed by the Secretary forty- 
eight hours in advance of the meeting may be acted upon 
at a regular meeting. Other matters may be acted upon 

211a 
if a majority of the Board of Directors votes to waive this 
notice provision. When notice of a special meeting is sent, 
only matters specified or described in the notice may be 
considered at the special meeting, except that with the 
unanimous consent of the Direciors present any other 
matter be considered. 
Business within the jurisdiction of 
a Committee may be considered at any meeting of the 
Committee. 
Only items of business 
identified 
in the 
agenda distributed by the Secretary forty-eight hours in 
advance of the meeting may be acted upon at a Committee 
meeting. Other matters may be acted upon if a majority 
of the Members of the Committee vote to waive this notice 
provision. 
Section 2. 
Order of Business. 
Unless waived by a 
vote of six or more Directors, the order of business at a 
regular meeting of.the Board shall be: 
a. Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting. 
b. Committee Reports 
c. Report of Chief Executive Officer and staff. 
d. Unfinished business. 
e. 
New business. 
f. Other business and adjournment. 
Section 3. 
Executive Session. 
All regular, special and 
committee meetings of the Board shall be open to the 
public, except that at any time a majority of the Directors 
present may affirmatively vote to consider a matter or 
matters in the categories described below in executive ses- 
sion which will be closed to the public. Any motion to 
meet in executive session must identify in general terms 
the subject or subjects to be considered and identify the 
subsection below under which the executive session is au- 
thorized. 
The following items or matters may be con- 
sidered and acted upon by the Board, and appropriate 
officers and staff, in the executive session: 

212a 
a. Personnel matters such as the discussion or con- 
sideration of: employment, appointment, assignment, pro- 
motion, demotion, performance ‘appraisal, discipline, res- 
ignation, salaries and benefits, and interviews of Directors, 
officers, and employees of the Authority, and applicants 
for the same. 
b. Personal matters not directly related to the Author- 
ity’s business in order to protect the privacy of individuals. 
c. Existing or prospective contracts, business or legal 
relationships to protect proprietary or confidential infor- 
mation of the Authority, any person or company; the 
financial interest of the Authority; or the negotiating posi- 
tion of the Authority. 
d. Financial matters, including the indebtedness of the 
Authority and the investment of Authority funds, particu- 
larly where competition or necotiation is involved. 
e. Consultation with legal counsel and briefings by 
staff, consultants and/or attorneys, pertaining to actual or 
potential litigation, pending or proposed legislation, com- 
pliance with a specific constitutional, statutory or judicially 
imposed requirement, or other legal matters, and discus- 
sions of such matters by the Board without the presence of 
counsel, staff, consultants, or attorneys. 
f. Discussion of security plans and other law enforce- 
ment measures for the protection of the public from ter- 
rorism and aircraft hijacking. 
g. Audit matters. 
Section 4. 
Actions in Executive Session. 
No resolu- 
tion, contract, or motion, adopted, passed or agreed to in 
an executive session, other than a request to the staff for 
information, shall become effective unless the Board or 
Committee, at an appropriate time following such session, 
reconvenes in public or open session and takes a vote of 
the Directors on such resolution, contract, or motion and 
the subject of the resolution, contract, or motion shall be 

2134 
reasonably identified: in the open session.’ 
This shall not 
be construed to require the Board or Committee to divulge 
information that is proprietary or actions which are not 
final. 
Section 5. 
Other Business. 
After completion of the 
agenda, the Chairman, Directors, or the Chief Executive 
Officer may, for information purposes, place any matter 
or matters on the agenda or other business which they 
deem to require the attention of the Board. 
Section 6. 
Procedure. 
Roberts Rules of Order, as 
amended, shall be the authority for all matters of proce- 
dure not otherwise covered by these Bylaws. A point of 
order as to procedure raised by any Director in the course 
of a regular, special or committee meeting shall be re- 
solved by a ruling of the Chairman. 
The vote of a ma- 
jority of the Directors present shall be required to overrule 
the Chairman. 
ARTICLE X 
Directives and Regulations 
Section 1. 
General. The Board will adopt, amend and 
repeal as necessary: 
1) internal directives and procedures 
for operating the Airports, including delegations of au- 
thority, and 2) regulations which may have the force and 
effect of law, pertaining to the use, maintenance and op- 
eration of its facilities and governing the conduct of per- 
sons and organizations using its facilities. 
Section 2. 
Regulatory procedure. 
Unless the Board 
determines that an emergency exists by unanimous vote 
of all Directors present, the Board shall, prior to the adop- 
tion of any regulation or alteration, TO: or modifi- 
cation thereof: 
a. Make such regulation or amendment thereof in con- 
venient form available for public inspection in the office 
of the Authority for at least ten days. 
~ 

214a 
b. Publish a notice in a newspaper or newspapers of 
general circulation in the District of Columbia, Mont- 
gomery County and Prince George’s County, Maryland, 
and in the local political subdivisions of the Common- 
wealth of Virginia where the Authority facilities are lo- 
cated declaring 
the Authority’s 
intention 
to consider 
adopting such regulation or amendment thereof and in- 
forming the public that the Authority will hold a public 
hearing at which any person may appear and be heard for 
or against the adoption of such regulation or such altera- 
tion, amendment, or modification, on a day and at a time 
to be specified in the notice, after the expiration of at least 
ten days from the day of the publication thereof; and 
c. Hold the public hearing, or appoint a hearing officer 
to hold a public hearing, on the day and at a time speci- 
fied in such notice or any adjournment thereof, and hear 
persons appearing for or against such regulation or amend- 
ment thereof. 
d. In accordance with the Metropolitan Washington 
Airports Act of 1986, adoption by the Board of the regu- 
lations of the Federal Aviation Administration which gov- 
ern the Airports at the time the Airports are transferred 
to the Authority shall not be subject to this procedure. 
Section 3. 
Inspection of regulations. The Authority’s 
regulations shall be available for public inspection in the 
Authority’s principal office. 
Section 4. 
Force and Effect of Law. The Authority’s 
regulations relating to: 
a. 
Air operations and motor vehicle traffic, including, 
but not limited to, motor vehicle speed limits and the loca- 
tion of and payment for public parking; 
b. Access to and use of Authority Facilities, including 
but not limited to solicitation, handbilling, picketing and 
the conduct of commercial activities; and 

215a 
c. 
Aircraft operation and maintenance; 
shall have the force and effect of law, as shall any other 
regulation of the Authority which shall contain a deter- 
mination by the Board that it is necessary to accord the 
same force and effect of law in the public interest; pro- 
vided, however, that with respect to motor vehicle traffic 
rules and regulations, the Board will obtain the approval 
of the traffic engineer or comparable official of the local 
political subdivision in which such rules or regulations are 
to be enforced. 
Section 5. 
Effective Dates. The Board shall establish 
the effective date of its regulatory actions consistent with 
Article IV of these Bylaws. 
ARTICLE XI 
Miscellaneous 
Section 1. 
Code of Ethics. The Board shall adopt a 
code of ethics and financial disclosure to assure the integ- 
rity of all decisions by the Board, its Board of Review, 
and employees of the Authority. The code shall provide 
that each Director and his/her immediate families may 
not hold a substantial financial interest in any enterprise 
that has or is seeking a contract or agreement with the 
Airports Authority or is an aeronautical, aviation services, 
or airports services enterprise that otherwise has interests 
that can be directly affected by the Airports Authority. 
Exceptions may be made if the financial interest is fully 
interest is fully disclosed to the Board and the Director 
does not participate in Board decisions that directly affect 
such interest. 
Section 2. 
Indemnity. The Authority shall indemnify 
each Director and Officer against all costs and expenses 
(including counsel fees) the Director actually incurs in 
connection with or resulting from any action, suit or pro- 
ceeding, of whatever nature, to which the Director is or 
shall be made a party by reason of his being or having 

216a 
been a Director or Officer of the Authority, provided (1) 
that the Director or Officer conducted him- or herself in 
good faith and (2) reasonably believed that his or her 
conduct was in the best interest of the Authority. 
This 
indemnity shall not apply in actions when the Director or 
Officer is adjudged liable to the Authority. 
Section 3. Minority participation. 
The Board shall 
develop and adopt a policy for providing minority partici- 
pation in the contracts of the Authority. 
ARTICLE XII 
Amendments 
These Bylaws may be amended or repealed in whole 
or in part by resolution of the Board adopted by at least 
seven Directors at any regular meeting or special meeting, 
provided that notice of intention to present such resolution 
shall be given to all Directors at least two days in advance 
of the meeting at which the motion to adopt such resolu- 
tion is to be made. 
Such notice shall be given by any 
Director, or by the Secretary at the request of any Direc- 
tors, and shall specify the subject matter of the proposed 
amendment or repeal. The notice of intention to amend 
or repeal these Bylaws shall include a specific reference 
to the Article subject to the proposed amendment or re- 
peal, together with the suggested change. 
Adopted March 4, 1987 
Amended January 8, 1992 and April 1, 1992 

217a 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Civil Action No. 92-556-JHG 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, SR., et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
v. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY, ef al., 
Defendants. 
PLAINTIFFS’ STATEMENT OF MATERIAL FACTS 
Pursuant to Local Rule 108(h), plaintiffs submit the 
following statement of material facts as to which there 
is nO genuine issue. 
1. On February 5, 1992, after receiving a list of five 
nominees from the Speaker of the House, which consisted 
entirely of Members of the House of Representatives, 
four of whom serve on the House Committees with over- 
sight responsibility over transportation matters, the Board 
of Directors appointed those five Members to the Board 
of Review. 
Answer 424; Board of Directors Meeting, 
Minutes of Feb. 5, 1992, at 8 (PI. Ex. B). 
The Board 
of Directors did not request the submission of any addi- 
tional names from the House. All five of the House nom- 
inees were members of the old Board of Review at the 
time of the Supreme Court decision. Compare Pi. Ex. B 
with 1991 Hearing at 6. 
2. In February, 1992, the Board of Directors received 
a list of three nominees from the President pro tempore 
of the Senate, which consisted of three Senators who 
serve on the Senate Committees with oversight responsi- 

218a 
bility over transportation matters, and who had been 
members of the Board of Review in June 1991, and a 
letter submitting the name of one individual who is not 
a Member of Congress. Letters to Hon. Linwood Holton 
from President pro tempore Robert Byrd (Feb. 5, 1992 
& Feb. 20, 1992) (Pl. Exs. 
C & D); cf. 1991 Hearing 
at 6. The Board of Directors did not request the sub- 
mission of any additional names from the Senate. 
On 
February 27, 1992, the Board of Directors appointed 
these four individuals to the Board of Review. 
Answer 
€ 25; Board of Directors Special Meeting, Minutes of 
Feb. 27, 1992, at 1 (Pl. Ex. E). 
3. The 60-day review period set forth in the Metro- 
politan 
Washington 
Airports 
Authority 
Amendments, 
§ 6007(f)(4)(D), will span at least three months, and 
might span more than six months in some circumstances. 
Affidavit of Pamela Gilbert 9 3-4 (May 28, 1992). 
Respectfully submitted, 
/s/ Patti A. Goldman 
PATTi A. GOLDMAN 
(D.C. Bar No. 398565) 
Alan B. Morrison 
(D.C. Bar No. 073114) 
Paul R.Q. Wolfson 
(D.C. Bar No. 414759) 
Public Citizen Litigation Group 
Suite 700, 2000 P Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 833-3000 
Attorneys for Plaintiffs 
May 29, 1992 

219a 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Civil Action No. 92-556-JHG 
JOHN W. HECHINGER, SR., et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
Vv. 
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY, et al., 
Defendants. 
h 
AFFIDAVIT OF PAMELA GILBERT 
I, Pamela Gilbert, hereby declare as follows: 
1. I am the legislative director of Public Citizen’s 
Congress Watch, a position that I have held since the 
end of 1989. In that capacity, I supervise a staff of four 
attorneys who regularly lobby Congress on a wide range 
of issues, as well as handling my own lobbying duties. 
From 1984 until I came to Public Citizen, I was the 
consumer program director of the U.S. Public Interest 
Research Group, the national lobbying office for a net- 
work of state consumer advocacy organizations. 
In that 
capacity, I engaged in extensive lobbying of the U.S. 
Congress. 
Based on my lobbying experience, I am fa- 
miliar with congressional practices, including the patterns 
of congressional recesses and adjournments. 
2. I understand that, in the Metropolitan Washing- 
ton Airports Act Amendments of 1991, Congress estab- 
lished a 60-day period for Congress to review certain 
actions of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Author- 
ity (““MWAA”), and that the review period consists of 
calendar days excluding Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, 

ia 
220a 
and any day on which neither House of Congress is in 
session because of an adjournment sine die, a recess of 
more than three days, or an adjournment of more than 
three days. 
3. Since this period excludes weekends and holidays, 
it consists of at least three months. 
However, based on 
my experience, Congress typically recesses or adjourns for 
more than three days at least once during any three 
month period, and such recesses or adjournments can 
occur much more often than that. Therefore, on average, 
the review period will span more than three months. 
4. However, it is also possible for the review period 
to cover more than six months, particularly in an election 
year when Congress generally recesses for two long breaks 
in the summer for party conventions, and then adjourns 
sine die in early October. 
Thus, if the MWAA Board 
of Directors submitted an action to Congress in late June 
of this year, there would be only approximately 15 to 20 
legislative days in July, less than 10 legislative days in 
August, and 15 to 20 legislative days in September before 
Congress adjourns sine die. The new Congress would not 
begin until the third week in January, 1993. Therefore, 
it is possible for the 60 day review period to span more 
than six months. 
Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1746, I declare under penalty 
of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct. 
Executed on this 28 day of May, 1992. 
/s/ Pamela Gilbert 
PAMELA GILBERT 

