. 
a ees 
» 
ih 
ALGO 
eee 
2 
rea 
Patt 
2m Bh piss 
Spa 
SRO EA SS 
FILED 
(0) 
MAR 2 4 1395 
No. 94-788 
i 
QEFIGE 
QF ine CLERK 
In The 
Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
+ 
CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 
Petitioner, 
V. 
CEMENT DIVISION NATIONAL GYPSUM 
COMPANY, et al., 
Respondents. 
> 
On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 
* 
RESPONDENTS’ BRIEF ON THE MERITS 
4 
Harney B. Stover, Jr.* 
KATHRYN A. LONSDORF 
Counsel for Respondents 
Cement Division, 
National Gypsum Company, et al. 
Davis & KuetrHau, S.C 
111 E. Kilbourn 
Suite 1400 
Milwaukee, WI 53202 
(414) 276-0200 
*Counsel of Record 
<KLE 
LAW 
@RIEF PRINTING Ct 
mO) 
25-64 
® 
CALL 
COLLECT 
(402) 
)-2@)) 
ne 
Oar 
mith 
sake 
Cova 
aee 
aa 
iso 
ee 
ape 
iat 
ofr 
Saran 

QUESTION PRESENTED 
In a mutual 
fault, admiralty, collision case, 
is a 
party’s fault a special or peculiar circumstance justifying 
the trial court’s exercise of its discretion to deny recovery 
of prejudgment interest to that party? 

** 
LIST OF PARTIES 
The List of Parties in Petitioner’s Brief on the Merits 
is true and correct. 
The following Respondents have parent corporations: 
a. 
Allstate Insurance Company is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck and Co. 
b. 
Highlands Insurance Company is owned by Hal- 
liburton Company. 
c. 
Insurance Company of North America (U.K.) Ltd. 
“G” A/o is owned by CIGNA Corporation. 
d. 
Insurance Company of North America (U.K.) Ltd. 
“O” A/o is owned by CIGNA Corporation. 
The balance of respondents are independent entities. 

ili 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
gs 
| 
i 
ee 
re 
ii 
ee ee 
ili 
ge 
Vv 
eg 
et 
1 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ................. 
1 
RE ee 
ee 
3 
THE COURT OF APPEALS CORRECTLY HELD 
THAT, IN A MUTUAL FAULT, ADMIRALTY, 
COLLISION CASE, A DISTRICT COURT DOES 
NOT HAVE THE DISCRETION TO DENY PRE- 
JUDGMENT INTEREST BASED UPON THE 
FAULT OF THE PARTY SEEKING ITS RECOV- 
A. 
Prejudgment interest is the rule in admiralty 
collision cases. A majority of lower courts 
have held that mutual fault of the parties is 
not a special or peculiar circumstance justi- 
fying the exercise of a court’s discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest. The Fifth and 
Eleventh Circuits have held that mutual 
fault is such a peculiar circumstance. Which 
is correct is the question presented to this 
De 
ee 
5 
ass kid Fila 
5 
0 9'0 Fon 3's 0 
3 
B. 
Discretion 
to deny prejudgment interest 
because of mutual fault is inconsistent with 
the general policy underlying civil litigation 
to fully compensate an injured party....... 
9 

iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 
C. 
Since the adoption of the rule of true com- 
parative negligence, a rule in admiralty per- 
mitting denial 
of prejudgment interest 
because of mutual fault has no rational basis 
and would promote litigation because of 
STII 5 
on 
knee Na ee Eee ales 16 
. 
D. 
Discretion 
to deny prejudgment interest 
based on the fault of a party (irrespective of 
degree) amounts to a penalty under a com- 
parative negligence regime because the fault 
of the party has already been assessed at the 
comparative negligence stage.............. 
23 
E. 
Because the relative degree of the parties’ 
causal fault is now determined under princi- 
ples of true comparative negligence, 
a 
“bright line” rule against denial of prejudg- 
ment interest, with an exception limited to 
where the party seeking interest has engaged 
in post-accident conduct justifying a denial 
of prejudgment interest, would be consistent 
with this Court’s prior decisions and deci- 
sions of a majority of lower courts address- 
IE SN ooo 
cco had ene se ee seen ee cae 
25 
CEPR ire 
e ena eee sees eon Macnee cetesh 
and 27 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Afran Transport Co. v. The Bergechief, 285 F.2d 119 
eee ee WEE ha 
+ od co weesne dee cane teaote oun 
ess 19 
Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405 (1975) .... 15 
Alkmeon Naviera, S.A. v. M/V Marina L, 633 F.2d 
rrr 
rr ees eee 4,5, 6 
Anderson v. Whittaker Corp., 894 F.2d 804 (6th Cir. 
EGS 
eS ARN OOs Gooch 
x We ee LESS CALE 
hee ha cen 5 
Bagrowski v. American Export Isbrandtsen Lines, 440 
oo 
8, Be. 
| ee 
ee 11 
Board of Comm'rs of Jackson County v. United States, 
5 
er rene 22 
Cement Div., Nat. Gypsum Co. v. City of Milwaukee, 
oe Foe men C7 Cit, 2986). ooo 
ccc ckccecs 4,5, 8,9 
Complaint of B.F.T. No. Two Corp., 433 F. Supp. 854 
CR RS EE Oa i oie uv 
a 6534 PK% be bw Me Kind kha cus 6 
Del Col v. Arnold, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 333 (1796) ......... 3 
Funkhouser 
v. J. B. Preston Co. Inc., 290 U.S. 163 
| Sa 
meer Tae Foe Pay 
ee amen De rae 9, 15, 17 
General Motors Corp. v. DeVex Corp., 461 U.S. 648 
SONS 
tee ere ERS Gree 
dices hindu lonub 
i <i 11 
Granholm 
v. TFL EXPRESS, 576 F. Supp. 435 
ees BUNS 
CAF Lone kis veka adhe ke nk ch end ances 6 
Grubart, Inc. v. Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co., 1995 
WL 68408, 11 (U.S.) (February 22, 1995)........... 21 
Iberian Tankers Co. v. Gates Construction Corp., 504 
Ce POP Ue GE, OE ooo oes one edb tenes 
a kGensces 19 
Inland Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing 
Co., 696 F.2d 321 (5th Cir. 1983) ........... 4, 7, 8, 26 
Library of Congress v. Shaw, 478 U.S. 310 (1986)...... 14 

vi 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
Lone Star Industries v. Mays Towing Co. Inc., 725 F. 
Supp. 440 (E.D. Mo. 
1989), 
rev'd on other 
grounds, 927 F.2d 1453 (8th Cir. 1991) .............. 6 
Matter of Bankers 
Trust, 658 F.2d 103 (3rd Cir. 
1981), cert. denied, 456 U.S. 961 (1982).............. 5 
Matter of Getty Marine, 1983 A.M.C. 550 (E.D. Va. 
Peek 
ea hk 6a ees 
ae 
wk 
a 
OU Wren 6 
Matter of Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d 1279 
oo Re ee reer 
eee ree 10, 15, 16, 24 
Miller v. Robertson, 266 U.S. 243 (1924) ............ 9, 10 
Monessen Southwestern Ry Co. v. Morgan, 486 U.S. 
| re 
re err errr ld, 22, 23 
Nat G. Harrison 
Overseas Corp. 
v. American Tug 
repr mee 
Boe 8 ee A ee 
ee 7 
National Marine Service, Inc. v. Talley, 348 F.2d 589 
ge | 
re ee 
er nr eee 7 
Noritake Co. v. M/V HELLENIC CHAMPION, 627 
eee oe . 
Lee 
| eee 
ee rrr eee + 
Oglebay Norton Co. v. CSX Corp., 788 F.2d 361 (6th 
Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 849 (1986) ......... 4 
Osterneck v. Ernst & Whinney, 489 U.S. 169 (1989) .... 12 
Parker Towing Co. v. Yazoo River Towing, Inc., 794 
ee 
eee 
eee eee 4, 8 
Royal Indemnity Co. v. United States, 313 U.S. 289 
CSOGR) ws sic 
Kuan een 
ee 
eee 
eee aks sake as. 9 
Sinclair Refining Co. v. SS GREEN ISLAND, 426 
ae 
Fhe Se 
eee rr Te Teese AE 
Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 267 U.S. 76 (1925) .... 11 

Vii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
STARLIGHT I, Inc. v. Patriots Corp., No. 83-3783-Z, 
slip op. at 7 (D.Mass. Aug. 9, 1985) ............... 6 
Stevens v. F/V BONNIE DOON, 655 F.2d 206 (9th 
UR 
Soros fae 
ne eee 
ee 
eG 
5 
The Amiable Nancy, 16 U.S. (3 Wheat) 546 (1818)...... 3 
The Anna Maria, 15 U.S. (2 Wheat) 327 (1817) ........ 3 
tre Néenitota, 122 US. 97 (1867) .. 2.6... 
ce enc. 4 
The Umbria, 166 U.S. 404 (1897)... 
. 2.2... 
cc cece enns 4 
United States 
v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 35 (No. 14, 
Ge 
ee 15 
United States v. Motor Vessel Gopher State, 614 F.2d 
ei 
Se ae, Ae a 
ne ae ee 6 
United States v. Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. 397 (1975) 
PARRA ES URS Gee 
CAS bik ans bi vaenetie 6, 16, 17, 19, 24 
West Virginia v. United States, 479 U.S. 305 (1987) 
PEER LTR OEOCENE 
S COMA 
ANCAIN GES HOARY 34,. ia, 3a, 34; 23 
Western 
Pacific Fisheries 
v. S/S PRESIDENT 
GRANT, 730 F.2d 1280 (9th Cir. 1984).............. 5 
UnNiteD States Cope 
28 U.S.C.A. Rule 11(b) (1994) ..................... 7, 22 
OTHER AUTHORITIES 
Prejudgment Interest: Survey and Suggestions, 77 Nw 
Oe ae 
a Gs ee 9, 13 
d D. Dobbs, Law of Remedies, § 3.6(1) (1993)........ ) 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Petitioner’s Statement of the case is inaccurate or 
incomplete in several respects. 
1. 
The settlement agreement between the parties, 
referred to in Petitioner’s Statement (Pet. Brief 2), pro- 
vided that the questions of whether prejudgment interest 
should be awarded, and, if so, the rate of interest would 
be submitted to the court for decision. (J.A. 46). 
2. 
In its reversal, in addition to its decision concern- 
ing mutual fault, the Court of Appeals held that, “we 
refuse to recognize municipality status as a peculiar cir- 
cumstance warranting the denial of prejudgment inter- 
est.” (J.A. 13a). Petitioner has not appealed as to that 
holding. 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 
A. 
The court prescribed rule in admiralty is that 
prejudgment interest is to be awarded, but discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest can be exercised where there 
are special or peculiar circumstances justifying its denial. 
The question presented in this case 
is quite simply 
whether a court can exercise discretion to deny prejudg- 
ment interest in a mutual fault, admiralty, collision case 
on the ground that the party seeking the prejudgment 
interest was at fault. A majority of lower courts hold that 
it cannot do so; a minority hold that it can do so. 
B. 
The discretion to deny prejudgment interest is 
bounded by rules and principles of law, not the least of 
which 
is the precept 
that prejudgment 
interest 
is 

designed to afford an injured party full and complete 
compensation. Prejudgment interest is compensation for 
the use (or the opportunity for use) of money from the 
date of injury/loss to the date of judgment. Discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest, because of the fault of the 
party seeking to be compensated for its loss, is patently 
inconsistent with the goal of fully compensating the party 
for its loss. 
C. 
Since the adoption of the rule of true compara- 
tive negligence in admiralty in 1975, there is no longer 
any rationale for allowing discretion to deny prejudg- 
ment interest because of mutual fault. A rule permitting 
the exercise of such discretion would foster and encour- 
age litigation because of uncertainty as to when and 
under what circumstances prejudgment interest would be 
denied. 
D. 
Discretion 
to deny prejudgment interest in a 
mutual fault, admiralty, collision case creates an anomaly 
in a true comparative negligence regime. The rationale 
for awarding prejudgment interest is to achieve the goal 
of full compensation by converting time of accident dam- 
ages (the amount of which is based upon the relative 
degree of fault of the parties) to time of judgment dam- 
ages (that is, damages determined under true compara- 
tive negligence principles plus interest on those damages). 
Discretion to deny prejudgment interest, based solely on 
the mutual fault of the party seeking its recovery, would 
amount to a penalty. 
E. 
Because the relative degree of the parties’ fault 
prior to the accident is now determined under principles 
of true comparative negligence, 
a “bright line” rule 

against denial of prejudgment interest is appropriate. An 
exception limited to instances where the party seeking 
interest has engaged 
in post-accident conduct (e.g., 
undue delay in prosecuting the action or assertion of 
frivolous claims), such that the interests of justice man- 
date a denial of prejudgment interest, would be consis- 
tent with this Court’s prior decisions as well as decisions 
of a majority of lower courts addressing the issue, and 
would minimize litigation over prejudgment interest. 
¢ 
ARGUMENT 
THE COURT OF APPEALS CORRECTLY HELD THAT, 
IN A MUTUAL FAULT, ADMIRALTY, COLLISION 
CASE, A DISTRICT COURT DOES NOT HAVE THE 
DISCRETION TO DENY PREJUDGMENT INTEREST 
BASED UPON THE FAULT OF THE PARTY SEEKING 
ITS RECOVERY. 
A. 
Prejudgment interest is the rule in admiralty 
collision cases. A majority of lower courts have 
held that mutual fault of the parties is not a 
special or peculiar circumstance justifying the 
exercise of a court’s discretion to deny prejudg- 
ment interest. The Fifth and Eleventh Circuits 
have held that mutual fault is such a peculiar 
circumstance. Which is correct is the question 
presented to this Court. 
1. 
For nearly two centuries, this Court has recog- 
nized that in admiralty cases prejudgment interest is a 
necessary component of the measure of full compensa- 
tion. The Amiable Nancy, 16 U.S. (3 Wheat) 546, 560 (1818); 
The Anna Maria, 15 U.S. (2 Wheat) 327, 335 (1817); Del Col 

v. Arnold, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 333, 334 (1796); The Umbria, 166 
U.S. 404, 421-22 (1897). It is well settled today that an 
award of prejudgment interest is the general rule in 
admiralty law. See: Cement Division, National Gypsum Co. 
v. City of Milwaukee, 31 F.3d 581, 583 (7th Cir. 1994) (“The 
general rule in admiralty, in order to fully compensate the 
plaintiff, is to award prejudgment interest from the date 
of the accident.”); Inland Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White 
Towing Co., 696 F.2d 321, 327 (5th Cir. 1983) (quoting 
Noritake Co. v. M/V HELLENIC CHAMPION, 627 F.2d 724, 
728 (5th Cir. 1980)); Parker Towing Co. v. Yazoo River Tow- 
ing, Inc., 794 F.2d 591, 594 (11th Cir. 1986); Alkmeon 
Naviera, S.A. v. M/V MARINA L, 633 F.2d 789, 797 (9th Cir. 
1980); Oglebay Norton Co. v. CSX Corp., 788 F.2d 361, 
367-68 (6th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 849 (1986). 
This Court has long approved of prejudgment interest in 
mutual fault cases. The Manitoba, 122 U.S. 97 (1887). Not- 
withstanding this Court’s holding in The Manitoba and the 
general rule, lower courts have carved out an exception 
to the rule which allows a district court to exercise discre- 
tion to deny prejudgment interest when there exist spe- 
cial or peculiar circumstances which make it inequitable 
for the losing party to pay prejudgment interest. See: 
Cement Division, 31 F.3d at 583; Inland Oil, 696 F.2d 327; 
Parker Towing, 794 F.2d at 594; Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 
797-98; Oglebay Norton, 788 F.2d at 368. 
2. 
The Circuit Courts addressing the issue of what 
constitutes a special or peculiar circumstance are in gen- 
eral agreement that 1) unwarranted delay in filing the 
action on the part of the party seeking the interest, and 2) 
bad faith/frivolous claims do constitute special or pecu- 
liar circumstances which justify the exercise of a court's 
discretion to deny prejudgment interest. Inland Oil, 696 
i 

F.2d at 327-328; Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 797-798; 
Cement Division, 31 F.3d at 583. Circuit courts in the Sixth, 
Seventh, and Ninth Circuits have explicitly held that 
mutual fault does not constitute a peculiar circumstance 
justifying the denial of prejudgment interest in an admi- 
ralty collision case. Anderson v. Whittaker Corp., 894 F.2d 
804, 810 (6th Cir. 1990) (holding that neither mutual fault 
nor mutual fault combined with uncertainty as to claims 
or damages are peculiar circumstances precluding an 
award of prejudgment interest); Cement Division, 31 F.3d 
at 585 (holding that mutual fault does not constitute a 
peculiar circumstance); Alkmeon Naveria, 633 F.3d at 789 
and n. 12 (awarding interest where plaintiff was forty 
percent at fault because the record showed no peculiar 
circumstances justifying denial and specifically stating in 
a footnote that denial of prejudgment interest on mutual 
fault grounds would seem no longer necessary since the 
abrogation of divided damages and would penalize a 
party twice for the same mistake). Subsequent cases in 
the Ninth Circuit have adhered to the Alkmeon Naviera 
rule. Stevens v. F/V BONNIE DOON, 655 F.2d 206, 209-210 
(9th Cir. 1981); Western Pacific Fisheries v. S/S PRESIDENT 
GRANT, 730 F.2d 1280, 1288 (9th Cir. 1984). While the 
Third Circuit has not considered the question of mutual 
fault as a special or peculiar circumstance, it has stated 
that, “[g]enerally, exceptional circumstances exist only 
when the district court concludes that the party request- 
ing interest has (1) unreasonably delayed in prosecuting 
its claim, (2) made a bad faith estimate of its damages 
that precluded settlement, or (3) not sustained any actual 
damages.” (emphasis added). Matter of Bankers Trust, 658 
F.2d 103, 108 (3rd Cir. 1981), cert. denied, 456 U.S. 961 

(1982). The court cited Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 
797-98, in support thereof. Likewise, the Eighth Circuit 
has stated that the only causes for denying prejudgment 
interest would be where a party “was dilatory in bringing 
suit or if the suit was frivolous.” United States v. Motor 
Vessel Gopher State, 614 F.2d 1186, 1190 (8th Cir. 1980). 
District courts in other circuits specifically have held that 
mutual fault is not a special or peculiar circumstance so 
as to justify a denial of prejudgment interest. Granholm v. 
TFL EXPRESS, 576 F. Supp. 435, 456-457 (S.D.N.Y. 1983) 
(wherein party 50% at fault who suffered all of the dam- 
ages was granted prejudgment interest); Matter of Getty 
Marine, 1983 A.M.C. 550, 552 (E.D. Va. 1982) (wherein a 
party 70% at fault was granted prejudgment interest on 
its net recovery); STARLIGHT I, Inc. v. Patriots Corp., No. 
83-3783-Z, slip op. at 7 (D.Mass. Aug. 9, 1985) (wherein a 
party 30% at fault was granted prejudgment interest in 
order to fully serve “the purpose of compensating an 
injured party” (at p. 7)); Complaint of B.F.T. No. Two Corp., 
433 F. Supp. 854, 876 (E.D. Penn. 1977) (comparative fault 
of parties held no longer a consideration in awarding 
prejudgment interest because of Reliable Transfer propor- 
tionate fault rule and claimant in limitation of liability 
action awarded prejudgment interest despite 75% fault); 
Lone Star Industries v. Mays Towing Co. Inc., 725 F. Supp. 
440, 445 (E.D. Mo. 1989), rev'd on other grounds, 927 F.2d 
1453 (8th Cir. 1991) (wherein a party’s 40% fault was 
considered not to be a circumstance to justify the denial 
of prejudgment interest). 
Only the Fifth and Eleventh Circuits, and district 
courts therein, have held that mutual fault constitutes a 
peculiar circumstance justifying the exercise of discretion 
to deny prejudgment interest. Prior to 1983, the Fifth 

Circuit had approved of some awards of prejudgment 
interest in mutual fault settings. See, e.g., National Marine 
Service, Inc. v. Talley, 348 F.2d 589 (5th Cir. 1965), Sinclair 
Refining Company v. SS GREEN ISLAND, 426 F.2d 260 (5th 
Cir. 1970). It had also approved denials of prejudgment 
interest in some cases involving so-called genuine dis- 
putes over good faith claims in mutual fault settings. See, 
Nat G. Harrison Overseas Corp. v. American Tug TITAN, 516 
F.2d 89, 97 (5th Cir. 1975), and cases cited therein. In 1983, 
the Fifth Circuit held that it had “consistently upheld 
denials of prejudgment interest in cases of apportioned 
fault.” Inland Oil, 696 F.2d at 328. With respect to the 
“good faith or genuine dispute regarding liability” com- 
ponent, the Inland Oil court appears to have equated a 
good faith dispute to a finding of any degree of mutual 
fault because the court declined to define a dividing line 
in apportionment for upholding a denial of prejudgment 
interest on the ground of mutual 
fault as a peculiar 
circumstance. However, any focus on good faith dispute 
is totally inappropriate since Rule 11 of the Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedure should guarantee that every dispute 
will be a genuine dispute over a good faith claim by 
mandating that the attorney who signs a pleading certi- 
fies that: the pleading is not being presented for any 
improper purpose; the claims, defenses and contentions 
therein are warranted; the allegations and factual conten- 
tions have or are likely to have evidentiary support; 
denials are warranted or reasonably based on a lack of 
information or belief. 28 U.S.C.A. Rule 11(b) (1994). In 
Inland Oil the argument was made that “because 
a 
‘serious dispute’ occurs any time there is a trial on the 
merits, this cannot be a justification for denying prejudg- 
ment interest.” 
Inland Oil, 696 F.2d at 328. The Fifth 

Circuit’s response was that “a finding that a plaintiff was 
partially at fault weakens his equitable claim that his 
funds have been withheld by a recalcitrant party.” Id. 
That response is really a nonsequitur, since a finding that 
a plaintiff is partially at fault lessens the amount of 
damages to which that party is entitled under comparative 
negligence principles. It should have no bearing on the 
interest on those damages to which the plaintiff is entitled 
under well established principles requiring full and com- 
plete compensation. The Eleventh Circuit, which once 
was a part of and generally follows the Fifth Circuit, has 
also held that the existence of a genuine dispute regard- 
ing liability is one peculiar circumstance which may war- 
rant denial of prejudgment interest, Parker Towing Co., 794 
F.2d at 594, and that the existence of such a peculiar 
circumstance 
is generally assumed in cases of appor- 
tioned fault. Id., citing Inland Oil, 696 F.2d at 328. In its 
consideration of prejudgment interest, that court neither 
considered nor cited any case outside of Fifth Circuit 
decisions. 
In the instant case, the actual holding of tiie United 
States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, from 
which Petitioner brought its Petition and upon which this 
Court granted Certiorari, states as follows: 
4s ....,asa matter of law, the mutual fault of the 
parties should not constitute a reason to deny an 
award of prejudgment interest in admiralty.” 
Cement Division, 31 F.3d at 585, Pet. for Cert. at 9a. The 
Court also reiterated its ruling as follows: 
as 
.. mutual fault of the parties in an admiralty 
collision case does not constitute a peculiar cir- 
cumstance justifying the denial of prejudgment 
interest.” 
eeEEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEee 

Cement Division, 31 F.3d at 586, Pet. for Cert. at 13a. It is 
noteworthy that the latter statement was footnoted as 
)
follows: 
“This opinion was circulated before release to 
all judges in active service. See Circuit Rule 
40(f). No judge favored a hearing en banc.” 
Cement Division, 31 F.3d at 586, Pet. for Cert. at 13a. The 
question for consideration by this Court is whether, in a 
mutual fault, admiralty collision case, 
a Court can exer- 
cise discretion to deny prejudgment interest to a party 
seeking its recovery because of that party’s pre-accident/ 
loss fault. 
B. 
Discretion 
to deny prejudgment 
interest 
because of mutual fault is inconsistent with the 
general policy underlying civil litigation to 
fully compensate an injured party. 
1. 
It is now a well established precept of civil law 
that prejudgment interest is designed to afford an injured 
party, generally the plaintiff, full and complete compen- 
sation from the day of the injury to the day of judgment. 
See: Prejudgment Interest: Survey and Suggestions, 77 Nw. 
U.L. Rev. 192 (1982) (hereinafter, “Survey and Sugges- 
tions”); 1 D. Dobbs, Law of Remedies, § 3.6(1) (1993). This 
Court has consistently recognized that prejudgment inter- 
est is an element of damages and is necessary to fully 
compensate the injured party (plaintiff). Funkhouser v. J. 
B. Preston Co. Inc., 290 U.S. 163, 168 (1933); Royal Indem- 
nity Co. v. United States, 313 U.S. 289, 295-97 (1941); Miller 
v. Robertson, 266 U.S. 243, 257-58 (1924). Implicit in the 
aim of achieving full compensation is that a party not 

10 
only recover the full measure of damages due as a result 
of the accident, but also that the party be compensated 
for the use of its damage recovery from the date of the 
accident: 
Compensation 
is a fundamental principle of 
I 
damages whether the action is in contract or in 
tort. 
. 
. 
. One who has had the use of money 
owing to another justly may be required to pay 
interest from the time the payment should have 
been made. Both in law and in equity, interest is 
allowed on money due. 
. 
. 
. Generally, interest is 
not allowed upon unliquidated damages... 
. 
[b]ut when necessary in order to arrive at fair 
compensation, the court in the exercise of a 
sound discretion may include interest or its 
equivalent as an element 
of damages. 
(citations omitted) 
Miller, 266 U.S. at 257-58. 
2. 
This Court in Miller and other cases has held that 
when necessary to arrive at a fair compensation, the court 
may include interest. In so doing, this Court recognized 
the general principle that interest is necessary to place the 
injured or damaged party in the same position as it 
would have been were it not for the accident. A denial of 
| 
prejudgment interest makes that party an involuntary 
creditor, without recourse, of the party owing interest 
because the latter had use of the former’s money which 
actually was due from the time of the accident. Cf., Matter 
of Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d 1279, 1331 (7th Cir. 
1992). It is counter-intuitive to hold on the one hand that 
a party is entitled to be fully compensated for its loss, but 
on the other hand that mutual fault justifies a denial of 
prejudgment interest. To the extent that the Petitioner 

11 
argues the latter point, its position is patently inconsis- 
tent with the principles of compensation underlying civil 
law developed by this Court. 
3. 
The Petitioner, at pages 19-24 of its Brief on the 
Merits (hereinafter, 
“Pet. Brief”), raises several points 
which merit discussion in the context of the Respondents’ 
right to complete compensation. Specifically, Petitioner 
argues that its liability for prejudgment interest stems 
from its “justified refusal” to settle the litigation during 
the first decade of its existence because it appeared that 
Petitioner would have no liability, and that an award of 
prejudgment interest in this context essentially penalizes 
a defendant (or any party) for continuing to litigate a 
matter.! Contrary to the emphasis placed by the Peti- 
tioner (and defendant in this case) on the defendant’s 
perspective, the cases and other authorities cited in its 
Brief on the Merits explicitly recognize that prejudgment 
interest is an element of complete compensation due the 
plaintiff. See: West Virginia v. United States, 479 U.S. 305, 
1 Despite the fact that the Petitioner has chosen not to 
appeal the appellate court’s determination that status as a 
municipality is not a peculiar circumstance justifying the denial 
of prejudgment interest, the Petitioner nonetheless continues to 
argue the issue to this court. Two points merit mention regard- 
ing this component of the Petitioner’s argument. First, the Peti- 
tioner, by operating the Port of Milwaukee in which the accident 
took place as a proprietary enterprise, Bagrowski v. American 
Export Isbrandtsen Lines, 440 F.2d 502, 509 (7th Cir. 1971), is 
“assumed to have accepted the ordinary incidents of suits in 
such business,” including the obligation to pay interest to the 
same degree as any private concern. Standard Oil Co. v. United 
States, 267 U.S. 76, 79 (1925). Second, like any other business, the 
Petitioner could have (and should have) procured insurance. It 
chose not to do so. 

12 
310 n. 2 (1987); Osterneck v. Ernst & Whinney, 489 U.S. 169, 
175 (1989) (“we have repeatedly stated that prejudgment 
interest ‘is an element of [plaintiff’s] complete compensa- 
} 
tion.’ ”), citing West Virginia, 479 U.S. at 310 and n. 2 and 
General Motors Corp. v. DeVex Corp., 461 U.S. 648, 655-656, 
and n. 10 (1983); Monessen Southwestern R. Co. v. Morgan, 
486 U.S. 330, 335 (1988) (“Prejudgment interest is nor- 
mally designed to make the plaintiff whole and is part of 
the actual damages sought to be recovered.”, citing West 
Virginia, 479 U.S. at 310 and 310-311, n. 2). 
West 
Virginia made clear that this Court proceeds 
from ‘he well-established principle that prejudgment 
interest 
is an element of complete compensation, 
not 
designed to punish a party, but to make the party whole. 
West Virginia, 479 U.S. at 310 and n. 2. Clearly, the focus is 
on the plaintiff’s interest in complete compensation, not — 
as argued by the Petitioner at pp. 19-23 of its Brief - on 
the defendant’s perspective that prejudgment interest 
operates as a cost imposed on the defendant for litigating 
its claim, discourages the defendant from settling, etc. As 
a matter of fact, one authority cited by Petitioner speaks 
eloquently to the correct perspective from which prejudg- 
ment interest awards are to be assessed. The discussion of 
this perspective arises in the context of the historical 
reluctance of courts to award prejudgment interest on 
unliquidated damages: 
“The rationale underlying the distinction 
between liquidated or reasonably ascertainable 
damages and unliquidated damages is that the 
defendant should not have to pay interest when 
he is unable to halt the accrual of interest by 
ee O

13 
paying the damages - damages which, if un- 
liquidated, cannot be determined prior to judg- 
ment. The distinction makes the defendant's 
point of view crucial: as long as the defendant 
cannot determine the extent of damages, no 
interest is awarded. 
“This emphasis on the defendant's perspective 
is misplaced. Interest is necessary to achieve full 
compensation even without such wrongdoing 
on the defendant’s part as would make him 
liable for punitive damages. Since interest is com- 
pensatory, the perspective of the plaintiff should 
determine the propriety of an interest award. If the 
goal of civil litigation is, indeed, to provide full 
compensation to the plaintiff, then the defen- 
dant’s uncertainty as to the amount of his lia- 
bility should be irrelevant.” 
Survey and Suggestions, 77 Nw. U.L. Rev. at pp. 197-98. 
(emphasis added) 
The Petitioner attempts to diminish the importance of 
the shift in this Court’s focus from a balancing of the 
equities approach (which arguably considers the perspec- 
tive of the defendant) to the rule in West Virginia that 
prejudgment interest is an element of plaintiff’s complete 
compensation. See, Pet. Brief, p. 14 at n. 5. Petitioner 
states that this Court's rejection of the “balancing of the 
equities” approach in West Virginia leaves intact the 
“equitable and discretionary nature of prejudgment inter- 
est” as demonstrated by the Court's dicta that “ ‘an equi- 
table consideration 
such 
as laches’ might bar ‘an 
otherwise valid claim’ for prejudgment interest.” Id. 

14 
Petitioner misstates the Court’s holding. West Virginia 
explicitly recognized the principle of prejudgment inter- 
est as an element of complete compensation, i.e., as an 
element of damages. That recognition does not alter a 
court’s ability to deny prejudgment interest on the basis 
of post-accident action or inaction of the plaintiff, such as 
unreasonable delay in pursuing its rights or assertion of 
frivolous claims (see discussion infra). Petitioner’s focus 
on the defendant’s perspective (which is implicit in its 
arguments that an award of prejudgment interest is inap- 
propriate when the defendant believes that it does not 
have liability and that an award of prejudgment interest 
penalizes a defendant for continuing to litigate) is simply 
a veiled attempt to return to the balancing of equities 
approach which this court specifically rejected in West 
Virginia. Petitioner should not be allowed to revisit that 
issue here. 
In addition, 
a number of cases cited by Petitioner in 
its Brief recognize that the underlying purpose of pre- 
judgment interest is to compensate the plaintiff for the 
use of its money between the time when the damages 
were incurred and the time of judgment. For example, in 
Library of Congress v. Shaw, 478 U.S. 310 (1986), this court 
addressed the rule of the United States Government's 
traditional immunity from interest in the context of an 
award of an attorney fee which included an increase in 
| 
the lodestar to compensate for a delay in payment of the 
fee. Holding that such an award of increased compensa- 
tion really constituted an award of interest prohibited by 
the “no-interest rule”, this Court recognized that the 
function of interest is to compensate the plaintiff for the 
” 

15 
loss of the opportunity to use the funds which constitute 
damages: 
Respondent claims, however, that interest and 
delay represent more than mere semantic varia- 
tions. Interest and a delay factor, according to 
the respondent, have distinct purposes: the for- 
mer compensates for loss in the use of money, 
while the latter compensates for loss in the 
value of money. 
We are not persuaded. Interest and the delay 
factor share an identical function. They are 
designed to compensate for the belated receipt of 
money. (emphasis added) 
Id. at 322. In discussing how interest is computed, this 
Court further noted that “[a]n interest rate reflects not 
only the real opportunity cost of capital, but also the 
inflation rate. Thus, loss of value due to delay is an 
element of an interest adjustment.” (citation omitted) Id. 
at n. 7. Earlier, in Funkhouser, 290 U.S. at 168, this Court 
recognized the concept that interest is designed to com- 
pensate for the time value of money: “the injured party 
has suffered a loss which may be regarded as not fully 
compensated if he is confined to the amount found to be 
recoverable as of the time of the breach [of contract] and 
nothing is added for the delay in obtaining the award of 
damages.” 
The discretion of a trial court is not unbridled but is 
to be exercised under law. Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d at 1334. 
“[D]iscretionary choices are not left to a court’s ‘inclina- 
tion, but to its judgment; and its judgment is to be guided 
by sound legal principles.’ ” Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 
422 U.S. 405, 416 (1975), quoting from United States v. 

rr 
|
16 
Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 35 (No. 14, 692d) (CC Va. 1807) 
(Marshall, C.J.); Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d at 1334. Exercise of 
discretion to deny prejudgment interest in a mutual fault 
|
|
setting, by itself, is inconsistent with the recognized prin- 
ciples that 1) the plaintiff (recovering party) is entitled to 
be fully compensated, and 2) an award of prejudgment 
interest compensates the plaintiff (recovering party) for 
the use of its money between the date of the accident/ 
loss and the date of judgment. When viewed in the con- 
text of admiralty law and a comparative fault regime, the 
exercise of discretion to deny prejudgment interest, based 
on the mutual (or even greater) fault of the party or 
S
ee
parties seeking recovery of interest, is illogical. 
C. 
Since the adoption of the rule of true compara- 
tive negligence, a rule in admiralty permitting 
denial 
of prejudgment interest because 
of 
mutual fault has no rational basis and would 
promote litigation because of uncertainty. 
Petitioner argues that this Court’s decision in United 
States 
v. Reliable Transfer Co., Inc., 421 
U.S. 397 (1975), 
adopting true comparative negligence in collision cases to 
replace the long standing rule of divided damages, sup- 
ports the minority rule that discretion to deny prejudg- 
ment interest may be exercised when there is a good faith 
dispute in a mutual fault setting. The central component 
of Petitioner’s argument on this point appears to be that 
under the divided damages rule there was certainty as to 
the amount of damages a defendant would owe, because 
parties simply added up the damages and divided them 
by the number of parties at fault, but that under Reliable 
Transfer, by contrast, there is uncertainty as to the amount 

17 
of damages a defendant may owe in a comparative negli- 
gence regime because its comparative fault cannot be 
assessed until a trial. Therefore, Petitioner argues, it is 
unfair to award prejudgment interest when a defendant 
has chosen to pursue the litigation in order to ascertain 
that certainty in the form of an allocation of fault. 
This central component of Petitioner’s argument 
smacks of the policy underpinnings for courts’ historical 
reluctance to award prejudgment interest upon unliqui- 
dated damages. See, Funkhouser, 290 U.S. at 168 (“the 
injured party has suffered a loss which may be regarded 
as not fully compensated if he is confined to the amount 
found to be recoverable as of the time of breach and 
nothing is added for the delay in obtaining the award of 
damages.”) As discussed supra, an approach allowing 
courts to deny prejudgment interest under these circum- 
stances wholly disregards the axiomatic principle that the 
plaintiff as the injured or damaged party is entitled to be 
fully compensated. More to the point, this Court decided 
to abolish the divided damages rule because the rule that 
the damages of parties to a collision were to be added up 
and divided equally between those at fault 1) was arbi- 
trary if there was a way to determine the actual propor- 
tionate fault of the parties, and 2) did not tend to induce 
care and vigilance on the part of ships (the policy articu- 
lated for maintaining the divided damages rule) any 
more than did a comparative negligence regime. With 
respect to the arbitrariness, it is clear that before Reliable 
Transfer, while there may have been greater certainty (if 
multiple parties admitted to fault) as to the result, that is, 
the exact measure of the amounts which the parties 

18 
would owe, there was 
little or no certainty as to the 
correctness of that result. 
The replacement of the divided damages rule with 
true comparative negligence, because the former was pat- 
ently unjust, amounted 
to a recognition that a party’s 
actual comparative liability, where such liability can be 
determined, should control the apportionment of dam- 
ages. This is in sharp contrast to an arbitrary policy of 
adding damages and dividing them equally between the 
parties at fault, no matter what the degree of fault. Since 
Reliable Transfer, once the result is finally determined by 
the trial court, or an appellate court, there is absolute 
certainty, based upon a comparative, pro rata percentage, 
as to the correctness of the result. Then it is fair and just 
to assess prejudgment interest on the share of damages 
attributable to each party based on its proportionate fault, as 
opposed to basing the assessment of prejudgment interest 
on an amount arbitrarily determined under the divided 
damages rule. For this reason, Petitioner’s claim that 
comparative negligence principles increase the amount of 
uncertainty, which in turn justifies a denial of prejudg- 
ment interest in a mutual fault setting, is an anomaly. 
Comparative negligence ensures that each party will pay 
prejudgment interest only on the other’s true measure of 
damages and will receive prejudgment interest only on its 
own true measure of damages. Each party is fully com- 
pensated for its loss. No party sustains a windfall. While 
the minority rule followed by the Fifth and Eleventh 
Circuits may have had justification in the divided dam- 
ages regime, because the courts unilaterally believed that 

19 
divided damages was an arbitrary measure of damages,? 
such a rule has no place in post-Reliable Transfer admiralty 
law and should be eliminated for the same reasons that 
the divided damages rule was eliminated. 
The approach advocated here by Respondents would 
promote settlements and reduce litigation over prejudg- 
ment interest. This Court has already determined that the 
rule of fairness achieved by true comparative negligence 
does not appear to discourage the negotiation of settle- 
ments in Jones Act personal injury cases. See Reliable 
Transfer, 421 U.S. at 408, n. 13. By the same rationale, it is 
plausible that a rule prohibiting a court from the exercise 
of discretion to deny prejudgment interest in mutual fault 
settings (except where the plaintiff engages in post-acci- 
dent, inequitable conduct justifying such a denial, dis- 
cussed infra) would serve to encourage settlements and 
reduce litigation over prejudgment interest. 
For example, let us assume that it is claimed that 
there was mutual fault in a given collision case. If the rule 
2 Petitioner’s assertion that “any court concerned about the 
inequity of tne divided damages rule would be ill-advised to try 
to use awards of prejudgment interest as a corrective [sic] meas- 
ure” (Pet. Brief at 29) does not alter the fact that courts were in 
fact uncomfortable with the arbitrariness of the divided dam- 
ages rule. Petitioner concedes that such is the origin of the 
major-minor fault and in-extremis rules, and could well have 
been the origin of the disinclination of courts to award interest 
on what they deemed to be an arbitrary, harsh and incorrect 
measure of damages. It does not follow from the proposition of 
such action being “ill-advised” that it was not in fact done, and 
with good justification. See: Afran Transport Co. v. The Bergechief, 
285 F.2d 119, 120 (2d Cir. 1960); Iberian Tankers Company v. Gates 
Construction Corp., 504 F.2d 747, 748 (2d Cir. 1974). 

20 
were that in all cases of mutual fault a damaged party is 
entitled 
to prejudgment interest on his proportionate 
share of the damages, and if one party who is alleged to 
be partially at fault for the accident were to settle the case 
before a trial on the merits, that party actually would be 
rewarded for settling the case in that he would not be 
faced with the obligation to compensate the other party 
for the use of its money from the date of the accident 
(unless, of course, the parties agreed otherwise), since the 
matter would not be brought to trial. Where there is a 
compromise, no party has had the use of the money of 
another party for the entire period between accident and 
judgment, or all have considered 
it and taken 
it into 
account when negotiating the compromise settlement. 
Put differently, discretion to deny prejudgment inter- 
est gives a party in a mutual fault case the incentive not to 
settle. Either party, but particularly the least damaged 
party, knowing that there may be a finding of mutual 
fault by the court once there is a trial, can refuse to settle 
and instead “roll the dice” as to whether the court will 
later exercise its discretion and deny prejudgment inter- 
est. If the trial court does not deny prejudgment interest 
on the amount of damages ultimately due one party, the 
paying party is none the worse off for refusing to settle 
because it has the money (or does not have to pay it) 
during the intervening time. If the court does decide to 
deny prejudgment interest, the paying party’s gamble 
“pays off.” In this respect, adoption of the discretionary 
standard advocated by the Petitioner, in the language of 
this Court, “would be hard to apply, jettisoning relative 
predictability for the open-ended rough-and-tumble of 
factors, inviting complex argument in a trial court and a 
it 
eNO
gt 
Ra 
Aint 
i eA

21 
virtually inevitable appeal.” Grubart, Inc. v. Great Lakes 
Dredge & Dock Co., 1995 WL 68408, 11 (U.S.) (February 22, 
1995). Elimination of the discretionary standard in favor 
of a “bright line” rule which provides for prejudgment 
interest in cases where there is mutual fault, except for 
instances of narrowly defined, post-accident, inequitable 
conduct on the part of the party seeking recovery of 
prejudgment interest (discussed infra), would reduce pro- 
tracted litigation and would promote settlements. 
Petitioner argues that cases involving prejudgment 
interest on federal claims are a “reliable guide” as to how 
prejudgment interest should be treated 
in admiralty, 
specifically that the discretion 
to award prejudgment 
interest should rest in the trial court. (Pet. Brief at 9-10). 
The cases relied on by the Petitioner in this context are 
distinguishable for several reasons. 
First, as discussed 
supra, in admiralty prejudgment interest is the rule, and 
the discretion 
is not a discretion 
to award prejudgment 
interest but rather a discretion to deny prejudgment inter- 
est where special or peculiar circumstances exist which 
justify the denial. Admiralty recognizes a standard of 
presumption in favor of awarding prejudgment interest. 
The non-admiralty cases cited by Petitioner are distin- 
guishable because the focus upon discretion to award pre- 
judgment interest is completely different. 
Second, many of the cases, cited by Petitioner as 
authority for the discretion to award prejudgment interest, 
do not involve a decision to award prejudgment interest 
in a mutual fault setting, but rather contain dicta which 
Petitioner takes out of context as support for its argu- 
ment. For example, Board of Comm'rs of Jackson County v. 

22 
United States, 308 U.S. 343, 352 (1939), was quoted by 
Petitioner (Pet. Brief 10-11) as follows: 
“{I]nterest is not recovered according to a rigid 
theory of compensation for money withheld, but 
is given in response to considerations of fair- 
ness. 
It is denied when its exaction would be 
inequitable.” 
Board of Commissioners involved an action brought by the 
United States on behalf of an Indian ward against the 
Board of Commissioners of Jackson County, Kansas, to 
recover back taxes collected by the county on lands which 
had been patented to the ward under a treaty. At issue 
was the recovery of interest in inter-governmental litiga- 
tion. This Court ultimately concluded that interest could 
not be collected. The passage quoted by the Petitioner 
was written 55 years ago in the context of an issue as to 
interest in governmental actions based upon quasi-con- 
tractual obligations, not in a mutual fault collision case in 
admiralty. 
Similarly, Monessen Southwestern Railway Company v. 
Morgan, 486 U.S. 330, 339 n. 8 (1988), is cited by the 
Petitioner as authority for the proposition that the deci- 
sion of Congress not to enact a prejudgment interest 
provision in the Federal Employees’ Liability Act (FELA) 
should be taken as an endorsement of a judge-made 
regime, with heavy emphasis on equitable discretion. 
Petitioner also relies on the absence of any prejudgment 
interest provision in the 1982 amendment to the federal 
post-judgment interest statute, 28 U.S.C.A. 1961 (1994), 
for the same argument. (Pet. Brief at 15-16). Petitioner’s 
reliance on Monessen and the federal post-judgment inter- 
est statute reads far too much into the minds of Congress. 

23 
Moreover, Monessen involved the issue of whether state 
courts may award prejudgment interest in FELA actions 
pursuant to local practice. This court held that states may 
not so award prejudgment interest because federal law 
does not authorize awards of prejudgment interest in 
FELA actions and because, when enacting FELA, while 
Congress expressly dispensed with other common law 
doctrines of that era, Congress gave no express indication 
that it intended to abrogate the common law doctrine 
barring prejudgment interest. Monessen deals with state 
court practices and is distinguishable in interpreting fed- 
eral law. It is wholly irrelevant to the question presented. 
By the same token, the federal post-judgment interest 
statute deals with just that and nothing more. Absent 
legislative statutory enactment, prejudgment interest is 
determined by judicial law, which differs substantially 
from judicial discretion. 
D. 
Discretion to deny prejudgment interest based 
on the fault of a party (irrespective of degree) 
amounts to a penalty under a comparative neg- 
ligence regime because the fault of the party 
has already been assessed at the comparative 
negligence stage. 
Carried to its logical conclusion, Petitioner’s argu- 
ment, that a genuine dispute over liability in a mutual 
fault collision case justifies an exercise of discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest, amounts to a penalty being 
levied against the party seeking interest. The policy basis 
for the rule that prejudgment interest is to be awarded, 
absent special or peculiar circumstances justifying a 
denial, is that a victim deserves to be fully compensated 

24 
and prejudgment interest is a component of that compen- 
sation without which one party retains the time value of 
another party’s money. When there is mutual fault, prin- 
ciples of comparative negligence operate to assure that 
both victims are compensated and penalized in accor- 
dance with their relative degree of fault, because each 
party is a plaintiff to the extent tnat he has been wronged 
by the other. Even if one party was more at fault than the 
other party, that party may only recover in proportion to 
the degree of wrong inflicted on it by the party which 
was less at fault. Therefore, it matters not what was the 
relative fault of the parties, since both are entitled to 
compensation to the extent of the other’s liability. There 
is no loss or gain to either party, regardless of how much 
more at fault one party is in relation to the other.% 
To deny an award prejudgment interest to either 
party, in such a case, amounts to a penalty, usually upon 
the party who sustains the greater damages - a factor 
wholly external 
to the degree of fault of the party - 
allowing the party who sustains less damages to obtain a 
windfall. Such an arbitrary result is precisely the type of 
“rough justice” this Court sought to eliminate by abroga- 
tion of the divided damages rule in Reliable Transfer, 
supra. As such, mutual fault or degree of fault are invalid 
reasons to deny prejudgment interest because the fault of 
the parties in causing the collision has already been taken 
3 Whether prejudgment interest is assessed upon each 
party’s proportionate recovery and they are offset to achieve a 
net recovery by one of the parties, or the recoveries are offset 
and prejudgment interest is assessed upon the resulting balance 
in favor of one of the parties, the net result in recovery of dollars 
and cents is the same. 
~ <li

25 
into account in the assessment of liability and allocation 
of damages. It is reflected in their respective compensa- 
tion. As succinctly stated by the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, “what is the point of 
computing the principal amount of damages in intricate 
detail if the judge may turn around and increase (or 
reduce) the value of that award 
. 
. 
. on the basis of vague 
equitable concerns?” Matter of Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz, 
954 F.2d at 1334. 
E. 
Because the relative degree of the parties’ 
causal fault is now determined under principles 
of true comparative negligence, a “bright line” 
rule against denial of prejudgment interest, 
with an exception limited to where the party 
seeking interest has engaged in post-accident 
conduct justifying a denial of prejudgment 
interest, would be consistent with this Court’s 
prior decisions and decisions of a majority of 
lower courts addressing the issue. 
A trial court’s discretion to deny prejudgment interest 
should be limited to situations involving inequities arising 
by reason of actions (or failure to act, as the case may be) 
after the accident/loss by a party seeking prejudgment 
interest. Clearly, under a comparative negligence regime, 
everything pre-accident should have been considered in 
the assessment and allocation of fault in reaching the 
correct and certain measure of liability and damages. A 
clear example of such post-accident inequity is laches — 
recognized by this Court in West Virginia as an “equitable 
consideration” which might bar “an otherwise valid claim 
for interest.” West Virginia, 479 U.S. at 311, n. 3. 

26 
What is important is the distinction between events 
which occur prior to the time of the accident/loss when 
damages are incurred and events which occur after that 
point to the date of judgment, as those events relate to the 
issue of the fairness in awarding prejudgment interest. To 
the extent that the inequitable conduct of a party bears 
directly on the concept that the party had the use of the 
other party’s money, such as where a party unreasonably 
d«'iys i» bringing the action or obstructs or delays justice 
by acverting frivolous claims, it is logical and equitable to 
conclude that the party’s own post-accident action or 
inaction “weakens his equitable claim that his funds have 
been withheld by a recalcitrant party.” Inland Oil, 696 F.2d 
at 328. To allow a court to intermingle the fault of a party 
in contributing 
to the cause of the accident (which 
impacts the measure of liability and consequential dam- 
ages) with the fault of that same party in taking or failing 
to take some post-accident action (which impacts his 
equitable claim that his funds have been withheld by the 
other party) would effectively alter, reduce or, in some 
instances, nullify application of comparative fault princi- 
ples. The only legitimate exercise of a court’s discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest is when a party engages in 
some post-accident conduct (such as delay in filing suit 
or including a frivolous claim along with a valid claim) 
which makes it inequitable to allow him to recover his 
prejudgment interest because that party is solely respons- 
ible for the post-accident, inequitable action and any 
consequences resulting from it such as delay in the dis- 
pute resolution. 
Based upon the foregoing, a “bright line” rule against 
the denial of prejudgment interest in a mutual 
fault, 

27 
admiralty collision case would be appropriate. An excep- 
tion to such a rule limited to where the party seeking 
prejudgment interest has engaged in post-accident/loss 
conduct (i.e., undue delay, assertion of frivolous claims or 
taking frivolous actions), such that the interests of justice 
justify a denial of prejudgment interest, would be consis- 
tent with this Court’s prior decisions as well as the deci- 
sions of the majority of lower courts addressing the issue. 
It would most certainly hold litigation over prejudgment 
interest to a minimum. 
CONCLUSION 
The Judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Seventh Circuit should be affirmed. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Harney B. STOVER, JR. 
KATHRYN A. LONSDORF 
Davis & KuELTHAU, S.C. 
111 E. Kilbourn Avenue, #1400 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202 
(414) 276-0200 
Attorneys for Respondents 
