, Supreme Court, U.8, “es 
\) FILED 


' 
. 


93 1828 MAY 1 619%: 
No. 


—————— Sl Cc TL 


In THE 


Supreme Court of the Hnited States 


OcToser TERM, 1993 


STATE OF Missouri, et al., 
Petitioners, 


vs. 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Respondents. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


JEREMIAH W. (JAY) NIXON 
Attorney General 


Joun R. Municu* 
Chief Counsel for Litigation 


MICHAEL J. FrgLDs 
Bart A. MATANIC 
NorMan E. SIBGEL 
Assistant Attomeys General 


P.O. Box 899 
Jefferson City, Missouri 65102 
(314) 751-3321 


Counsel for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


— 


— 
St. Louis Law Printing,Inc. 13307ManchesterRd. St Louis,MO 63131 314-231-4477 


ot 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 

The questions presented in this petition arise from the continu- 
ing, long-running litigation over the remedial phase of the 
Kansas City, Missouri intradistrict school desegregation case, in 
which comprehensive and unprecedented educational, financial 
and physical resources have been provided, thus far at a cost in 
excess of $1.3 billion, to approximately 37,000 students — 
resulting in the creation of a system recently found by the District 
Court to offer “facilities and opportunities not available any- 
where else in the country.” 


The questions presented are: 


1. Whether a remedial educational desegregation program 
providing greater educational opportunities to victims of 
past de jure segregation than provided anywhere else in the 
country nonetheless fails to satisfy the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment (thus precluding a finding of partial unitary status) 
solely because student achievement in the District, as 
measured by results on standardized test scores, has not 
risen to some unspecified level? 


2. Whether a federal court order granting salary increases to 
virtually every employee of a school district — including 
non-instructional personnel — as a part of a school deseg- 
regation remedy conflicts with applicable decisions of this 
court which require that remedial components must di- 
rectly address and relate to the constitutional violation and 
be tailored to cure the condition that offends the Constitu- 
tion? 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


A complete list of the parties to the proceeding is contained in 
the caption to the December 8, 1993 opinion of the Court of 
Appeals. Petition Appendix (hereinafter “Pet. App.”) A-28 
through A-29. The petitioners are the State of Missouri and its 
listed officials. 


— ili— 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 
a eiccclbcnnsnnnnsopenanneeese i 
Parties 00 the Proceeding .........00:cccsscrcssrssssssssecssssersersess ii 
STITT snccsccenngnenescasscntacetscsesenassssnensesnesssesece v 
STITT Aili cccnsedncccsensscenecsecacsnevensseconsnemnusceseveese | 
Jurisdictional StaseMent ..........00....ccsssssrscsssosssseessereerees 2 
Constitutional Provision Involved ..................:c0cseeeees 2 
I HI vs cartscnntescsncccccsenscvcsesececerenerevecescoecees 2 
ee see 3 

2. The Litigation Leading Up to the Court of 
gE 6 
Reasons for Granting the Wit ..............c0csssesssereeeseess 12 


1. TheCourtof Appeals’ Opinion Conflicts With 
Decisions of This Court Setting Forth the 
Standards and Limits of Desegregation Rem- 
edies. It Also Raises an Important Question of 
Federal Law That Has Not Been, But Should 
Be Directly Resolved by This Court — 
Whether, In Applying the Freeman Test for 
Unitary Status, a Court of Appeals Overseeing 
a School Desegregation Case May Require 
Increased Standardized Test Scores .............. 13 


= iy 


A. The Court of Appeals’ Imposition of a 
Student Outcome-Based Standard for 
Unitary Status, Requiring Enhanced Stu- 
dent Achievement, Purports to Guaran- 
tee Outcomes Rather Than Opportunities 
and is Therefore Flatly at Odds With 
Settled Equal Protection Jurisprudence. 


B. Factually and Constitutionally, the Eighth 
Circuit’s Student Outcome-Based Stan- 
dard is Untenable Because Factors Out- 
side the Control of Government and Un- 
related to De Jure Segregation Dramati- 
cally Affect Student Achievement ........ 


2. A Federal Court Order Granting Salary In- 
creases to Virtually Every Employee of a 
School District as a Part of a School Desegre- 
gation Remedy Conflicts with Applicable De- 
cisions of This Court, Which Require that 
Remedial Components Must Directly Ad- 
dress and Relate to the Constitutional Viola- 
tion and Be Tailored to Cure the Condition that 
Offends the Constitution .............ccccccccsscesesees 


FOSS E HEE ES ESHEETS OES EEE ED ESSE SEES ESSE ESE SE ESSE SESE SE SESSES 


13 


19 


—_ ve 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page(s) 
Cases: 
Arthur v. Nyquist, 712 F.2d 809 (2d Cir. 1983) ............ 26 
Board of Education v. Dowell, 498 U.S. 237 (1991) ........ 7,13, 
21,22,23 
Board of Education v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 179 (1982)... 19 
Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 U.S. 483 (1954) ............ 14 
Brown v. Board of Educ. of Topeka, Shawnee County, 

Kan., 978 F.2d 585 (10th Cir. 1992) ..........c0ccsee0ee 12 
Clements v. Fashing, 457 U.S. 957 (1982) .........ccsse000e8 17 
Coalition to Save Our Children v. Board of Education, 

757 F. Supp. 328 (D.Del. 1991) ...........sccssessereeveees 17 
Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman, 433 U.S. 406 

COD cecrusinssiitaleninnsbisinneindinemnentnmanee 23 
Diaz v. San Jose Unified School District, 861 F.2d 591 

CE FED ccentesrinretnttemnnenineninzmenme 12 
Flax v. Potts, 725 F. Supp. 322 (N.D. Tex. 1989), aff'd, 

pe ff. fs | 12 


Freeman v. Pitts, U.S. __, 112 S.Ct. 1430 (1992) ....passim 
General Building Contractors Ass'n v. Pennsylvania, 


Re 24 
Higgins v. Board of Education, 508 F.2d 779 (6th Cir. 

SE cnchicsctilnicntrnsnigtniniticenubinuannimeneininemne 20 
Hills v. Gautreaux, 425 U.S. 284 (1976) ...........cceeeeeee 


Jenkins v. Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 19 (W.D. Mo. 1985)... 4,6 


Jenkins v. Missouri, 807 F.2d 657 (8th Cir. 1986), cert. 


denied, 484 U.S. 816 (1987) ....ccccccccccccccceesesseeeees 3 
Jenkins v. Missouri, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th Cir. 1988)...... 4 
Jenkins v. Missouri, 931 F.2d 470 (8th Cir. 1991)........ 4 
Kadrmas v. Dickinson Public Schools, 487 U.S. 450 

a ea ea ee 16 
Liddell v. Board of Education, No. 72-100C(6), Order G 

(1156) 94 (E.D. Mo. May 2, 1994) ........ccccceeee. 13 
Liddell v. Missouri, 731 F.2d 1294 (8th Cir. 1984) ...... 12 
McKinny v. Oxnard Union High School District Board of 

Trustees, 642 P.2d 460 (1982) .o.ccccccccccccccesssceeseees 17 
Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974) .o.ccccccccccceceees 20,23 
Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) ..ccccccccccccceseeee passim 
Missouri v. Jenkins, 491 U.S. 274 (1989) ......cccccccccsceee 3 
Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33 (1990) .......ccccccccccesceeee passim 
NAACP v. Lansing Board of Education, 559 F.2d 1042 

RENEE PTR bs roe leciiieies 20 
Northeastern Florida Contractors v. Jacksonville, _ 

U.S. —. BIS S.C. ZIT (IDWS) ..cecocecocecccccocecoseccee 18 
Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 265 (1986) ...........c.cc0ec0e00- 16 
Pasadena Board of Education v. Spangler, 427 U.S. 424 

ES ES ORC TR CELE, SD, See Oe cae 22 
Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202 (1982) ........cccccccccecceeeseeesees 16 


Reed v. Rhodes, 455 F. Supp. 569 (N.D. Ohio (1978) .. 12 


Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 
ee TTD wiircisireriitiaidataitiinapatateatiintasiiaiaiiibiiaiiiaies 17 


ete en — 


= = 


San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. } 
(IDF ccccerececcssscesensssscsnscssncssccsensvessoescsessasssssssesssene 


School Board of the City of Richmond v. Baliles, 829 F.2d 
1308 (4th Cir. 1987) ......ccccccecssecsesseeeseeeseeesenssnesenees 


School District of Kansas City, Missouri v. State of 
Missouri, 460 F. Supp. 421 (W.D. Mo. 1978) ...... 


Spangler v. Pasadena City Board of Education, 611 F.2d 
1239 ta Cis. 1979) nncccccccceccescssoccsscvcescsccccccssecveeess 


Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg Board of Education, 
GBB UG. 8: CIBTED cccccscsesscecncscssccssscesscerssvessesssessses 


Tasby v. Black Coalition to Maximize Education, 771 
F.2d 849 (Sth Cir. 1985) ..........cccccccccscesereeeeeeeneeees 


Turner v. Fouche, 396 U.S. 346 (1970) .........cccccceeeeeeees 


United States v. City of Yonkers, 833 F. Supp. 214 
(S.D.N.Y.. 1993) cccccoccveceeccccecesccvsecssccvcosocssssvecsoooses 


Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 (1975) ....-.-cceceeceeseeeeeeees 
Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976) ........00000e0s0 
Constitutional Provision: 

United States Constitution, Fourteenth Amendment... 
Statute: 

2B UBC. © 1DSAC1) .nceccecccccsccsesecessescssesecccccesenvscsesseocenes 
Other Authorities: 


D. Armor, Why is Black Educational Achievement Ris- 
ing, The Public Interest, Summer 1992..............-.. 


16 


19 


— viii — 


G. Jaynes and R. Williams (eds.), A Common Destiny; 


Blacks and American Society, National Academy 
Press: 1989 


A. Morantz, Money, Choice and Equity: Major Invest- 


ments With Modest Returns (Harvard Graduate 
School of Education 1994) 


W. Taylor, The Continuing Struggle for Equal Educa- 


tional Opportunities, 71 N.C.L. Rev 1693 
(1993) 


SOPH ETOH EET EE EEE EE EE EEE EEEEEE EEE SESE SEES EE EEE EE ES 


SORTER EEE EEE EERE OR ER EEE OSES EES 


SPS OH EEE ET ET EE OEE ET ESSE OEESEEEEEE ESOS OSES ESSE SESE OSES SESE ESOS OES 


12 


No. 
In THE 
Supreme Court of the Hnited States 
Octoser TeRM, 1993 


STATE OF Missouri, et al., 
Petitioners, 


vs. 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Respondents. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The November 29, 1993, opinion of the Court of Appeals is 
reported at 11 F.3d 755 and is reprinted at pages 1 to 27 of the 
accompanying appendix to this petition. The December 8, 1993, 
opinion of the Court of Appeals is reported at 13 F.3d 1170 and 
is reprinted at pages 28 to 35 of the appendix. The order of 
February 24, 1994, denying panel rehearing has not been re- 
ported. It is reprinted at pages 36 to 42 of the appendix. The order 
of March 15, 1994, denying the suggestion for rehearing en banc, 
along with the concurring opinion and the dissenting opinion 
joined by five of the ten active judges, has not been reported. It 
is reprinted at pages 43 to 68 of the appendix. 


— ee 


The District Court’s orders of June 17, 1992, June 25, 1992, 
June 30, 1993, and July 30, 1993, have not been reported. They 
are reprinted at pages 69 to 121 of the appendix. Additionally, the 
District Court’s order of April 16, 1993, to which significant 
reference is made by the Court of Appeals, is reprinted at pages 
122 to 143 of the appendix. 


JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT 


The judgments of the Court of Appeals were entered on 
November 29 and December 8, 1993. The order denying the 
petition for panel rehearing was entered on February 24, 1994. 
The jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 


U.S. Const. Amend. XIV, § 1: “No state shall . . . deny to any 
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


‘This petition, arising out of the seventeen-year old Kansas 
City, Missouri school desegregation case, presents the Court 
with the opportunity to provide necessary guidance and clarifi- 
cation to the many lower courts supervising post-liability phase 
desegregation reinedies. It squarely presents the issue of whether 
“success” in desegregation is measured by the degree to which 
equal opportunity has been provided, or whether equal outcomes 
are required. The Eighth Circuit set an outcome-based standard 
mandating increased student achievement, as measured by re- 
sults on standardized test scores, as a prerequisite to a finding 
that the KCMSD is providing an equal educational opportunity 
and has eliminated the vestiges of prior de jure segregation. The 
Eighth Circuit also overstepped its authority in approving deseg- 
regation-funded salary increases for virtually all employees — 
including all non-instructional personnel — of the defendant 
school district. The jurisdiction of the District Court was based 
on 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1343(a)(3). 


| 
) 


— 


1. The Prior Proceedings 


In 1977, the Kansas City, Missouri School District (“KCMSD” 
or the “District’””) and certain KCMSD students filed their initial 
complaint charging that various named defendants, including 
the State of Missouri and its Board of Education and various 
officials, had caused unconstitutional interdistrict segregation 
throughout the Kansas City metropolitan area. After the District 
Court realigned the KCMSD as a defendant, School District of 
Kansas City, Missouri v. State of Missouri, 460 F. Supp. 421,442 
(W.D. Mo. 1978),' students in the KCMSD and in several other 
surrounding Missouri districts filed an amended complaint, 
adding claims of an intradistrict violation within the KCMSD. 

The District Court rejected the claims for interdistrict relief, 
Jenkins v. Missouri, Order of June 5, 1984, aff'd, Jenkins v. 
Missouri, 807 F.2d 657, 671 (8th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 484 
U.S. 816 (1987), but found the KCMSD and State defendants 
liable on the intradistrict claims. The Court dismissed the federal 
Department of Housing and Urban Development and the subur- 
ban school districts.’ 


In 1985, as part of the remedial phase of this long-ranging 
litigation, the District Court began implementing an extensive 
array of quality education programs which have become known 


' Although a nominal defendant, the KCMSD, the recipient of the extraor- 
dinary funds provided by the State, has sided with the Plaintiffs in virtually 
every dispute throughout this protracted litigation. As Justice Kennedy noted, 
“[t}he Plaintiffs and KCMSD might well be seen as parties that have ‘joined 
forces apparently for the purpose of extracting funds from the State trea- 
sury.”” Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33, 76 (Kennedy, J., concurring), 
quoting Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267, 293 (1977) (Milliken II) (Powell, 
J., concurring in judgment). 

2 This case has been before this Court previously on two occasions. 
Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33 (1990) (court-imposed tax increase); 
Missouri v. Jenkins, 491 U.S. 274 (1989) (attorneys’ fees). 


a he 


as the Milliken II components. Jenkins v. Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 
19 (W.D. Mo. 1985). These included programs providing all 
KCMSD students with a vast array of additional educational 
Opportunities, including additional educational materials, re- 
duced class sizes, full day kindergarten, extended day programs 
and other general educational improvement programs. See gen- 
erally id at 26-46. In a typical year, such programs alone cost 
approximately $54 million. Pet. App. A-143. 


Subsequently, the District Court approved the joint request of 
the defendant KCMSD and Plaintiffs and directed implementa- 
tion of a further comprehensive plan magnetizing all high and 
middle schools, and most elementary schools in the KCMSD. 
These included a performing arts middle and high school, a 
technical school offering vast and varied programs, a school with 
a large farm and wildlife area, and a $32 million dual-theme high 
school for computer and Classical Greek style education, includ- 
ing an indoor running track, gymnastics room and an Olympic- 
sized swimming pool and natatorium. To date, the magnet 
programs have cost $301 million, and magnet transportation has 
cost an additional $118 million. At the same time, the District 
Court approved a massive capital improvements program which 
has greatly enhanced the KCMSD physical plant. See Missouri 
v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33,77, 80 (1990) (Kennedy, J., concurring) 
(outlining the contours of the “extraordinary remedy” ordered by 
the District Court); Jenkins v. Missouri, 931 F. 2d 470, 481 (8th 
Cir. 1991); Jenkins v. Missouri, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th Cir. 1988). 
By 1989, $260 million in capital improvements had been or- 
dered. Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 61. Currently, expenditures for 
capital improvements alone total approximately $417 million, 
with more requests forthcoming. The District Court unsurprisingly 
found these expensive and wide-ranging remedies “provide[d] 
the KCMSD with facilities and opportunities not available 
anywhere else in the country.” Pet. App. A-115. 


wn tun 


As one part of the remedy, the District Court has provided 
salary assistance to the KCMSD teachers since 1987. In 1992 the 
District Court vastly expanded the scope of salary relief to 
include salary increases to all non-instructional personnel, as 
well as teachers. This expansion of the remedy added $13.7 
million annually to the salary component of the remedy. Cur- 
rently, all but three of the approximately 5,000 KCMSD employ- 
ees receive salary increases from court-ordered desegregation 
funds. 


In 1990 this Court — by a 5 to 4 vote — affirmed a method by 
which the KCMSD could increase taxes above those approved 
by the voters to pay its share of the extraordinarily costly remedy 
in KCMSD. Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. 33 (1990).’ In his 
concurring opinion, Justice Kennedy, joined by the Chief Jus- 
tice, and Justices O’Connor and Scalia, expressed serious con- 
cerns over the “extraordinary” scope of this remedy. Justice 
Kennedy noted that the remedy was unprecedented in its breadth 
and cost, to an extent “never before . . . approved” by the Court. 
He also questioned the need for numerous remedial components, 
the exclusion of which could have made the taxing mechanism 
affirmed by this Court unnecessary. 495 U.S. at 76-80 (Kennedy, 
J., concurring). The additional requirements of increased test 
scores and salary increases for virtually all KCMSD employees, 
which the Eighth Circuit imposed below, have since further 
increased the already “extraordinary” scope of this remedy. 

To date, the wide-ranging remedies ordered by the District 
Court in this case have cost local and State taxpayers more than 
$1.3 billion. The State so far has paid approximately $838 


> The District Court had imposed a tax increase on KCMSD patrons 
directly. /d. at 41. The Eighth Circuit, while allowing the District Court's 
increase to stand, had modified the procedures to be used such that the Board 
would approve a levy. The District Court would then enjoin interference with 
the levy increase. /d. at 43. This Court rejected the District Court’s approach, 
but affirmed the modified procedure. /d. at 58. 


pee! 


million in support of its share of the costs and some of the 
KCMSD’s share through application of joint and several liabil- 
ity. The total cost for the Milliken II and salary increase compo- 
nents at issue here through February, 1994 is more than $300 
million and $143 million, respectively. In addition to the mas- 
sive desegregation payment KCMSD has received since fiscal 
year 1986, over the same time frame it has also received $471 
million in regularly appropriated State funding for education. In 
the 1992 fiscal year, combining its regular and court-ordered 
desegregation expenditures, KCMSD spent the highest amount 
per pupil of any district in the State of Missouri, $13,500, fully 
$3,000 more per student than the next highest district. KCMSD, 
a constitutional violator, has expressed no interest in obtaining 
a return of local control, apparently intoxicated by the extraordi- 
nary funds it receives from the State Treasury. See Milliken II, 
433 U.S. at 293 (Powell, J., concurring in judgment). 


2. TheLitigation Leading Uptothe Court of Appeals’ 
Opinions 


Early in the remedial phase of this litigation, the District Court 
set forth its standard for the remedy: 


The long term goal of this Court’s remedial orders is to 
make available to all KCMSD students educational oppor- 
tunities equal to or greater than those presently available in 
the average Kansas City, Missouri metropolitan suburban 
school district. 


Jenkins, 639 F. Supp. at 54 (emphasis added). The District Court 

stated its rationale for providing these educational opportunities: 
In achieving this goal, the victims of unconstitutional 
segregation will be restored to the position they would have 
occupied absent such conduct. . . 


Id. In this Court’s 1990 decision in this case, the four concurring 
Justices questioned the Constitutional necessity of the District 


ol 


Court’s “suburban comparability” standard. Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 
76 (“It cannot be contended that interdistrict comparability, 
which was the ultimate goal of the District Court’s orders, is 
itself a constitutional command.”) 


Following this Court’s 1992 decision in Freeman v. Pitts, __ 
U.S. __, 112 S. Ct. 1430 (1992), the State sought partial unitary 
status with regard to the Milliken II programs. It premised its 
request on the undisputed fact that these programs had met, and 
in most cases vastly‘exceeded, the questionable standard set by 
the District Court for these programs in its 1986 remedial order. 
With regard to “suburban comparability,” the State presented 
undisputed evidence that the programs in place in the KCMSD 
had exceeded opportunities available in all the suburban school 
districts in almost every area. Despite this uncontroverted evi- 
dence, and the District Court’s later finding that suburban 
comparability standards had been vastly surpassed, Pet. App. A- 
115, the District Court rejected the State’s partial unitary status 
arguments, instead ordering additional budgets for the pro- 
grams. It wholly failed, however, to analyze the Freeman issues 
or render any findings whatsoever on those questions. Pet. App. 
A-69. 


On appeal, a panel of the Eighth Circuit affirmed the District 
Court’s order, and in the opinion imposed for the first time in the 
case an entirely new standard--surpassing even the questionable 
“suburban comparability” benchmark--for determining whether 
unitary status has been reached. The Court imposed the require- 
ment that the State prove an unspecified level of improvement in 
student achievement, in place of the traditional measure of equal 
educational opportunity. Pet. App. A-21. While acknowledging 
that the decisions of this Court in Board of Education v. Dowell, 
498 U.S. 237 (1991) and Freeman established the nature of the 
inquiry necessary in considering the question of partial unitary 
status, the panel went dramatically further, stating: 


The success of quality of education programs must be 
measured by their effect on the students, particularly those 
who have been the victims of segregation. 


Pet. App. A-21.4 


The result of the Eighth Circuit’s decision is the creation of an 
unprecedented student performance-based test for analyzing the 
sufficiency of the quality education component of a remedy. The 
five judges dissenting from the denial of the State’s petition for 
en banc rehearing recognized that the Eighth Circuit’s new 
standard supplanted the traditional equal Opportunity bench- 
—- that has long guided Fourteenth Amendment jurispru- 

nce. 


In the same decision in which it injected the new student 
achievement standard, the Eighth Circuit panel also upheld the 
District Court’s order granting across-the-board dese gregation- 
funded salary increases to virtually all KCMSD employees. 
Such funding of District-wide salary increases first became an 
issue in the case in 1990, when the Plaintiffs, the KCMSD and 
an intervenor, American Federation of Teachers, Local 691 


* That these statements contemplated an increase in test scores as a 
standard for a declaration of partial or full unitary status is clear, as those were 
the only measures of student achievement the District Court had addressed. 
Prior to the panel ruling, the District Court had stated, in dictum, that while 
the KCMSD magnet schools had increased educational opportunities and 
attracted some suburban non-minorities to the KCMSD, the KCMSD could 
not be declared partially unitary “because the District is still at or below 
national norms at many grade levels.” Pet. App. A-131. The testimony of 
KCMSD witnesses at the hearing in May, 1992, which led to the District 
Court's June 17, 1992, order discussed test scores extensively, as the five 
judges dissenting from denial of en banc rehearing noted. Pet. App. A-62. 
Those judges concluded “the panel felt that student achievement, or lack 
thereof, was the watermark up to which the tide of desegregation effort must 
flow.” Id. As noted, infra p. 10, the three judges concurring with the denial of 
———— i acknowledged the test results standard the panel 


ee Se ere 


4. ee ee ee 


— = 


(“AFT’’)— the collective bargaining agent for KCMSD teachers 
— filed motions seeking court-ordered salary increases for both 
instructional and other non-instructional personnel. The District 
Court approved a settlement of the initial expanded salary 
requests, reserving the parties’ right to raise subsequently any 
and all legal objections in its order of July 23, 1990. 


The salary issue recurred in 1992 and 1993, when the AFT and 
KCMSD filed motions seeking additional across-the-board sal- 
ary funding. The State opposed the motions arguing they re- 
quested relief beyond the scope of the remedy and unrelated to 
the constitutional violation, but the District Court approved 
desegregation funding for the increases. Order of June 25, 1992, 
Pet. App. A-76. These court-ordered salary increases covered 
not only teachers and administrators, but extended to non- 
instructional employees such as cooks, custodians, carpenters, 
laborers, electricians, parking lot attendants, security guards, 
secretaries, clerical workers, business administrators and data 
processing personnel. On appeal to the Eighth Circuit, the State 
reiterated its argument (again unsuccessfully) that the salary 
increases exceeded the District Court’s authority because they 
were not tied to the constitutional violation under Milliken II, 433 
U.S. at 281-82. The Court of Appeals affirmed the 1992 salary 
order in its November 29, 1993, opinion, Pet. App. A-l, and the 
1993 order in the separate opinion of December 8, 1993. Pet. 
App. A-28. 


Following the Eighth Circuit panel’s ruling on these two 
issues, the State petitioned for rehearing of the Eighth Circuit 
panel opinions of November 29 and December 8, 1993, and also 
suggested rehearing en banc. The panel, modifying its initial 
Cécision only slightly, denied rehearing on February 24, 1994. 
Pet. App. A-36. 


The full Court of Appeals — split 6 to 5 — denied rehearing 
en banc on March 15, 1994. Three judges, including Senior 


— = 


Circuit Judge John Gibson, Judge McMillian (both of whom sat 
on the panel) and Judge Magill, joined a concurring opinion, 
while the five dissenting judges joined in an eighteen page 
opinion authored by Judge Beam.’ The concurring judges made 
clear that, in their view, students’ standardized test results were 
a factor in relieving a school district of court supervision: 


When we deal with student achievement in a quality educa- 
tion program in the context of relieving a school district of 
court supervision, test results must be considered. 


Pet. App. A-45. 


The dissenting judges, however, consisting of five of the ten 
members in regular active service on the Court of Appeals, 
expressed a sharply contrary view, writing: 


The District Court has, with the approbation of the panel, 
embedded a student achievement goal measured by annual 
standardized tests into its test of whether the KCMSD has 
built a high quality educational system sufficient to remedy 
past discrimination. The Constitution requires no such 
standard. 


Pet. App. A-58. The dissent agreed with the State Defendants 
that the lack of improvement in standardized test scores was the 
only factor the District Court had found lacking in the parties’ 
implementation of the desegregation remedy: 


The only factor the District Court saw standing in the way 
of unitary status for the educational program was continued 
below average academic performance. Indeed, there is no 
other evidence in the record to support a conclusion that the 


* The additional dissenters joining in the opinion were Judges Bowman, 
Wollman, Loken and Morris Arnold. 


ee ee ee ee . 


educational enhancement (Milliken II) program of the 
KCMSD is wanting. 


Pet. App. A-61. 


The five dissenting judges also agreed with the State that 
salary increases for non-instructional personnel were beyond the 
scope of a legitimate remedy under Milliken II, stating that 


logic does not directly relate the pay of parking lot atten- 
dants, trash haulers and food handlers, for instance, to any 
facet or phase of the desegregation plan or to the constitu- 
tional violations. 

Pet. App. A-57. 


It is against this background of an unprecedented remedy, 
massive expenditures, and a sharply divided Court of Appeals 
that this long-running case comes once again to this Court. 


= 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


This petition presents two important constitutional issues 
arising in a desegregation case of “exceptional importance” and 
involving an array of in-place remedial programs “concededly 
without parallel in any other school district in the country.” 
Jenkins, 855 F.2d at 1318-19 (Bowman, J., dissenting from 
denial of rehearing en banc). As Justice Kennedy, (joined by the 
Chief Justice and Justices O’Connor and Scalia) correctly ob- 
served in Missouri v. Jenkins, the result of the District Court’s 
orders is an “extraordinary remedy” of a breadth “never before 
-- approved” by the Supreme Court. 495 U.S. at 80. The remedy 
has since expanded. 

This lawsuit has persisted for over 17 years, and the quality 
education component, initiated in 1985, has been fully in place since 
1989. The case involves an “unparalleled educational experiment 
that has funneled more than $1.2 billion” into the Kansas City 
schools to eradicate the vestiges of past de jure segregation.’ The 
issues at stake here will direct not only the future course and cost of 
the remedy in Kansas City, but will affect remedy-phase desegrega- 
ton Cases in metropolitan areas throughout the land.’ For the 
reasons set out herein, the Court should grant the writ of 
certiorari and resolve these important issues. 


* A. Morantz, Money, Choice and Equity: Maj ith Mode. 
’ , : Major Investments With M. 
Returns | (Harvard Graduate School of Education 1994). “s 


’See,e.g.,Brown v. Board of Educ. ka, Shawnee 

F.2d 585 (10th Cir. 1992); Freeman bo County, es ema 
Jose Unified School District, 861 F.24 591, 593 (9th Cir. 1988); Tasby v 
Black Coalition to Maximize Education, 771 F.2d 849 (5th Cir. 1985) 
(Dallas); Liddell v. Missouri, 731 F.2d 1294 (8th Cir. 1984) (St. Louis); 
United States v. City of Yonkers, 833 F. Supp. 214 (S.D. N.Y. 1993); Flax v. 
Potts, 725 F. Supp. 322,325-26 (ND. Tex. 1989), aff d,915 F.2d 155 (Sth Cir 
1990) (Fort Worth); Reed v. Rhodes, 455 F. Supp. 569, 597-602 (N.D. Ohio 
1978) (Cleveland). Indeed, in the St. Louis, Missouri desegregation case, 
where local and state taxpayers have already spent over $1.6 billion, the 
District Court recently adopted, sua sponte, the Eighth Circuit’ s test requiring 

(Footnote 7 continued on next page) 


ee ee ee eee 2 


— 


1. The Court of Appeals’ Opinion Conflicts With 
Decisions of This Court Setting Forth the Stan- 
dards and Limits of Desegregation Remedies. It 
Also Raises an Important Question of Federal Law 
That Has Not Been, But Should Be Directly Re- 
solved by This Court — Whether, in Applying the 
Freeman Test for Unitary Status, a Court of Ap- 
peals Overseeing a School Desegregation Case May 
Require Increased Standardized Test Scores. 


A. TheCourtof Appeals’ Imposition ofa Student 
Outcome-Based Standard for Unitary Status, 
Requiring Enhanced Student Achievement, 
Purports to Guarantee Outcomes Rather Than 
Opportunities and is Therefore Flatly at Odds 
With Settled Equal Protection Jurisprudence. 


The Eighth Circuit’s novel ruling would measure the consti- 
tutional sufficiency of a quality education component of a 
comprehensive desegregation remedy by the degree of im- 
proved student achievement, as measured by results on standard- 
ized test scores. This outcome-based standard, wholly foreign to 
traditional equal protection analysis, creates an entirely new and 
untenable standard for determining when a desegregation rem- 
edy has achieved its purpose to the extent practicable. Indeed, the 
Eighth Circuit’s ruling eviscerates this Court’s standard an- 
nounced previously in Dowell and Freeman precisely because it 
interposes a requirement that is not “practicable.” Dowell, 498 
U.S. at 250; Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1446. 


(Footnote 7 continued) 


i student achievement for unitariness. Liddell v. Board of Education, 
No. 72-100C(6), Order No. G (1156) 94 at 1-2 (E.D. Mo. May 2, 1994). 
Moreover, the addition of such a requirement as a prerequisite to a declaration 
of unitary status may cause renewed efforts to reopen cases in which the 
remedies did not contain such programs. See Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 78 
(Kennedy, J., concurring). 


oe 


Neither this Court nor any other federal late court has 

iptinn. menseety meemeso vont page 
prerequisite to ei ull or partial unitary status. In f; 

noted by the five Eighth Circuit sere Aer scr depraa 
of rehearing en banc, this Court long ago rejected the notion that 
there is a constitutional right to analogous relief, in the context 
of racial balance in the form of any particular degree of numeri- 
cal racial mixing. In Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg Board of 
Education, 402 U.S. 1, 24 (1971), this Court stated: 


If we were to read the holding of the district court to require, 
as a matter of substantive constitutional right, any particu- 
lar degree of racial balance or mixing, that approach would 
be disapproved and we would be obliged to reverse. 


Id. See also Pet. App. A-63. Indeed, the Court’s unwillingness in 
Swann in 1971 to set outcomes as a test for racial balancing 
necessarily dooms the Eighth Circuit’s student outcome-based 
standard for educational achievement since it is integration, in 
the first place, that is the raison d’ etre of desegregation rem- 
edies. See Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 U.S. 483, 493 (1954). 


. In the courts below, no party disputed the State’s showing that 
it had complied with the District Court’s orders requiring mas- 
sive funding of over $300 million for implementation of the 
quality education component of the remedy. Likewise, no party 
contested the State’s showing that the overall quality of educa- 
tion programs the KCMSD offered was equal to or better than 
analogous programs offered in any surrounding Missouri subur- 
ban school district. The comprehensive remedy has provided the 
KCMSD with numerous quality education programs, magnet 
schools (every high school, every middle school and more than 
two-thirds of the elementary schools) providing varied themes 
and options for all KCMSD students to choose from, and 
substantial capital improvements, including numerous new build- 
ings, widespread general renovation and the addition of special- 
ized facilities for magnet programs. See generally Pet. App. A- 


A lt al a AA Be OE od 


A teed 


mee fo Pe Fe tele 


— 


53 - A-55; Jenkins, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th Cir. 1988). The remedy 
is unprecedented in scope and cost. Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 76-77 
(Kennedy, J., concurring). Indeed, as the District Court itself 
found, “KCMSD [has been given] facilities and opportunities 
not available anywhere else in the country.” Pet. App. A-115. 


The result of these Herculean efforts is unparalleled quality 
education programs for all KCMSD students, regardless of race. 
Indeed the District Court found that the KCMSD educational 
opportunities were unsurpassed by any school district, whether 
located in suburban Kansas City, McLean, Virginia, or any- 
where else. In providing these extraordinary opportunities, the 
State has more than fulfilled its obligation to remedy the vestiges 
of “a system-wide reduction in student achievement,” Jenkins, 
639 F. Supp. at 24. Against this background, the Eighth Circuit's 
attempt to raise the bar yet another notch is flatly inconsistent with 
the principles of Swann and should not be permitted to stand. 


Other equal protection decisions of this Court fully support 
the principle that federal courts may not require, as a prerequisite 
to unitary status, that a school district guarantee to its students 
that they attain some arbitrary level of achievement. Just as “[i]t 
cannot be contended that interdistrict comparability, which was 
the ultimate goal of the District Court’s orders, is itself a 
constitutional command,” so too the Eighth Circuit’s creation of 
a guaranteed outcome standard is clearly outside the Equal 
Protection Clause’s mandates. Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 
76 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Indeed, the District Court’s initial 
“suburban comparability” standard concerned itself only with 
facilities and programs — factors at least within government's 
power to control. A student performance standard, largely be- 
yond the effective control of the State or KCMSD, far exceeds 
even that questionable benchmark. See pp.19-23 infra. 


Simply because education is at issue here does not dictate 
deviation from the Court’s traditional equal protection analysis. 


— 146— 


This Court has repeatedly held that educati i 
tion per se is not 

a right. See Kadrmas v. Dickinson Public Schools, 
87 U.S. 450, 458 (1988); Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 265. 284 
(1986); Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 223 (1982); San Antealo 
School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 (1973). The Consti- 
tution simply does not contain any guarantee of an education of 
ns bape quality or of any particular level of achievement 
> 4 studen ts, individually or collectively. In Rodriguez this 
urt plainly distinguished between protection of rights and 

supposed guarantees of those rights to particular levels: 
The Court has long afforded zealous protection against 
unjustifiable governmental interference with the individual ’s 
right to speak and to vote. Yet we have never presumed to 
possess either the ability or the authority to guarantee to the 


citizenry the most effective speec 
electoral choice. . h or the most informed 


Id. at 36 (emphasis in original).* Nothing in the decisions of this 


* Rodriguez properly questioned how a right to a parti 
education could even be effectuated based on the substantial debate eparding 


affecting student performance, see infra at it is si “practi 
ung » at 19-23, it is simply not i- 
cable to impose such a student achievement benchmark. Freeman, 112S.Ct 


rae ee 


; 
| 
. 


= 


Court supports a guarantee in the school desegregation context 
of student achievement at any particular level.’ 


In other contexts this Court has likewise never interpreted the 
Fourteenth Amendment to require equal outcomes; indeed it has 
rejected that flawed approach. The Court has long defined an 
equal protection injury as the denial of equal opportunity result- 
ing from the imposition of an unconstitutional barrier, see, €.8., 
Turner v. Fouche, 396 U.S. 346, 362 (1970), not the ultimate 
inability to obtain the benefit. /d. (Plaintiffs had the right to be 
considered for the board of education without the burden of 
invidiously discriminatory disqualifications, but had no right to 
be appointed to the board). The Court has continuously referred 
to this standard in determining, for standing purposes, whether 
a plaintiff has suffered an actionable injury under the Equal 
Protection Clause. See, e.g., Clements v. Fashing, 457 U.S. 957, 
962 (1982); Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 438 
U.S. 265, 281, n.14 (1978). 


* As one district court correctly noted: 
The 14th Amendment requires an equal education. There is no consti- 
tutional guarantee of a quality education. The Constitution is satisfied 
if all of the students . . . [in a school district] receive an equally bad 
education, regardless of race. 
Coalition to Save Our Children v. Board of Education, 757 F. Supp. 328,350 
(D. Del. 1991). In Kansas City, of course, “KCMSD students have in place 
a system that offers more educational opportunity than anywhere in America.” 
Pet. App. A-65. 
Similarly, the California Supreme Court has stated: 
[T]he primary objective of a desegregation plan is to achieve a unifor- 
mity of educational opportunities for all races by eliminating the 
detrimental effects of a segregated school system .. . 
McKinny v. Oxnard Union High School District Board of Trustees, 642 P.2d 
460, 463 (Cal. 1982). It is not to require test score increases or guarantee 
equality of results. 


aw Chae 


Most recently, the Court applied the equal protection injury 
analysis in Northeastern F lorida Contractors v. Jacksonville, _ 
U.S. __, 113 S. Ct. 2297 (1993), in which an association of 
general contractors challenged a city ordinance according pref- 
erential treatment to minority-owned businesses in awarding 
city contracts. /d. at2299. The Court determined that because the 
association was denied the opportunity to bid on certain con- 
tracts, they had suffered an injury cognizable under the Equal 
Protection Clause. /d. at 2304. 


In reaching this conclusion, the Jacksonville Court specifi- 
cally analyzed its 1975 decision in Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 
(1975), where the Court determined that a construction associa- 
tion had not suffered an injury cognizable under the Equal 
Protection Clause. In distinguishing the earlier case, the Court 
noted that the Warth plaintiffs had made no claim that the 
construction association’s members could not apply for permits 
on the same basis as other firms. The Jacksonville Court stated 
there was no equal protection injury in Warth because “[tJhe 
firms’ complaint. . . was not that they could not compete equally; 
it was that they did not win.” Jacksonville, 113 S. Ct. at 2304. 


This Court’s previous decisions regarding the goals of school 
desegregation and equal protection have focused upon providing 
the opportunity to obtain a benefit; not the ultimate benefit itself. 
Plainly, the District Court’s original finding of discrimination in 
this case cannot be used to create a wholesale shift in equal 
protection injury analysis, particularly in light of the uncontested 
Opportunity level created in KCMSD. Therefore, the Eighth 
Circuit’s requirement of a guaranteed outcome far exceeds the 
Equal Protection Clause’s mandate. 


—_ 


B. Factually and Constitutionally, the Eighth Circuit’s 
Student Outcome-Based Standard is Untenable 
Because Factors Outside the Control of Govern- 
ment and Unrelated to De Jure Segregation Dra- 
matically Affect Student Achievement. 


This Court and others have long recognized that numerous 
factors beyond the provision of educational resources 
dispositively affect students’ standardized test scores. This case 
presents a textbook example of that proposition. In Board of 
Education v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176, 198 (1982), for example, this 
Court in dealing with a claim under the Education of the 


Handicapped Act, noted that 


a myriad of factors . . . might affect a particular student's 

ability to assimilate information in the classroom. 
Similarly, in School Board of the City of Richmond v. Baliles, 
829 F.2d 1308, 1312-13 (4th Cir. 1987), the Fourth Circuit held 
that poverty and ineffective educational philosophy were Te- 
sponsible for remaining achievement disparities between major- 
ity and minority students. In the instant case, Judge Beam, 
writing for the five dissenters, correctly noted that: 


To require achievement test scores at or above the national 
norm is to require the school system to be responsible for 
circumstances beyond its control. Segregated housing pat- 
terns, poverty, street violence, drug usage, criminal activi- 
ties and lack of parental involvement, if they exist in the 
KCMSD, are not the responsibility of the public school 
system. 


Pet. App. A-64. The Eighth Circuit panel's initial decision 
simply assumed that the State could be required to fund pro- 
grams to eliminate any deficiencies in student achievement test 
scores. It also assumed — without any basis — that the State 
could succeed in raising test scores, apparently through the 
continued application of massive resources, without even exam- 


ining whether these or other factors would ha impac 
student achievement.'° tee ek, mag 


Conversely, this Court has routinely limited remedial respon- 
sibilities to matters within the control of defendants. As the Court 
stated in Freeman, “[w]here control lies, so too does responsibil- 
ity.” Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1445. Necessarily, where control 
does not lie, as in the case of student achievement, so too 
responsibility should not be imposed."' Similarly, this Court has 
recognized that “*[t}here are undoubted practical as well as legal 
mantenaiens Si any 

on cases.” Milliken II, 433 U.S. at 280 (quoting Milli 
v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717, 763 (1974) omen Nh ong 4 
dissenting); see also Swann, 402 U.S. at 22 (“the elimination of 


'* The panel decision did not discuss any evidence on the influence 
factors not within the control of the school system. Nor wes any such evideexe 
presented before the District Court because the requirement of improved 
student achievement first surfaced in the panel’s opinion. 

That factors other than educational resources determine results on stan- 
dardized test scores has been recognized not only by the Fourth Circuit and 
the dissenting judges of the Eighth Circuit, but also in the scholarly literature. 
See W.L. Taylor, The Continuing Struggle for Equal Educational Opportu- 
nity, 71 NC. L. Rev. 1693, 1703 (1993) (link between concentration of 
poverty in public schools and performance on tests of basic reading skills); G. 
Jaynes and R. Williams (eds.), A Common Destiny, Blacks and American 
Society, 366, 369, 372, National Academy Press: 1989 (discussing effect of 
socioeconomic status, family size and peer pressure on educational out- 
comes); D. Armor, Why is Black Educational Achievement Rising, The Public 
Interest, Summer 1992, p. 66 (“It is well-documented that socioeconomic 
factors . among the major explanations of black-white achievement differ- 


"In language at odds with the opinions before this Court, i ircui 
has held “[t}he Constitution imposes no duty on school iaaieee sm 
segregative conditions resulting from factors over which they have nocontrol 
..«. NAACP v. Lansing Board of Education, 559 F.2d 1042, 1049 (6th Cir. 
1977); see also Higgins v. Board of Education, 508 F.2d 779, 791 (6th Cir. 
1974). Clearly, the principle applies equally to the quality education context. 


= 


racial discrimination in public schools is a large task and one that 
should not be retarded by efforts to achieve broader purposes 
lying beyond the jurisdiction of school authorities. One vehicle 
can carry only a limited amount of baggage.”). Indeed, any other 
standard would vitiate the holdings of Dowell and Freeman that 
desegregation remedies are temporary in nature and limited in 
purpose to eradicating vestiges of discrimination to the “extent 
practicable.” 


In light of the effect on student achievement exerted by non- 
instructional factors, the Court of Appeals’ requirement of 
improved student achievement greatly exceeds the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s guarantee of “equal educational opportunity for 
our Nation’s children.” Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U.S. at 80 
(Kennedy, J., concurring) (emphasis added). If permitted to 
stand, such a standard would mark a radical departure from this 
Court’s established requirement that only purposeful discrimi- 
nation is remediable under the Fourteenth Amendment, see, ¢.2., 
Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 240 (1976), and that, in any 
case, a constitutional remedy must be tailored to the injury 
caused by the constitutional violation. Milliken IT, 433 U.S. at 
281-82. 


This Court recognized in Freeman that it was beyond the 
scope of a court’s authority to require that a desegregation 
remedy alleviate conditions that were beyond the school district’s 
power because to do so would mean such cases would never end: 


Itis beyond the authority and beyond the practical ability of 
the federal courts to try to counteract these kinds of continu- 
ous and massive demographic shifts. To attempt such 
results would require ongoing and never-ending supervi- 
sion by the courts of school districts simply because they 
were once de jure segregated. 


Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1448. This principle from Freeman is 
consistent with the Court’s admonition the previous term in 


Dowell: “[w]e emphasize that federal judicial supervision of 
local school systems was intended as a temporary measure.” 
Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1445. Similarly, in Pasadena Board of 
Educ. v. Spangler, 427 U.S. 424, 434-35 (1976), this Court 
declined to require continued supervision of a defendant school 
district which had complied with a desegregation order requiring 
a Certain racial balance: 


[I}n this case, the district court approved a plan desi to 
obtain racial neutrality in the attendance of iene 
Pasadena . "s public schools. No one disputes that the initial 
implementation of this plan accomplished that objective. 
That being the case, the district court was not entitled to 
require the [school district] to arrange its attendance zones 
each year so as to ensure that the racial mix desired by the 
court was maintained in perpetuity. For having once imple- 
mented a racially neutral attendance pattern in order to 
remedy the perceived constitutional violations on the parts 
of the defendants, the district court had fully performed its 
function of providing the appropriate remedy for previous 
racially discriminatory attendance patterns. 


Id. at 436-37. 


The Court of Appeals’ requirement that the State and the 
KCMSD demonstrate a test score increase as a prerequisite to 
withdrawal of court supervision in this case would condemn the 
KCMSD to supervision by the Court for an indefinite period, 
contrary to the principles espoused by this Court in Freeman and 
Dowell. The KCMSD may well approve of continued judicial 
supervision, see Pet. App. A-62 (KCMSD Administrator en- 
dorsing a 100 year remedy), because that would keep extraordi- 
nary desegregation funds from the State flowing intothe KCMSD. 
However, such indefinite judicial control is contrary to this 
Court’s mandate that school districts under desegregation orders 
be returned to the control of State and local authorities once they 
are operating in compliance with the Constitution. This Court 


<a 


has strongly emphasized local control of schools in its previous 
opinions, most recently in Freeman: 


As we have long observed, ‘local autonomy of school 

districts is a vital national tradition.’ 
Id., 112 S. Ct. at 1445, quoting Dayton Board of Education v. 
Brinkman, 433 U.S. 406, 410 (1977); see also Dowell, 498 U.S. 
at 248 (discussing “‘the important values of local control of 
public school systems’”), quoting Spangler v. Pasadena City 
Board of Education, 611 F.2d 1239, 1245 n. 5 (9th Cir. 1979) 
(Kennedy, J., concurring). The Eighth Circuit’s ruling is pre- 
cisely contrary to these holdings. 


For these reasons, this Court should grant certiorari to reverse 
the Eighth Circuit’s erroneous constitutional interpretation. 


2. A Federal Court Order Granting Salary Increases 
to Virtually Every Employee of a School District as 
a Part of a School Desegregation Remedy Conflicts 
with Applicable Decisions of this Court, Which 
Require that Remedial Components Must Directly 
Address and Relate to the Constitutional Violation 
and be Tailored to Cure the Condition that Offends 
the Constitution. 


In Milliken I this Court said that “[(t}he controlling principle 
consistently expounded in our holdings is that the scope of the 
remedy is determined by the nature and extent of the constitu- 
tional violation, /d., 418 U.S. at 745 (citing Swann, 402 U.S. at 
16). In Milliken II this Court held that federal court remedial 
orders must directly address and relate to the constitutional 
violation itself. Milliken II, 433 U.S. at 281-82. This Court has 
also held that before a court may impose a remedial program, it 
must be satisfied that “the constitutional violation caused the 
condition for which remedial programs were mandated.” /d. at 
286, n.17. In Freeman this Court followed that principle, stating 
that “a remedy is justifiable only insofar as it advances the 


= 


ultimate objective of alleviating the constitutional violation.” 
Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1445. 


This controlling principle, of course, is consistently applied in 
other cases dealing with remedies for constitutional violations: 


This principle was not one limited to school desegregation 
cases, but was instead ‘premised on a controlling principle 
governing the permissible scope of federal judicial power, 
a principle not limited to a school desegregation context.’ 


General Building Contractors Ass'n v. Pennsylvania, 458 U.S. 
375, 399 (1982) (quoting Hills v. Gautreaux, 425 U.S. 284, 294 
n.11 (1976)). 


Here, the District Court has never found that low district-wide 
salaries violate either the constitutional rights of the students, 
teachers or other staff of the KCMSD or that they flow from any 
earlier constitutional violation by the State. Nevertheless, the 
Eighth Circuit panel affirmed the District Court’s orders grant- 
ing salary increases to virtually every employee within the 
KCMSD, without regard to whether they had instructional duties 
or even any interaction with the students.'? Insofar as the District 
Court’s order pertains to non-instructional personnel, it clearly 
does not address or relate to the constitutional violation upon 
which this remedy is premised — the defendants’ historical 
denial of an equal educational opportunity. 

The panel premised its ruling on the dubious and speculative 
assumption that providing salary increases to Districtemployees 
would “improve the KCMSD’s desegregative attractiveness.” 
Pet. App. A-26. It is conceivable such an argument could apply 
to increases specifically tailored to attracting specialists needed 
to implement the magnet programs or to other necessary instruc- 


___' The only District employees who do not receive court-ordered salary 
increases are the Superintendent and two highly-paid administrators. 


a 


tional personnel, who were unavailable for salary reasons. How- 
ever, there is absolutely no legal or factual basis to assume that 
providing raises to parking lot attendants, custodians, cooks and 
other similar non-instructional personnel will reverse the effects 
of the defendants’ past de jure discrimination. As Judge Beam 
noted, writing for the five judges dissenting from the denial of 
the suggestion for rehearing en banc: 


[T]he current effort by the KCMSD and the American 
Federation of Teachers (AFT), aided by the Plaintiffs, to 
bypass the collective bargaining process is uncalled for and 
is probably not an exercise reasonably related to the consti- 
tutional violations found by the Court in 1985. Further, it 
enables the KCMSD to involve the State, via the joint and 
several liability holdings of the Court, in pay raises the 
KCMSD probably could not impose upon its constituents. 
The Court’s salary order also enables the teachers’ union to 
achieve goals that would be unattainable under the bargain- 


ing process. 
Pet. App. A-58. Judge Beam later added: 


I agree with the State that logic does not directly relate the 
pay of parking lot attendants, trash haulers and food han- 
dlers, for instance, to any facet or phase of the deseg- 
regation plan or to the constitutional violations. 


The District Court’s unprecedented salary order finds no 
support in the caselaw. In a decision setting a standard at odds 
with the decision below, the Second Circuit stated that a deseg- 
regation remedy should not be used to provide general upgrades 
to school systems implementing desegregation remedies: 


[A] court must be alert not to permit a school board to use 
acourt’s broad power to remedy constitutional violations as 
a means of upgrading an educational system in ways only 
remotely related to desegregation. 


— 


Arthur v. Nyquist, 712 F.2d 809, 813 (2d Cir. 1983). Justice 
Kennedy, writing for three other members of the Court, reaf- 
firmed this principle in his concurring opinion in Missouri v. 
Jenkins 495 U.S. at 77. 

The salary increase ordered here includes substantial numbers 
of personnel not remotely related to desegregation. The in- 
creases for non-instructional personnel cannot be justified under 
the previous holdings of this Court. As with the requirement of 
Student test score increases, permitting school desegregation 
cases to be used for such purposes would establish an unsound 


precedent for remedies in desegregation cases as well as other 
cases involving institutional constitutional violations. 


—_ a 


CONCLUSION 


The Eighth Circuit's creation of an outcome-based student 
achievement standard for unitary status far exceeds the Equal 
Protection Clause’s established guarantee of equal opportunity. 
It is neither traceable to any constitutional injury in this case nor 
is ita tenable standard. Moreover, in application it would plainly 
contravene this Court’s recent pronouncements on the proper 
duration and purposes of desegregation remedies. Similarly, the 
Court of Appeals’ ruling approving salary increases for all non- 
instructional personnel — paid for by extraordinary desegrega- 
tion funds — is plainly outside the scope of a proper desegrega- 
tion remedy. Therefore, this Court should grant the petition for 
a writ of certiorari. 

Respectfully submitted, 


JEREMIAH W. (JAY) NIXON 
Attorney General 


JOHN R. MUNICH* 
Chief Counsel for Litigation 


MICHAEL J. FIELDS 
BART A. MATANIC 
NORMAN E. SIEGEL 
Assistant Attorneys General 


P.O. Box 899 
Jefferson City, MO 65102 
(314) 751-3321 


Counsel for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


APPENDIX 


eh a 


PD ON 


— 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 90-2238 
No. 91-3636 


Kalima Jenkins, by her friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated; 


Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Plaintiffs, 
Vv. 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Roseann Bentley; Dan L. 
Blackwell; Gary M. Cunningham; Raymond McCallister, Jr.; 

Susan D. Finke; Thomas R. Davis; Cynthia B. Thompson, 
Members of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 

Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the 
State of Missouri, 


Defendants-Appellants, 


—_ * 


School District of Kansas City, Missouri 
Claude C. Perkins, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 92-3194 
No. 92-3200 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall: 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine: 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 
v. 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 

of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 

McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education: Robert E 

‘Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 


—_< 


Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 
Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 


Defendants-Appellants, 


School District of Kansas City; 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 


Defendants-Appellees. 


Appeals from the United States District Court 
for the Western District of Missouri 


Submitted: September 15, 1993 
Filed: November 29, 1993 


Before McMILLIAN, Circuit Judge, HEANEY, Senior Circuit 
Judge, and JOHN R. GIBSON, Circuit Judge. 


JOHN R. GIBSON, Circuit Judge. 


The State of Missouri appeals from four orders of the district 
court! entered in the ongoing Kansas City school desegregation 
case. The district court ruled in two orders that base costs of the 
original group of magnet schools were properly included as 
desegregation costs, which the State could be required to pay as 
a result of its joint and several liability for desegregation ex- 
penses. The State argues that the district court erred in placing 


* Although we are aware that many of those named as defendants no longer 
hold their offices and substitution of public officers is automatic under Fed. 
R. App. P.43(c), the parties have not notified us of the names of the successors 
in office. Therefore, we have not amended the style in this case. 


' The Honorable Russell G. Clark, Senior United States District Judge for 
the Western District of Missouri. 


a ee 


this expense on the State, because in earlier orders the district 
court had required that these orders be paid by the Kansas City, 
Missouri School District. The State appeals the district court 
order approving Certain quality education programs known as 
Milliken IT programs after Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 
(1977) (Milliken I]), for the 1992-93 school year.? The State 
contends that the Milliken II programs already in place had 
achieved the goals set for them, and had attained unitary status 
under Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430 (1992), and the district 
court erred in not recognizing this and in ordering further 
programs. Finally, the State appeals from orders requiring the 
State to pay for a salary increase for KCMSD teachers and other 
employees. We affirm the orders of the district court. 


L 


The first two appeals involve orders allowing the base costs of 
the “flagship magnets” as desegregation expenses for which the 
State and KCMSD are jointly and severally liable. The flagship 
magnets (also referred to as the “1986-87” magnets in reference 
to their inception date) are schools that existed before the 
desegregation remedy and were converted into magnet schools 
as part of the desegregation remedy. The costs that KCMSD 
would have incurred in running these schools, regardless of the 
desegregation remedy, are referred to as “base costs.” Costs 
associated with the magnet themes are called “incremental 
magnet costs.” 


In the original magnet school order, June 16, 1986, the court 
made 110 distinction between base costs and incremental costs for 


* The Milliken I programs included extended day, effective schools, 1986- 
87 magnets, district communications, security, playground equipment, Cen- 
Se neacede tam eel, aadententes Gay pragam for Westport 


* The flagship magnets are the three schools of the Southwest 
Cluster 
(Cook, Hartman, and Marlborough), Swinney and Volker, and the Lincoln 
College Preparatory magnet. 


—_S 


the flagship schools, but classified the total amount as a deseg- 
regation expense, allocating half to the State and half to the 
KCMSD. Jenkins v. Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 19, 53-55 (order on 
pending motions) (W. D. Mo. 1985), aff d, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th 
Cir. 1988), cert. denied as to this order, 490 U.S. 1034 (1990). 
The State alluded to this very briefly in an appeal of that funding 
order, complaining that the district court “held all of the operat- 
ing costs of the schools, whether part of the original budgets or 
newly ordered by the court, were to be counted as necessary 
desegregation expenses,” and that the court had “effectively 
transfer{red] to the desegregation plan all of the operating 
expenses of the schools.” We affirmed the June 16, 1986 order, 
though without discussion of this point. Jenkins v. Missouri, 855 
F.2d 1295, 1319 (8th Cir. 1988) VJenkins II), cert. denied in 
relevant part, 490 U.S. 1034 (1989). 


The district court in November 1986 ordered a more extensive 
“Long Range Magnet Plan” which created new magnets in 
addition to the flagship magnet schools. The Long Range Mag- 
net Plan budget distinguished between base and incremental 
costs for the new magnets, and required the KCMSD to pay base 
costs from its operating budget. On July 25, 1988, the district 
court decided that the flagship magnets and the new magnets 
should be funded according to the same principles, and that it 
would therefore not require the State to pay the base costs for the 
flagship magnets for 1988-89. Because the KCMSD could not 
show which costs were base and which incremental, the court 
simply included the whole cost in the desegregation budget, but 
allowed the State a credit for the base amount, which was to be 
determined later. The court issued a similar ruling for 1989-90. 


Before the State obtained the benefit of these credits, however, 
money problems intervened. The court stayed the orders requir- 
ing the KCMSD to pay the 1988-89 and 1989-90 base costs, 
pending a review of KCMSD’s finances by an independent 


—_e 


consulting firm to determine what KCMSD could pay for out of 
its operating budget.‘ 


Two orders are on appeal, dated June 26, 1990 and July 5, 
1991, in which the district court approved the total expenses for 
the flagship magnets as desegregation expenses for the years 
199091 and 1991-92, respectively. In those orders, the court 
allocated the flagship base costs entirely to the KCMSD, but the 
effect of joint and several liability is that the State could be called 
on to pay these costs. In the 1990-91 order the court stated that 
the consultant’s study was still pending, and that if the report 
should result in the February 1, 1990 stay order being lifted, the 
State could receive a credit for the base costs. In the 1991-92 
order the court stated the budget study did not indicate that the 
KCMSD had the money to pay the base costs from its operating 
budget, and therefore, the costs would have to be shifted to the 
desegregation budget. 


The State’s objection is that by designating the 1990-91 and 
1991-92 base costs as desegregation expenses, payable by the 
KCMSD, the court is indirectly requiring the State to pay the 
costs, through the operation of joint and several liability. The 
State raises four arguments against such a result. 


First, the State argues that requiring it to pay for the ordinary 
costs of operating KCMSD’s schools is impermissibly granting 
relief not related to the State’s constitutional violation, since 
KCMSD would have had to pay the operating costs of its 
schools, whether or not the State ever committed a constitutional 
violation. 


* By later agreement of the parties, the State actually recovered the money 
from the 1988-89 and 1989-90 credits, out of the proceeds from property taxes 
that had been paid into escrow but were released for the District’s use after the 
Supreme Court affirmed the property tax order under which they were 
authorized. 


—_* 


The cases the State cites are not directly applicable, since they 
either address situations in which there was no relation between 
the remedy ordered and the constitutional violation,’ or simply 
refer generally to the requirement that the remedy be limited to 
rectifying conditions that offend the Constitution. As we dis- 
cuss at length in Part II, the effect of the constitutional violations 
in this case was to lessen student achievement in the KCMSD 
and to cause white flight. Jenkins I], 855 F.2d at 1300. It has 
already been determined that the proper remedy for these injuries 
is to improve the quality of education given to minority students 
and to implement superior educational programs that will attract 
white students back to the District and redistribute the whites 
concentrated in certain parts of the District. Jd. The flagship 
magnet schools are a cornerstone of the remedial plan. The 
relation between payment of the magnets’ base costs and the 
success of the constitutional remedy is evident. If KCMSD 
cannot pay the basic costs of keeping the schools open, the 
magnet programs at those schools cannot go forward and the 
remedial plan will be stillborn. It is therefore consistent with 
Milliken II to require the State to pay costs the KCMSD would 
have been otherwise responsible for when KCMSD cannot pay, 
and when failure to pay would fatally undermine the constitu- 
tionally-mandated remedy. In fact, it is settled law in this circuit 
that a desegregation remedy can require the State to pay the 
entire costs of educating at least some of a district’s students, 
since we affirmed such an order in St. Louis over the same sort 
of objection the State makes here. See Liddell v. Missouri, 801 
F.2d 278, 282-83 (8th Cir. 1986) (Liddell IX). 


5 Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717, 744-45 (1974) (Milliken I); Liddell v. 
Missouri, 731 F.2d 1294, 1309 (8th Cir.) (Liddell VII), cert. denied,469 U.S. 
816 (1984). 

* Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430, 1445 (1992); Milliken v. Bradley, 433 
U.S. 267, 281-82 (1977) (Milliken IT); Swann v. Charlotte - Mecklenburg Bd. 
of Educ.,402 U.S. 1, 16 (1971); Arthur v. Nyquist, 712 F.2d 809, 813 (2d Cir. 
1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 936 (1984). 


— 


Next, the State argues that the district court’s decision to place 
the base costs in the desegregation budget is inconsistent with 
other decisions that the district court has made in this case. The 
State argues that the authority of the court’s orders separating 
base and incremental costs for the flagship magnets’ 1988-89 
and 1989-90 funding is not affected by the February 1, 1990 stay 
of those orders and the rationale of those orders should govern 
later years. We have recognized the practical flexibility of the 
court in shaping remedies and adjusting and modifying injunc- 
tions in Jenkins v. Missouri, 931 F.2d 470, 482 (8th Cir.) Jenkins 
IIT), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 437 (1991), particularly where there 
are changed circumstances. The district court exercised this 
flexibility when it changed from full desegregation funding for 
the flagship magnets (as it had ordered before 1988-89) to 
separating base from incremental costs. In response to a budget 
study which “did not indicate that the KCMSD has resources 
available from its operating budget to support the base budgets,” 
the court once again consolidated the base costs with incremen- 
tal costs. There was adequate rationale for the change and the 
1990-91 and 1991-92 orders do not conflict with the court’s 
earlier treatment of the base costs. 


The State quotes language from the district court opinion of 
July 5, 1991, in which the court rejected the KCMSD’s “no 
money” argument in another context. The KCMSD had argued 
that because it was always out of money and could not pay for its 
operating Costs, its operating and desegregation budgets should 
be merged, with the State required to pay any expenses the 
KCMSD could not afford. The district court rejected this argu- 
ment, stating, “There is no legal authority for essentially trans- 
forming the State into a guarantor of KCMSD operating budget 
shortfalls.” Order of July 5, 1991 at 9. The court then advised 
KCMSD either to pursue additional funding or to institute cuts 
to balance its operating budget. Even granting that there may be 
tension between the July 5, 1991 decision and the orders before 
us, the district court did not err or abuse its discretion in making 


_ 


an adjustment or modification of its earlier equitable orders 
dealing with the flagship magnets’ funding, so vitally important 
to the remedy of the constitutional violations. 


Finally, the State suggests that the entire issue should be 
remanded to the district court for reconsideration in light of the 
State’s enactment of a new school finance formula, which the 
State argues will provide significantly greater state funding to 
KCMSD. This new development may well affect funding in 
future years, but at this point we simply do not know how. Any 
effect it may have will be determined by the district court as it 
considers future funding orders. It is not appropriate that we 
consider it in the first instance. 


The parties evidently delayed the presentation of this appeal 
for some time in the hopes that the issue would be settled by the 
report of the independent consultant. It was only when the 
report’s result did not reveal sufficient money available to 
KCMSD to solve the problem that the State prosecuted its 
appeal. We view this as a recognition of the need to balance the 
many conflicting issues in crafting an appropriate remedy, and 
this further supports our conclusion that we should affirm the 
district court’s orders with respect to the base costs of the 


flagship magnets. 
Il. 


The State argues that the district court erred as a matter of law 
or, in the alternative, abused its discretion by failing to address 
in its June 17, 1992 order the State’s argument that the Milliken 
II quality education programs were unitary. Even if the district 
court was not obliged to make findings on this issue, the State 
argues that it abused its discretion in failing to hold the district 
unitary in the quality education area. We affirm the district 
court’s judgment. 


KCMSD submitted its motion for approval of the desegrega- 
tion plan for 1992-93, including continuation of the Milliken II 


—< 


programs, which the court had originally approved in order to 
improve student achievement in the KCMSD. While the 
KCMSD’s motion was pending, the United States Supreme 
Court decided Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430 (1992). The 
State then relied on Pitts to argue that the Milliken II programs 
had been implemented fully and that the court should declare 
these programs unitary and return responsibility for them to the 
school district. The court held a hearing on the 1992-93 budget 
issues on May 27 to 29, 1992, and while rejecting some requests, 
ordered most of the Milliken I] programs fully funded. 


The June 17, 1992 order approved the KCMSD’s 1991-92 
budgets without comment. Order of June 17, 1992 at 7. In 
granting the funding, it is evident that the district court rejected 
the State’s arguments. The district court did not err in so ruling, 
even though it did not articulate its reasoning in approving the 
funds. Rejection of the State’s argument is demonstrated by the 
district court’s failure to make findings based on these argu- 
ments. See Switzer Brothers, Inc. v. Locklin, 297 F.2d 39, 45 (7th 
Cir. 1961) (“[Failure to enter findings with respect [to certain 
evidence] is tantamount to findings adverse to appellants upon 
the evidence.”), cert. denied, 369 U.S. 851 (1962). The district 
court need not make specific findings on all facts, but must only 
rule on the ultimate facts necessary to reach a decision in the 
case. United States v. F D. Rich Co..Inc., 439 F.2d 895, 899 (8th 
Cir. 1971); Falcon Equip. Corp. v. Courtesy Lincoln Mercury. 
Inc., 536 F.2d 806, 808 (8th Cir. 1976) (“It is well established 
that the trial court does not need to make specific findings on all 
facts but only must formulate findings on the ultimate facts 
necessary to reach a decision.”’). The district court’s order some 
nine months later in which it anticipated an orderly and gradual 
withdrawal of court control demonstrates the court’s grasp of the 
Freeman v. Pitts argument asserted by the State, and of the issues 
there raised. 


Were we to entertain any question about the import of the 
district court’s June 17, 1992 order, the district judge’s com- 


— A-11 — 


ments from the bench during the hearing and later orders raising 
the same or similar issues answer our concerns. The State argues 
that the court should have declared the KCMSD unitary in regard 
to the quality education programs because the only goal of the 
desegregation remedy is the “full implementation” of the reme- 
dial programs, which the State asserts it has accomplished. 
However, during the hearing the court pointed out that the goal 
was not to implement certain programs, but rather to integrate the 
school district. Judge Clark stated: 


The [cJourt’s goal was to integrate the Kansas City, Mis- 
souri, School District . . . and all these other matters were 
elements to be used to try to integrate the [KCMSD].... 
That’s the goal. And a high standard of quality education. 
The magnet schools, the summer school program and all 
these programs are tied to that goal. . .. But when [the State] 
says no particular goal has been set, I think [it is} in error. 


Judge Clark’s order rejecting funding for some of the pro- 
grams and granting funding for continuation of other programs 
could only have done so on the basis that the goals of the 
desegregation programs, the elimination of the vestiges of past 
discrimination to the extent practicable, had not yet been achieved. 


Because this desegregation litigation is ongoing, we also find 
it appropriate to refer to later orders which show that the district 
court considered and rejected the State’s arguments. Nine months 
after the order giving rise to this appeal, the court considered a 
motion for approval of the Long Range Magnet Renewal Plan. 
On April 16, 1993, the district court entered an order which dealt 
more explicitly with many of the arguments now urged by the 
State. Order of April 16, 1993. None of the parties has appealed 
this April 1993 order. Yet, this order helps illuminate the June 
1992 order now before us. In the April order, the district court 
made the sort of findings contemplated by Freeman, anticipating 
an orderly and gradual withdrawal of court control. See 112 S. 
Ct. at 1445. 


— A-12 — 


In the April 1993 order, the district court defined the first issue 
as whether the magnet programs have improved the educational 
lot of the victims of unconstitutional segregation and whether 
approval of the Long Range Magnet Renewal Plan would likely 
result in additional educational progress. The second issue was 
whether the original Long Range Magnet Plan had helped the 
KCMSD reverse white flight, and whether the Long Range 
Magnet Renewal Plan would bring more white students into the 
District. The third issue the court considered was whether the 
magnet programs have redistributed the students within KCMSD 
for maximum desegregation and whether the Renewal Plan 
would result in stabilization and further enhancement of 
desegregative gains. 


The district court commented on the substantial progress 
made in desegregating KCMSD schools. The court found that 
there had been a trend of improvement in academic achievement, 
but that the school district was far from reaching its maximum 
potential because KCMSD is still at or below national norms at 
many grade levels. Order of April 16, 1993 at 11. The court 
observed that the magnet school plan has been successful over- 
all, with a substantial pool of suburban whites expressing an 
interest in attending KCMSD magnet schools. /d. at 9. The 
educational opportunities afforded in the magnet schools are 
better than previously available. Jd. at 13. The court then ex- 
tended the duration of the magnet plan. /d. at 14. The court stated 
that it was important to maintain the magnet plan as it is because 
of the positive impact on both the desegregation effort and on 
achievement. /d. at 20. The court ordered a two-year extension 
of the current plan (with certain modifications) in order to 
maintain the integrity of the programs currently offered, and to 
allow the KCMSD to better measure the effectiveness of the 
programs. Jd. The court expressed a need for the parties’ views 
of an effective method by which the district may fund its share 
of the programs. It directed the KCMSD to submit a plan 
commensurate with current funding or at a level permitting 


— 


maintenance of the same quality of both facilities and instruc- 
tion, assuming withdrawal of court ordered funding at alterna- 
tive intervals of three, five, seven or ten years. /d. at 21. 


In essence, the court’s order indicated that the magnet school 
plan had been substantially successful, that further areas for 
improvement still existed, and that the court was looking for- 
ward to the day when a gradual phase-out would be considered. 
This orcs specifically addresses the issues raised by Freeman v. 
Pitts. See 112 S. Ct. at 1446 (listing factors a district court must 
consider to order a partial withdrawal of its supervision). 


Further, the district court’s July 30, 1993’ order regarding 
Milliken II programs expressly decides these issues. The State 
appealed this order but raised no Freeman v. Pitts arguments; the 
State only attacks the salary issue. We refer to the July 1993 order 
only as it fleshes out the meaning of the earlier district court 
orders dealing with the Freeman issues. In the July order the 
district court stated that it had previously ruled in the April 16, 
1993 order as a result of the Long Range Magnet Renewal Plan 
that “KCMSD has not met the goals and standards set by the 
[c]ourt in establishing the desegregation remedy.” Order of July 
30, 1993 at 3. The court unambiguously stated: “The court finds 
that the State’s arguments that these components have attained 
unitary status are unpersuasive.” /d. These statements leave no 
doubt that the court rejected the State’s Freeman arguments in 
July 1993, and it follows that in this ongoing litigation, it did so 
in the earlier orders dealing with the issue. 


The court said next that the State argues inconsistently that the 
desegregation plan is a complete failure, but on the other hand, 
that the Milliken I] components are completely successful. The 
court also concluded that the State has continued to make 
fundamentally flawed arguments in pursuit of an order determin- 


’ This appeal bears our docket No. 93-3274, and was argued November 3, 
1993. 


—e 


ing unitary status in the KCMSD. The court found that the 
Milliken II components have been partially successful in imple- 
menting the goals and standards of the desegregation remedy, 
but the components have not yet met these goals in their entirety. 
The court’s statements in its July 30, 1993 order, which the State 
referred to only most obliquely in the argument of the issues 
before us, substantiates our reading and interpretation of the 
orders heretofore entered by the district court. 


The State next argues that even if we conclude (as we have) 
that the district court was not obligated to issue findings of fact 
regarding the success of the Milliken II programs, the district 
court abused its discretion when it held that the Milliken II 
programs were not unitary. The essence of the State’s argument 
is that it complied fully and satisfactorily with all court orders, 
insofar as the remedial programs have been fully implemented 
and funded for a seven-year period. This, it argues, is the extent 
of its liability. We reject the State’s argument that the District has 
achieved unitary status regarding the quality education offered 
its students. 


The Supreme Court has twice in recent years considered the 
standards to be employed in determining whether a school 
system has become unitary. 


First, in Board of Education of Oklahoma City v. Dowell, 111 
S. Ct. 630, 636 (1991), the Supreme Court stated that in deter- 
mining whether there was constitutional compliance in a school 
desegregation case, the district court “should address itself to 
whether the Board had complied in good faith with the desegre- 
gation decree since it was entered, and whether the vestiges of 
past discrimination had been eliminated to the extent practi- 
cable.” /d. at 638. The Court itemized a number of facets of 
school operation that a court should consider in determining 
whether the vestiges of de jure segregation had been “eliminated 
as far as practicable,” including “student assignments, . . . 
‘faculty, staff, transportation, extra-curricular activities and fa- 


— A-15 — 


cilities.” Jd. (quoting Green v. New Kent County School Bd.,391 
U.S. 430, 435 (1968)).* 


Second, in Freeman v. Pitts, the Court dealt specifically with 
whether a district court could withdraw incrementally from 
supervising a school desegregation case. The Court held that the 
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit erred in requiring 
retention of full remedial authority until a school district had 
achieved unitary status in all categories. 112 S. Ct. at 1446. 


In discussing the meaning of “unitary,” Freeman began with 
the basis for the court’s exercise of equitable power. The Court 
stated: 


The essence of a court’s equity power lies in its inherent 
Capacity to adjust remedies in a feasible and practical way 
to eliminate the conditions or redress the injuries caused by 
unlawful action. Equitable remedies must be flexible if 
these underlying principles are to be enforced with fairness 
and precision. . . . “The task is to correct, by a balancing of 
the individual and collective interest, the condition that 
offends the Constitution.” The requirement of a unitary 
school system must be implemented according to this 
prescription. 


Id. at 1444 (citations omitted). 


Freeman stressed that the end purpose of a court’s supervision 
is to remedy the violation and then to restore to state and local 
authorities control of the school system. /d. at 1445. Partial 
relinquishment of judicial control can be a significant step in 
fulfilling the district court’s duty to return the control of schools 
to local authorities. /d. “A transition phase in which control is 
relinquished in a gradual way is an appropriate means to this 
end.” Jd. The Court continued: 


* Another factor to be considered is the quality of education offered to the 
white and black students. See Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1437. 


— A-16— 


[O]}ne of the prerequisites to relinquishment of control in 
whole or in part is that a school district has demonstrated its 
commitment to a course of action that gives full respect to 
the equal protection guarantees of the Constitution. 


Id. 


Freeman authorizes a district court to relinquish control in 
Stages, Outlining the analysis it should follow and requiring 
careful articulation of its reasoning. The district court is given 
discretion based upon its assessment of many factors, some of 
which are most intangible: 


A court’s discretion to order the incremental withdrawal 
of its supervision in a school desegregation case must be 
exercised in a manner consistent with the purposes and 
objectives of its equitable power. Among the factors which 
must inform the’ sound discretion of the court in ordering 
partial withdrawal are the following: whether there has 
been full and satisfactory compliance with the decree in 
those aspects of the system where supervision is to be 
withdrawn; whether retention of judicial control is neces- 
sary or practicable to achieve compliance with the decree in 
other facets of the school system, and whether the school 
district has demonstrated, to the public and to the parents 
and students of the once disfavored race, its good faith 
commitment to the whole of the court’s decree and to those 
provisions of the law and the constitution that were the 
predicate for judicial intervention in the first instance. 

Id. at 1446 (emphasis added). 


In order to analyze this case under Freeman v. Pitts to 
determine if KCMSD has achieved unitary status, we must 
consider the constitutional injury, the methods selected to rem- 
edy that injury, the goals of the remedy, and the success achieved 
by the remedy. 


— A-17 — 


Of course, the injury is that vestiges remain of the dual school 
system once required by the State of Missouri. Those vestiges 
take the form of reduced student achievement and white flight, 
resulting in the anomaly of a racially isolated school district in 
the midst of a population with a far different racial makeup. In 
Jenkins II, we quoted the district court’s findings: 


“[W]itnesses confirmed the conclusion reached by the 
Supreme Court in Brown I [Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 
U.S. 483 (1954)] that forced segregation ruins attitudes and 
is inherently unequal . .. . The general attitude of inferiority 
among blacks produces low achievement which ultimately 
limits employment opportunities and causes poverty.” “Seg- 
regation has caused a system wide reduction in student 
achievement in the schools of the KCMSD.” 


The district court found that segregation in KCMSD caused 
the departure of the whites in the system to private schools 
and to the suburbs. During the years between Brown | and 
trial, the enrollment of KCMSD shifted from predomi- 
nantly white to predominantly black. In the 1958-59 school 
year, blacks constituted 22.5% of KCMSD enrollment, but 
by 1983-84 enrollment was 67.7% black and white enroll- 
ment had dropped 80%. “[A]s of 1974, 20 years after Brown 
1,39 schools were more than 90% black .... Eighty percent 
of all blacks in the District attended schools that were 90% 
black... .” KCMSD later reduced the number of over-90%- 
black-enrollment-schools, but the district court found in 
1984 that KCMSD had still not completely dismantled the 
dual system. 


855 F.2d at 1300 (citations omitted). 


— A-18 — 


The remedy consisted of a capital improvements plan to 
rectify the decay in the school’s physical facilities,’ numerous 
quality education programs, and a far-reaching magnet school 
plan. The goals of the remedial programs were: (1) to compen- 
sate the victims by improving the education given them; (2) to 
enhance the programs so as to reverse the white flight pattern, 
winning back white students from private and suburban schools, 
and thus ending the racial isolation of the victims; and (3) to use 
the magnet schools as a way of bringing about voluntary redis- 
tribution of children within the KCMSD itself. Jd. at 1302. 


The substance of the State’s argument is that the Milliken I] 
quality education programs have been established successfully 
and are of superior quality to those programs offered in the 
suburban school districts and, therefore, that the goal of amelio- 
rating inferior educational opportunities has been accomplished. 
The State presented Dr. Terrance Stewart, Assistant Commis- 
sioner of Education for the State of Missouri, as its witness with 
respect to the implementation of the Milliken I] programs. The 
district court viewed his testimony as giving a glowing report of 
the success of the programs. However, the court made clear that 
the goal was to integrate the Kansas City, Missouri School 
District, and that the various programs were tools to be used to 
do so. The court rejected Dr. Stewart’s argument that no goals 
had been achieved. It is also significant that the testimony of Dr. 
Stewart did no more than describe the successful establishment 
of the several educational programs, but gave no indication of 
whether these programs had succeeded in improving student 
achievement. On the other hand, KCMSD’s Superintendent 
Walter Marks, and Assistant Superintendent of Instruction Art 
Rainwater, testified that while the programs had been estab- 
lished and progress was being made both in academic achieve- 
ment and reduction of racial isolation, much remains to be done. 


* The capital improvements are not before us in this appeal. But see Jenkins 
11, 855 F.2d at 1300, 1306-07. 


— A-19 — 


The only evidence before the district court with respect to the 
degree of progress on elimination of vestiges of past discrimina- 
tion was at best that a start had been made. The evidence on the 
record fell far short of establishing that such vestiges had been 
eliminated to the extent practicable. See Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 
1446 (quoting Dowell, 111 S. Ct. at 638). These tests, articulated 
in Doweli and Freeman, answer the State’s argument that 
establishment of the programs by compliance with the court 
order is all that is required. 


Further, Freeman did not indicate that the State is entitled to 
be released upon accomplishment of any particular objective 
without also considering whether retention of judicial control 
was necessary or practicable to achieve compliance with the 
decree in other facets of the school system. The State did not try 
to prove that it has demonstrated a good faith commitment to the 
whole of the court’s decree. See Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1446; see 
Brown v. Board of Educ., 978 F.2d 585, 592 (JOth Cir. 1992) 
(“[{S]pecific policies, decisions, and courses of action that extend 
into the future must be examined to assess the [defendant’s] good 
faith.”), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 2994 (1993). 


KCMSD argues that the State’s evidence is insufficient to 
justify exercise of the court’s discretion to grant unitary status 
under Freeman. KCMSD’s argument has much merit, but the 
State asks only that we hold the district court abused its discre- 
tion in continuing the education programs. 


We have considered the State’s arguments in considerable 
detail, and we are satisfied that Judge Clark’s comments during 
the four-day hearing show that he fully considered the State’s 
Freeman arguments. In his order, he rejected funding for some 
of the programs, while granting the funds for others; thus, he 
implicitly rejected the State’s Freeman arguments. While it 
might have been desirable for the court to articulate explicitly 
even a conclusory rejection of the State’s Freeman arguments, 


— A-20 — 


the district court did not abuse its discretion in continuing the 
quality education programs. 


In view of the State’s arguments that under Freeman it is 
entitled to a determination on an incremental basis that KCMSD 
has become unitary, a few further words are appropriate.'° 
Dowell and Freeman both outline in considerable detail the 
nature of the inquiry the district court must undertake in consid- 
ering this issue. These principles must be applied in analyzing 
the question of unitariness to determine whether there has been 
a successful remedy for the constitutional violations that have 
been found to exist in KCMSD. Our earlier opinions which we 
have discussed above, particularly Jenkins I] and the district 
court orders there in issue, set forth in detail the constitutional 
violations and the impact upon the District. It goes without 
saying that careful factfinding and detailed articulation of find- 
ings will be required, particularly with respect to whether ves- 
tiges of discrimination have been eliminated to the extent prac- 
ticable, and thus certain aspects of KCMSD have become 
unitary. It is evident that in considering the various parts of the 
remedy, some questions will be far more easily resolved than 
others. The improvement of the physical facilities is one that 
lends itself to relatively simple quantification. Questions of 
student assignments, faculty and staff composition, as well as 
extra-curricular activities and facilities, are only slightly more 
complicated. 


When the question of quality of education is reached, how- 
ever, the issue is far more complex. The district court correctly 
observed that implementation of programs in and of itself is not 
sufficient. The test, after all, is whether the vestiges of segrega- 
tion, here the system-wide reduction in student achievement, 


*° Another part of the remedy we have stressed repeatedly is the develop- 
ment of a voluntary inter-district plan. We observe once again that the only 
implementation of any such plan is the ten student exchange with the Missouri 
City schools. 


— A-21 — 


have been eliminated to the greatest extent practicable. The 
success of quality of education programs must be measured by 
their effect on the students, particularly those who have been the 
victims of segregation. It will take time to remedy the system- 
wide reduction in student achievement in the KCMSD schools, 
and the orders of the district court reflect that it is aware of this 
fact. 


We must also recognize that the funding problems are an 
inherent part of the entire problem in KCMSD, as we observed 
in Jenkins II, 855 F.2d at 1305. The atmosphere within the 
community and the legal climate within the State have prevented 
KCMSD from raising the necessary funds to maintain its schools 
and to fund remedial programs. These are all aspects that the 
district court must consider as it continues to address this issue 
in the future. 


IIL. 


The State also argues that the district court erred as a matter of 
law in approving salary increases for KCMSD employees in its 
order of June 25, 1992. Order of June 25, 1992 at 15-16. The 
State argues first that the salary increase remedy sought ex- 
ceeded that necessary to remedy the constitutional violations, 
and alternatively, that if the district court had lawful authority to 
impose the increases, it abused its discretion in doing so. We 
reject the State’s arguments and affirm the district court’s June 
25, 1992 order granting the salary increases." 


On September 15, 1987, the district court ordered salary 
increases to be paid out of the desegregation budget, finding that 
high quality personnel are necessary not only to implement 
specialized desegregation programs intended to improve educa- 


'' The salary increases called for in the court’s order had been completely 
paid when argument was heard in this case. Presumably, the State would seek 
recovery of the funds from KCMSD, and whether there is a practical effect, 
in view of joint and several liability, is a question that we need not ponder. 


— A-22 — 


tional opportunities and reduce racial isolation, but also to ensure 
that there is no diminution in the quality of its regular education 
programs. Jenkins, 672 F. Supp. 400, 410 (W.D. Mo. 1987), aff'd 
in relevant part, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th Cir. 1988), cert. denied as 
to relevant part, 490 U.S. 1034 (1989). Additional increases to 
be paid from the desegregation budget were sought in 1990, and 
after several days of hearings in June of that year, the parties 
reached a settlement as to salary increases to be paid equally by 
the State and KCMSD, with KCMSD’s fifty percent share to be 
funded by an increase in the real estate tax levy from $4 per $100 
valuation to $4.96. The settlement specifically provided that 
joint and several liability would not apply to these salary obliga- 
tions. The parties in this litigation did not appeal from the order, 
and this court dismissed an appeal filed by a group of taxpayers. 
Jenkins v. Missouri, 967 F.2d 1245, 1248 (8th Cir.) (property 
owners’ notice of appeal was ineffective since they did not move 
to intervene until time to appeal had already expired), cert. 
denied, 113 S. Ct. 811 (1992). 


In early 1992 the American Federation of Teachers and 
KCMSD sought additional increases in salaries to be paid as 
desegregation expenses. The State opposed the increases and 
argued that the court should order a roll-back of salaries of the 
KCMSD staff to the 1986-87 levels because the salary increases 
did not meet the goals set by the court. 


After a hearing lasting four days, the district court entered its 
order approving the salary increases. Order of June 25, 1992 at 
16. The court set forth in detail the respective contentions of the 
parties and supporting evidence and ordered the State to fund 
fifty percent of the increases and KCMSD to fund fifty percent, 
with joint and several liability. Most importantly in this order, 
the court found that Kansas City, Missouri is part of the national 
urban market, and that other cities are competing for Kansas 
City’s teachers and staff. The district court found that the State’s 
roll-back proposal would drastically impair implementation of 


— A-23 — 


the desegregation remedy. Order of June 25, 1992 at 13. The 
district court concluded that logic and empirical data showed 
that in an absence of desegregation funding for salaries, the 
District would not be able to implement the desegregation plan. 
Id. at 12. Quoting Freeman v. Pitts, the court found that the 
“essence of a court’s equity power lies in its inherent capacity to 
adjust remedies in a feasible and practical way to eliminate the 
conditions or redress the injuries caused by unlawful action.” /d. 
at 12 (quoting Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. at 1444). The court 
referred to its ruling in 1989 that KCMSD’s difficulty in hiring 
and retaining qualified personnel adversely affected the deseg- 
regation plan. /d. at 13 (citing Order of July 5, 1989 at 23). In 
approving the 1990 salary package, the court found that salary 
increases for KCMSD’s personnel were “essential to comply 
with the [clourt’s desegregation orders.” Order of June 25, 1992 
at 13 (quoting Order of July 23, 1990 at 6). The district court also 
referred to its earlier orders and decisions of this court that high 
quality personnel are necessary not only to implement special- 
ized desegregation programs intended to improve educational 
opportunities and reduce racial isolation, but also to “insure that 
there is no diminution in the quality of its regular academic 
program.” Jenkins v. Missouri, 672 F. Supp. at 410. The court 
found: “In order to improve the desegregative attractiveness of 
the KCMSD, the District must hire and retain high quality 
teachers, administrators and staff.” Order of June 25, 1992 at 15. 
Finally, the district court concluded that the basis for its ruling is 
grounded “in remedying the vestiges of segregation by improv- 
ing the desegregative attractiveness of the KCMSD.” /d. 


The State makes noclaim that the findings of fact of the district 
court are clearly erroneous. Instead, it simply argues that as a 
matter of law there is no support for the district court’s order, and 
if there is such support, the district court abused its discretion in 
ordering the salary payments. In great part, the State seems to be 
urging that we review the issue de novo based upon factual 


— Mtn 


arguments that it now asserts, many based on evaluative criteria 
it claims the district court had adopted. 


The State’s legal argument is that the district court should 
have denied the salary increase funding because it is contrary to 
Milliken II and Swann in that it does not directly address and 
relate to the State’s constitutional violation. The State argues that 
low teacher salaries do not flow from any earlier constitutional 
violations by the State. The State particularly targets pay of non- 
teacher personnel as beyond the power of the court to reach. 


The State’s argument requires that we look again to the 
finding, which we affirmed in Jenkins II, 855 F.2d at 1300, that 
“[s]egregation has caused a system wide reduction in student 
achievementin the schools of the KCMSD” as well as departures 
of whites to private schools and suburbs. The goals of the 
remedial programs are to improve the educational lot of the 
victims of unconstitutional segregation, to regain some portion 
of the white students who have fled the District and retain those 
that are still there, and to redistribute the students within the 
KCMSD to achieve the maximum desegregation possible. 855 
F.2d at 1302. The State has too narrow an approach to the nature 
of the constitutional violation and injury, which is extremely 
broad. See pages 17-18, supra. In addition to compensating the 
victims, the remedy in this case was also designed to reverse 
white flight by offering superior educational opportunities. See 
Jenkins II, 855 F.2d at 1302. 


Contrary to the State’s argument, the issue is not that low 
teacher pay in and of itself is a constitutional violation that must 
be remedied, but rather the systemic reduction of student achieve- 
ment and white flight which require as part of the remedy quality 
education programs and magnet schools. This remedy finds its 
earliest support in Milliken II, which stated: “In the first place, 
like other equitable remedies, the nature of the desegregation 
remedy is to be determined by the nature and scope of the 
constitutional violation . . . . [T]he decree . . . must be designed 


—s 


as nearly as possible ‘to restore the victims of discriminatory 
conduct to the position they would have occupied in the absence 
of such conduct.” 433 U.S. at 280 (citations omitted). Milliken 
II discussed educational remedies deemed necessary to restore 
the victims of discriminatory conduct to the position they would 
have enjoyed in terms of education provided in a non-discrimi- 
natory manner in a school system free from pervasive dejure 
racial segregation. Jd. at 282. Milliken II specifically approved 
remedial education programs “to overcome past inadequacies 
and to compensate minority children for unequal educational 
opportunities resulting from past or present racial and ethnic 
isolation.” Jd. at 284-85. Indeed, Milliken II looked to habits of 
speech, conduct, and attitudes reflecting cultural isolation as 
conditions that the remedy could appropriately address. Jd. at 
287. 


The establishment of the quality educational programs in 
KCMSD springs from these roots and from the ample findings 
that we have reviewed on numerous occasions. 


To this beginning proposition we must then add the findings 
of the district court that salary funding is necessary to implement 
the desegregation plan. The court stated in its June 1992 order 
that “[IJogic and empirical data show that in the absence of 
desegregation funding for salaries, the district will not be able to 
implement its segregation plan. “ Order of June 25, 1992 at 12. 
It was particularly appropriate that in this same order the district 
court looked to the language in Freeman v. Pitts that “[t}he 
essence of a court’s equity power lies in its inherent capacity to 
adjust remedies in a feasible and practical way to eliminate the 
conditions or redress the injuries caused by unlawful action, “ 
slip op. at 12 (quoting Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1444), and further 
that a district court may require the expenditure of funds to 
implementa desegregation remedy, slip op. at 12 (citing Milliken 
IT). The court looked to its earlier holdings that KCMSD’s 
difficulty in hiring and retaining qualified personnel adversely 


— A-26 — 


affected the desegregation plan. Slip op. at 13. “High quality 
personnel are necessary not only to implement specialized 
desegregation programs intended to ‘improve educational op- 
portunities and reduce racial isolation,’ but also to ‘ensure that 
there is no diminution in the quality of its regular academic 
program.””’ /d. at 13 (citing Jenkins I]). The court also found that 
to improve the KCMSD’s desegregative attractiveness, KCMSD 
must be able to hire and retain high quality teachers, administra- 
tors, and staff. Slip op. at 15. 


What we have said, coupled with the district court’s findings 
detailed above, demonstrates the legal basis for the court’s salary 
orders. Further, as we said in discussing the decay of the district’s 
physical facilities in Jenkins I], the constitutional violations by 
the State and failure to remove the vestiges of the dual school 
system “‘contributed to, if not precipitated, an atmosphere which 
prevented the KCMSD from raising the necessary funds to 
maintain its schools.”’ 855 F.2d at 1305. The same principle 
applies equally to the salary issue before us. In Jenkins I] we 
rejected an argument similar to that asserted by the State today. 
Itis also significant that the district court, in its first order relating 
to salaries, specifically referred to the deterioration in KCMSD’s 
teacher salary position because of failure to obtain passage of a 
tax levy. Jenkins v. Missouri, 672 F. Supp. at 410. 


We reject the State’s argument that the salary order entered by 
the district court was without lawful authority. We are satisfied 
that the district court’s factual findings provide sufficient under- 
pinning for the legal conclusion the district court reached in this 
case. 


We need not engage in a detailed analysis of the State’s factual 
arguments. There was substantial evidence to support the district 
court’s findings we have referred to above. Further, the court 
heard testimony from the State’s experts that there was a statis- 
tically significant, positive change in the turnover rates for full- 


aT oe 


time employees after the earlier salary increase, that the percent- 
age of certified employees selecting KCMSD dramatically in- 
creased because of the earlier salary increases, that the percent- 
age of employees lost to other school districts after the salary 
increase declined significantly, and that the average perfor- 
mance evaluation for the professional employees increased 
positively and significantly. The record provides ample support 
for the district court’s findings, and we conclude that it did not 
abuse its discretion in approving the salary increases. 


We affirm the various orders entered by the district court. 
A true copy. 
Attest: 


CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, 
EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


_ 


a fh — 


APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-3274 


Kalima Jenkins, by her friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated; 
Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 
Vv 


State of Missouri; Mel Carnahan, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Bob Holden, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 


—s 


Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacqueline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 


Defendants-Appellants, 


School District of Kansas City 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof 


Defendants-Appellees. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Western District of Missouri 


Submitted: November 3, 1993 
Filed: December 8, 1993 


Before McMILLIAN, Circuit Judge, HEANEY, Senior Circuit 


Judge, and JOHN R. GIBSON, Circuit Judge. 
JOHN R. GIBSON, Circuit Judge. 


The State of Missouri once again appeals from orders of the 
district court' granting salary increases to KCMSD personnel as 
part of the remedy in the ongoing Kansas City school desegrega- 
tion case. Jenkins v. Missouri, No.77-0420-CV-W-4 (W.D. Mo. 
June 30 and July 30, 1993). We affirm. 


We have in our most recent opinion affirmed salary orders 
entered by the district court on June 25, 1992. Jenkins v. 
Missouri, No. 90-2238 (8th Cir. Nov. 29, 1993). In our opinion 
we outlined the history of the court’s orders dealing specifically 
with salaries as a part of the desegregation remedy, including the 
original salary order of September 15, 1987, and a settlement 
reached by the parties in 1990, and finally, the affirmance of the 


'The Honorable Russell G. Clark, Senior United States District Judge for 
the Western District of Missouri. 


is 


— A-30 — 


1992 order. We need not repeat that history which is set out in our 
earlier opinion. Slip op. at 21-27. Additional hearings were held 
on salary motions for the school years 1993-94, 1994-95, and 
1995-96, and the district court in an order dated June 30, 1993 
granted salary increases to be effective in the three school years. 


L 


The State first argues that the district court should have denied 
the salary increase funding, as it is contrary to Milliken v. 
Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) (Milliken 11), in that it does not 
directly address and relate to the constitutional violation. The 
State argues that low teacher salaries do not flow from any earlier 
constitutional violations by the State, and therefore violate 
Milliken II, as well as Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of 
Education, 402 U.S. 1 (1971), requiring the remedial steps be 
carefully tailored to correct the vestiges of prior desegregation 
and no more. The State particularly targets pay of non-teacher 
personnel as not flowing from constitutional violations by the 
State, and beyond the power of the court to reach. 


We have rejected the same arguments with respect to the 
1992-93 salary funding order. See Jenkins v. Missouri, No. 90- 
2238, slip op. at 21-27 (8th Cir. Nov. 29, 1993). We reasoned that 
quality education programs and magnet schools were a part of 
the remedy for the vestiges of segregation causing a system wide 
reduction in student achievement in the KCMSD schools. /d. at 
24-26. Further, we pointed to the district court’s findings that the 
failure to remove the vestiges of the dual school system precipi- 
tated an atmosphere which prevented KCMSD from raising 
necessary funds, specifically those to maintain required salary 
levels. /d. at 26-27. It is significant that in its order for the earlier 
year the district court underscored the language from Freeman 
v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430, 1444 (1992), that “[t]he essence of a 
court’s equity power lies in its inherent capacity to adjust 
remedies in a feasible and practical way to eliminate the condi- 


OER are Br hal , 


ee ee pe ee: 
os 


—_* 


tions or redress the injuries caused by unlawful action.” Order of 
June 25, 1992 at 12. The significant finding of the court with 
respect to the earlier funding order was that the salary increases 
were essential to comply with the court’s desegregation orders, 
and that high quality teachers, administrators, and staff must be 
hired to improve the desegregative attractiveness of KCMSD. 


We reject the State’s argument that the salary order is contrary 
to Milliken II and Swann. 


Il. 


The State next argues that the district court’s finding that 
KCMSD competes in a national urban market for teachers is 
clearly erroneous. We first observe that this is an argument that 
the State did not make with respect to this same finding in the 
June 1992 district court order. The essence of the State’s argu- 
ment is that it presented four witnesses on the issue of the 
national urban market, that there was and is no national urban 
market from which school districts compete for staff in any 
significant fashion, and even if there was, KCMSD does not 
compete in it. 

We have said on numerous occasions, particularly in school 
desegregation cases, we give great deference to the factual 
findings of the district court, and reverse only if clearly errone- 
ous, under the standards set forth in Anderson v. Bessemer City, 
470 U.S. 564, 573 (1985). The litigation before us dates back to 
1977, with Judge Clark presiding over the case during the entire 
period. We traced this history in Jenkins v. Missouri, 807 F.2d 
657, 661-62 (8th Cir. 1986) (Jenkins I), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 
816 (1987), and on numerous occasions since that time we have 
updated the long chronology. Contrary to the State’s arguments, 
there was substantial evidence that the District actively recruits 
and competes for teachers on a nationwide basis. In 1991 and 
1992 KCMSD representatives traveled to New Mexico, North 
Carolina, Texas, Florida, Wisconsin, Arizona, Colorado, Michi- 


— A-32 — 


gan, New Jersey, Ohio, and New York to recruit qualified 
teachers. In addition, they advertise in numerous journals on a 
nationwide basis. Both Superintendent Marks and AFT witness 
Gould testified about the difficulty in recruiting teachers to work 
in urban school districts. 


The evidence introduced was sufficient to support the district 
court’s findings that there was a national urban market. Even the 
testimony offered by the State tended to confirm this fact. The 
State’s witnesses, though they stated they knew of no national 
market, conceded that their own school districts did at least some 
nationwide recruiting. 

The record provides abundant support for the district court’s 
finding and only ambiguous evidence detracting from it. This 
record in no way inspires a “definite and firm conviction that a 
mistake has been committed.” Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 
U.S. at 573. Therefore, we may not disturb the district court’s 
finding. 


IIL. 


Finally, the State argues that the court abused its discretion in 
approving the salary increases even if pay raises for some 
KCMSD employees are permissible. The State contends that the 
district court abused its discretion when it did not properly assess 
the results based on evaluative criteria the court had approved 
earlier, that the expert testimony provided by AFT and KCMSD 
failed to show that the salary increases had a positive effect on 
the quality of the KCMSD staff, and that the court had no basis 
for its finding that the non-teacher personnel were entitled to 
salary increases. The district court first found that because the 
salary increases are a necessary component of the desegregation 
program, the court only needed to determine the extent to which 
a raise would be appropriate. The district court then conducted 
a detailed analysis of the proposals submitted by the three 


— A-33 — 


parties. Our analysis of the district court’s careful factfinding 
demonstrates that it did not abuse its discretion. 


In its proposal to the district court, the State argued that only 
certain of the instructional personnel should receive a one 
percent plus $400 increase for fiscal year 1994. The State, in 
essence, asked the court to freeze salaries at fiscal year 1993 
levels for the other teachers and the rest of the personnel in the 
KCMSD. The State has failed to give, either to the district court 
or to us in this appeal, any clear basis for differentiating between 
that group of teachers who would be entitled to a raise and those 
who would not. The district court rejected the State’s proposal, 
stating that the State had failed to submit a serious proposal and 
that the State’s plan was “not consistent with the meaningful 
implementation of the desegregation program.” Order of June 
30, 1993 at 4. Viewing the State’s proposals as “little or no 
benefit” to crafting a desegregation remedy, the court pointed to 
the legislature’s failure to pass legislation which would enable 
the KCMSD to fund its share of desegregation expenses. /d. at 4- 
5. The district court then carefully weighed the proposals made 
by the AFT and KCMSD, and concluded that because resources 
were not available to fund the AFT plan, the court could not 
implement AFT’s suggestions. /d. at 5. The court also referred to 
its earlier adoption of a less expensive proposal with respect to 
the Long Range Magnet Plan as evidence that the cost savings 
there would be used to the benefit of the desegregation program 
and help facilitate KCMSD’s ability to fund salary increases. /d. 
at 8. We have observed in numerous orders appealed to us that 
the district court has juridically pruned applications of funding 
that have been presented to it. We are convinced that the district 
court’s detailed analysis demonstrates a careful exercise of 
discretion and prevents any conclusion that it abused this discre- 
tion. 


The State also argues that the district court abused its discre- 
tion in not considering the evaluative criteria the court had earlier 


a ee 


—_<t 


endorsed and approved, and that the salary increase has not 
changed the basic pattern of hiring or departures in the District. 
In a sense, the essence of the State’s argument is that the district 
court should have accepted the testimony of its witnesses in this 
respect, a proposition we have on two occasions in this long 
litigation rejected. See Jenkins v. Missouri, 942 F.2d 487, 490- 
91 (8th Cir. 1991), and Jenkins v. Missouri, 965 F.2d 654, 657 
(8th Cir. 1992). It is enough to say that the district court 
recognized and rejected these specific arguments in its June 
1992 order. Order of June 25, 1992 at 9-11, 15. In the order 
before us, the court clearly stated that it declined to make a 
different ruling on substantially unchanged evidence. Order of 
June 30, 1993 at 2. It is evident that the district court had before 
it substantial evidence of a statistically significant reduction in 
the turnover rates for full-time employees, a dramatic increase in 
the percentage of certified employees selecting KCMSD be- 
cause of the salary increases, and a significant decline in the 
number of employees lost to other districts. Further, the court 
heard testimony that the average performance evaluation for the 


professional employees increased positively and significantly. 


The State also disputes the two percent per year pay increase 
the court granted to certain non-teacher personnel, and 2.5 
percent per year pay increase to the remaining group, including 
maintenance workers, cooks and the like. We have already 
discussed the court’s finding that salary increases for KCMSD’s 
personnel were essential to comply with the court’s desegrega- 
tion order. Order of June 25, 1992 at 15. To improve the 
desegregative attractiveness of the KCMSD, the District must 
hire and retain high quality teachers, administrators, and staff. 
/d. In the June 1993 order, the district court reiterated that the 
salaries of KCMSD personnel are appropriately considered a 
desegregation expense. Order of June 30, 1993 at 2. It made 
specific findings with respect to the two percent per year increase 
for administrators and non-represented employees, and with 


ne 


asi fp 95 — 


respect to the operating, warehouse, maintenance, mail room 
and food service employees, and stated that the evidence reaf- 
firmed that support personnel are critical to the successful 
implementation of the desegregation program. /d. at 12. These 
findings are not shown to be clearly erroneous, and are a 
sufficient basis to support the court’s finding with respect to 
salary increases for those personnel, and accordingly, the district 
court did not abuse its discretion in ordering these increases. 


We believe that the court did not abuse its discretion in the 
June 1993 order. It is evident that in considering the salary 
proposal now before us, the district court carefully analyzed the 
positions of the three parties, threaded its way through conflict- 
ing evidence, made findings of fact, and accepted the proposals 
it considered the best for the desegregation remedy of KCMSD. 
In addition, the district court has not hesitated to reject requests 
for funding that it determined were not appropriate. Finally, as 
we have observed in our latest opinion, the district court has 
requested submissions for funding proposals based on alterna- 
tive phaseout periods of three, five, seven, or ten years. Thus, all 
of its careful analysis leads to the inescapable conclusion that the 
court is completely aware of not only the full scope but also the 
particular details in the desegregation remedy, and that it is 
anticipating the day when it may declare certain portions of the 
program unitary. The district court did not abuse its discretion in 
the June 1993 order. 


We affirm the judgment of the district court. 
A true copy. 
Attest: 


CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, 
EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


— A-36 — 


APPENDIX C 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 90-2238 
No. 91-3636 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated; 
Plaintiffs-Appellees, 
American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Plaintiffs, 
v. 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Roseann Bentley; Dan L. 
Blackwell; Gary M. Cunningham; Raymond McCallister, Jr.; 

Susan D. Finke; Thomas R. Davis; Cynthia B. Thompson, 


Members of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 


Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the 
State of Missouri, 
Defendants-Appellants, 


—_< 


School District of Kansas City, Missouri 
Claude C. Perkins, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 92-3194 
No. 92-3200 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine: 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor- Appellee, 
v 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri: 
Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 

of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 


— A-38 — 


Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 
Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 
Defendants-Appellants, 


School District of Kansas City 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 93-3274 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 

American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 

v. 

State of Missouri; Mel Carnahan, Governor of the State of 


Missouri; Bob Holden, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 


Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 


or? POM AE PEPE EN ODP, A ee ’ 


— A-39 — 


of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 
Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 


Defendants-A ppellants, 


School District of Kansas City 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


Appeals from the United States District Court 
for the Western District of Missouri 


Filed: February 24, 1994 


ORDER 


The petition for rehearing by the panel is denied. The panel of 
its Own motion substitutes pages 17 and 20 attached hereto for 


the respective pages in the original opinion filed November 29, 
1993. 
A true copy. 
Attest: /s/ Michael E. Gans 


CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, 
EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


[Page 17] 


with the decree in those aspects of the system where 
supervision is to be withdrawn; whether retention of judi- 
cial control is necessary or practicable to achieve compli- 
ance with the decree in other facets of the school system; 
and whether the school district has demonstrated, to the 
public and to the parents and students of the once disfavored 
race, its good faith commitment to the whole of the court’s 
decree and to those provisions of the law and the constitu- 
tion that were the predicate for judicial intervention in the 
first instance. 
Id. at 1446 (emphasis added). 


In order to analyze this case under Freeman v. Pitts to 
determine if KCMSD has achieved unitary status, we must 
consider the constitutional injury, the methods selected to rem- 
edy that injury, the goals of the remedy, and the success achieved 
by the remedy in eliminating the vestiges of the constitutional 
violations to the extent practicable. 


Of course, the injury is that vestiges remain of the dual school 
system once required by the State of Missouri. Those vestiges 
take the form of reduced student achievement and white flight, 
resulting in the anomaly of a racially isolated school district in 
the midst of a population with a far different racial makeup. In 
Jenkins II, we quoted the district court’s findings: 


“[W]itnesses confirmed the conclusion reached by the 
Supreme Court in Brown I [Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 
U.S. 483 (1954)] that forced segregation ruins attitudes and 
is inherently unequal . .. . The general attitude of inferiority 
among blacks produces low achievement which ultimately 
limits employment opportunities and causes poverty.” “Seg- 
regation has caused a system wide reduction in student 
achievement in the schools of the KCMSD.” 


; 
4 
; 
E 


— A463 — 


The district court found that segregation in KCMSD caused 
the departure of the whites in the system to private schools 
and to the suburbs. During the years between Brown / and 
trial, the enrollment of KCMSD shifted from predomi- 
nantly white to predominantly black. In the 1958- 


[Page 20] 


KCMSD argues that the State’s evidence is insufficient to 
justify exercise of the court’s discretion to grant unitary status 
under Freeman. KCMSD’s argument has much merit, but the 
State asks only that we hold the district court abused its discre- 
tion in continuing the education programs. 

We have considered the State’s arguments in considerable 
detail, and we are satisfied that Judge Clark’s comments during 
the four-day hearing show that he fully considered the State’s 
Freeman arguments. In his order, he rejected funding for some 
of the programs, while granting the funds for others; thus, he 
implicitly rejected the State’s Freeman arguments. While it 
might have been desirable for the court to articulate explicitly 
even a conclusory rejection of the State’s Freeman arguments, 
the district court did not abuse its discretion in continuing the 
quality education programs. 

In view of the State’s arguments that under Freeman it is 
entitled to a determination on an incremental basis that KCMSD 
has become unitary, a few further words are appropriate.” 
Dowell and Freeman both outline in considerable detail the 
nature of the inquiry the district court must undertake in consid- 
ering this issue. These principles must be applied in analyzing 


* Another part of the remedy we have stressed repeatedly is the develop- 
ment of a voluntary inter-district plan. We observe once again that the only 
implementation of any such plan is the ten student exchange with the Missouri 
City schools. 


—iiina 


the question of unitariness, and in determining the success of the 
remedy in eliminating the vestiges of the constitutional viola- 
tions found to exist in KCMSD to the extent practicable. Our 
earlier opinions which we have discussed above, particularly 
Jenkins II and the district court orders there in issue, set forth in 
detail the constitutional violations and the impact upon the 
District. It goes without saying that careful factfinding and 
detailed articulation of findings will be required, particularly 
with respect to whether vestiges of discrimination 


a» eh — 


APPENDIX D 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 90-2238 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Plaintiffs, 
v. 

State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Roseann Bentley; Dan L. 
Blackwell; Gary M. Cunningham; Raymond McCallister, Jr.; 

Susan D. Finke; Thomas R. Davis; Cynthia B. Thompson, 
Members of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 

Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the 
State of Missouri, 
Defendants-Appellants, 


— 


School District of Kansas City, Missouri 
Claude C. Perkins, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 91-3636 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 
American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 
v. 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Roseann Bentley, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Member of the Missouri State Board of 
Education; Susan D. Finke, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, presiding President, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, Member of the Missouri 
State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. Williams, 


— hi — 


Member of the Missouri State Board of Eaucation; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education, 


Defendants-Appellants, 
School District of Kansas City, Missouri; 


Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 
Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 92-3194 
No. 92-3200 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 
v. 


State of Missouri; John Ashcroft, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Wendell Bailey, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 

of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 


—s 


of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 
Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 
Defendants-A ppellants, 


School District of Kansas City 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 


Defendants-Appellees. 


No. 93-3274 


Kalima Jenkins, by her next friend Kamau Agyei; Carolyn 
Dawson, by her next friend Richard Dawson; Tufanza A. 
Byrd, by her next friend, Teresa Byrd; Derek A. Dydell, by 
his next friend Maurice Dydell; Terrance Cason, by his next 
friend, Antoria Cason; Jonathan Wiggins, by his next friend, 
Rosemary Jacobs Love; Kirk Allan Ward, by his next friend, 
Mary Ward; Robert M. Hall, by his next friend, Denise Hall; 
Dwayne A. Turrentine, by his next friend, Sheila Turrentine; 
Gregory A. Pugh, by his next friend, David Winters, on behalf 
of themselves and all others similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees, 


American Federation of Teachers, Local 691, 
Intervenor-Appellee, 


Vv. 


—_~S 


State of Missouri; Mel Carnahan, Governor of the State of 
Missouri; Bob Holden, Treasurer of the State of Missouri; 
Missouri State Board of Education; Peter Herschend, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Raymond 
McCallister, Jr., Reverend, Member of the Missouri State 
Board of Education; Susan D. Finke, Vice-President, Member 
of the Missouri State Board of Education; Thomas R. Davis, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Robert E. 
Bartman, Commissioner of Education of the State of 
Missouri; Gary D. Cunningham, President, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education; Rebecca M. Cook, 
Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; Sharon M. 
Williams, Member of the Missouri State Board of Education; 
Jacquelline Wellington, Member of the 
Missouri State Board of Education, 
Defendants-Appellants, 


School District of Kansas City 
Walter L. Marks, Superintendent thereof, 


Defendants-Appellees. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Western District of Missouri 


Filed: March 15, 1994 


Before RICHARD S. ARNOLD, Chief Judge, McMILLIAN, 
Circuit Judge, JOHN R. GIBSON, * Senior Circuit Judge, 
FAGG, BOWMAN, WOLLMAN, MAGILL, BEAM, 
LOKEN, HANSEN, and MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, 
Circuit Judges. 


_e 


ORDER 


The suggestion for rehearing en banc is denied. Judges Bowman, 
Wollman, Beam, Loken, and Morris Sheppard Arnold would 
grant the suggestion. 


JOHN R. GIBSON, Senior Circuit Judge, concurring in the 
denial of rehearing en banc, joined by McMILLIAN and 
MAGILL, Circuit Judges. 


The dissent to the denial for rehearing en banc would now 
rehear the ninth decision of this court dealing with the intradistrict 
remedy for the constitutional violations in the Kansas City, 
Missouri School District. Its willingness to do so is based on a 
misperception of the issues in this case and a highly selective 
reading of the record before the district court. 

The dissent accepts, at least in part, the State’s argument that 
the district court adopted a student achievement goal, measured 
by test scores, as the only basis for determining whether past 
discrimination has been remedied. The dissent develops this 
argument at length by examining the testimony of several 
witnesses. Certainly, Dr. Marks and Dr. Rainwater referred to 
student achievement test results, but their testimony covered a 
far broader spectrum. When we deal with student achievement 
in a quality education program in the context of relieving a 
school district of court supervision, test results must be consid- 
ered. Test scores, however, must be only one factor in the 
equation. Nothing in this court’s opinion, the district court’s 
opinion, or the testimony of KCMSD’s witnesses indicates that 
test results were the only criteria used in denying the State’s 


* The Honorable John R. Gibson was an active judge of this court when 
the suggestion for rehearing en banc was filed and took senior status on 
January 1, 1994, before this order was filed. 


Vato it SE 


; 
f 
; 
| 
; 


—_~ 


claim that its obligation for the quality education programs 
should be ended by a declaration they are unitary. 


The Kansas City school desegregation litigation does not deal 
with “pedagogical sociology,” see dissent, slip op. at 16, but 
rather the remedy for the constitutional violations and injuries, 
uncontested if not admitted, that we summarized in Jenkins v. 
Missouri, 949 F.2d 1052, 1057 (8th Cir. 1991) Venkins VII): 


The ultimate issue in this case, as it has been over the years, 
is remedying serious and pervasive constitutional viola- 
tions. [Jenkins v. Missouri] Jenkins II, 855 F.2d [1295] at 
1300 (quoting Jenkins v. Missouri, 593 F. Supp. 1485, 1492 
(W.D. Mo. 1984) (“the inferior education indigenous of the 
state-compelled dual school system has lingering effects in 
the Kansas City, Missouri School District”) and Jenkins v. 
Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 19, 24 (W.D. Mo. i985) (“Segrega- 
tion has caused a system wide reductign in student achieve- 
ment in the schools of the KCMS*”). . . . 


Few of the school desegregation cases have attempted to 
remedy as difficult an injury as “a system wide reduction in 
student achievement” caused by discrimination against black 
students. A quality of education program was part of the deseg- 
regation plan in DeKalb County, Georgia, which was before the 
Supreme Court in Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430 (1992). 
Justice Kennedy there referred to the “more ineffable category of 
quality of education.” /d . at 1441. The district court’s treatment 
of comparative test results in Freeman and its holding that the 
district had not achieved unitary status with respect to quality of 
education programs was noted by the Supreme Court, id. at 
1441-42, and the parties did not challenge this part of the order. 
Id. at 1446. Thus, the Milliken IT’ quality education components 
of the district court’s decree remain in effect. 


' Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977). 


—_—~ we 


While the dissent argues that no particular level of education 
is guaranteed by the Constitution, the Constitution does require, 
as articulated again in Freeman, that the vestiges of discrimina- 
tion be eliminated to the extent practicable. See 112 S. Ct. at 
1448. Applying this test to the system wide reduction in student 
achievement, of a widespread and long-standing nature, is the 
task to which the district court addressed itself. 


The dissent demolishes a strawman of a one-hundred year 
remedy. These words were those of the State’s lawyer in a 
leading question, with which Dr. Rainwater agreed. The district 
court nowhere mentions this exchange. To the contrary, as the 
panel recognized, the district court called for submission of 
alternative plans phasing out court-ordered funding in three, 
five, seven or ten years. The dissent raises numerous other issues 
that should be answered, but reference to the panel’s opinion is 
sufficient for this purpose. 


We have in our earlier decisions observed that “[t}hech ¥ «i 
remedies to redress racial discrimination is ‘a balancing ; > ess 
left, within appropriate constitutional or statutory limits, the 
sound discretion of the trial court.”” Jenkins v. Missouri (Jenkins 
IT), 855 F.2d 1295, 1299 (8th Cir. 1989) (quoting United States 
v. Paradise, 480 U.S. 149 (1987), aff din part and rev’ din part, 
495 U.S. 33 (1990). The significance of the district court’s 
analysis is underscored by Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1445-46, 
which discussed the district court’s discretion to order an incre- 
mental withdrawal. 


The reasons advanced by the dissent do not justify rehearing 
en banc. 


BEAM, Circuit Judge, dissenting from the denial of rehearing en 
banc, joined by BOWMAN, WOLLMAN, LOKEN, and 
MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, Circuit Judges. 


The court, with a vote of six nays and five yeas, denies en banc 
consideration of orders of the district court dealing, in part, with 


a 


— A-51 — 


court ordered pay raises for employees of the Kansas City, 
Missouri School District (KCMSD) and with the partial unitary 
status of the school district. I dissent. 

L 


The de jure racial segregation of the KCMSD has been before 
the same United States District Judge for the Western District of 
Missouri since 1977. In that year, “the KCMSD implemented a 
desegregation plan,” which reassigned African-American (mi- 
nority) and European-American (majority) students within the 
district and which was designed to effect “a minimum of 30% 
minority enrollment . . . in every KCMSD school.” Jenkins v. 
Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 19, 35 (W.D. Mo. 1985). Minority 
studeats from schools with a large minority enrollment were 
moved to schools with a large majority enrollment and vice 
versa. School boundary lines were changed, attendance zones 
created and more than 16,000 KCMSD students had their school 
assignments changed. /d. at 35-36. In 1979-1980, the United 
States Office of Civil Rights classified the KCMSD as being “in 
compliance” with federal requirements of school desegregation 
under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. /d. at 36. 


Between 1977 and 1985 the KCMSD majority enrollment 
decreased by more than forty-four percent while minority enroll- 
ment decreased by only thirty percent. Jd. By 1985, nineteen of 
the fifty elementary schools in the KCMSD had enrollments of 
ninety percent or more minority students. Jd. Tax collections 
were on the decline and school financing plans were failing at the 
ballot box. “White flight” to private schools and to the suburbs 
was rampant. 


The district court, correctly recognizing that at least part of 
this problem was the consequence of the de jure segregation 
previously practiced under Missouri constitutional and statutory 
law, fashioned a remedial plan for the desegregation of the 
KCMSD and for “the elimination of all vestiges of state imposed 


— A-52 — 


segregation.” /d. at 23. This laudable goal was in accordance 
with the requirements of Green v. County School Board, 391 
U.S. 430 (1968). “The transition to a unitary, nonracial system 
of public education was and is the ultimate end to be brought 
about.” /d. at 436. School boards were charged in Green with 
taking all necessary steps to convert to unitary systems in which 
= discrimination would be eliminated “root and branch.” /d. 
at 438. 


Although the district court deemed the KCMSD and the State 
liable for the results of past racial discrimination, the court found 
that the suburban school districts (SSDs) Surrounding Kansas 
City were not guilty of constitutional wrongs requiring them to 
participate in a court imposed remedy. This holding was af- 
firmed by this court, en banc, in Jenkins v. Missouri, 807 F.2d 
657 (8th Cir. 1986) (Jenkins I), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 816 
(1987). The nonliability of the SSDs presented at least one 
obvious remedial problem; specifically, the minority students in 
the KCMSD could not be intermixed by court order with the 
majority students in the suburbs. With this restriction in mind, 
the district court fashioned an aggressive and far reaching 
remedial plan binding only on the KCMSD. Some observers 
have described it as the most ambitious and expensive remedial 
program in the history of school desegregation. 


The district court concluded that segregation had caused, 
among other things, “a systemwide reduction in student achieve- 
ment.” Jenkins, 639 F. Supp. at 24 (emphasis in original). This 
reduction in achievement, together with the deterioration in 
physical facilities, health concerns, safety concerns, comfort 
concerms and inadequate funding of all educational activities, 
had, at least in part, caused the “white flight” noted earlier. Thus, 
the district court imposed a remedy broadly designed (1) to 
attract majority students to KCMSD schools in order to provide 
minority students with a multiracial educational experience and 
(2) to provide a high-quality educational program, whether or 


oe ee ee o , ae a i 


— A-53 — 


not a significantly desegregated school population was ever 
achieved. 


A general outline of the remedy, affirmed with some modifi- 
cations by this court, is as follows:? 


(1) Acourt imposed taxation plan on the citizens of Kansas 
City, Missouri, for school purposes. 


(2) Joint and several liability between the state and the 
KCMSD that required the state to provide substantial 
remedial funds including fund shares otherwise imposed 
upon the KCMSD for which no local monies were imme- 
diately available. 


(3) A system of magnet schools with educational themes 
designed to attract majority students away from the suburbs 
and the private schools to which they had fled and to expand 
the educational opportunities for all students. 


(4) An educational program aimed at “results more in 
keeping with national norms,” Jenkins, 639 F. Supp. at 24, 
with reading skills at such national norms to be achieved 
within four or five years. Jd. The educational program was 
to include: 


(a) An annual evaluation rating of AAA, the highest 
classification awarded by the Missouri State Depart- 
ment of Elementary and Secondary Education, for all 
KCMSD schools. (All SSDs were and presently are 
AAA rated. At the time of the remedial order, the 
KCMSD was rated AA) 


(b) Reduction of class sizes to levels below those 
required for the AAA rating. 


* Specific details of the remedial plan are set forth in Jenkins v. State of 
Missouri, 639 F. Supp. 19 (W.D. Mo. 1985) and our in en banc opinion in 
Jenkins I, 807 F.2d 657 (8th Cir. 1986). 


— SS 


(c ) Extensive library improvements through improved 
media and library resources and through the hiring of 
at least twenty-two new librarians, thirteen of whom 
are certified for elementary schools. 


(d) A system-wide computer education program with 
State-of-the-art automation equipment and highly 
skilled instructors. 


(e) A reduced teaching load for all teachers and an 
improved curriculum with “additional art, physical 
education and music programs with specialty teach- 
ers. 


(f) Additional school counselors to begin service at 
the elementary level and to reduce the workload of 
existing counselors at the secondary level to one full 
time counselor for each 390 students or fraction thereof. 


(g) A summer school program providing remedial and 
developmental learning experiences, reinforcement 
and enrichment instruction and a “desegregative learn- 
ing experience.” /d. at 31. 


(h) A full day kindergarten program in all elementary 
schools in the district. 

(i) An extended day program including before and 
after school tutoring. 


G) An extensive early childhood development pro- 
gram. 


(5) An “effective schools” program designed to accom- 
plish changes in the KCMSD from the “bottom up.” This 
program involves money for special programs developed 
by staff, parents, patrons, administrators, principals, teach- 
ers and students. /d. at 33. 


— A-55 — 


(6) Staff development through special training in the 
principles and goals of the desegregation plan, implemen- 
tation of effective instructional programs, effective infor- 
mation transmission, imposition of equitable discipline, 
solving transportation problems, use of school and commu- 
nity resources, and the law applicable to school desegrega- 
tion. 

(7) A mandatory student reassignment study costing not 
over $175,000. 


(8) A voluntary interdistrict (KCMSD and SSD) transfer 
program. 

(9) District-wide capital improvements. 

(10) A separate desegregation plan administration. 

(11) A desegregation monitoring committee. 


(12) A new salary schedule designed to enhance the pay of 
all teachers and administrators and to aid in the recruitment 
and retention of staff at all levels and areas of responsibility. 


The plan, very broadly outlined above, was implemented for 
the 1985-1986 school year. It has been ongoing and evolving 
since that time. 

For the eight school years under the remedy, 1985-1986 
through 1992-1993, the total KCMSD/state expenditures for the 
desegregation plan alone has been in excess of $902,473,047 
and is escalating.’ The KCMSD also apparently spends approxi- 


* The state contends in its petition for rehearing en banc that the cost to date 
specifically attributable to the desegregation remedy has been in excess of 
$1.2 billion dollars of which more than $250,000,000 has been spent to 
develop and maintain the educational programs. Petition for Rehearing at 5. 
This overall cost figure may be correct although I cannot tell from the 

(Footnote 3 continued on next page) 


— A-56 — 


mately two additional local, state or federal dollars on its school 
system beyond each dollar spent for the desegregation plan.* The 
annual per capita costs of the KCMSD far exceed those of the 
SSDs. I have compared the per-pupil cost for the year 1991-1992 
(the only year readily available to me) for the KCMSD and for 
each SSD. With capital costs included, the per-pupil costs in the 
SSDs ranged from a low of $4,192 to a high of $7,488. KCMSD 
costs per pupil, by comparison, were $13,500. The SSDs oper- 
ating costs (excluding capital costs) fell between $2,854 and 
$5,956 per student. The KCMSD spent $9,412 per student. With 
this for background, I turn to the present dispute. 


I. 


The state now seeks en banc consideration of parts of four 
orders of the district court and objects, specifically, to two facets 
of the district court rulings: (1) an order of June 30, 1993, 
granting additional salary increases to all employees of the 


(Footnote 3 continued) 


evidence reasonably available to me at this time. The $250,000,000 program 
cost estimate is clearly low if itis intended to include all expenses except those 
connected with capital improvements. My estimate is derived from manage- 
ment audits in the annual reports of the desegregation monitoring committee 
that contain desegregation plan costs for the school years 1985-1986 through 
1989-1990 and from recent figures the parties supplied to the panel that 
include expenditures for the school years 1990-1991 through 1992-1993. 
There may be additional state and federal desegregation dollars being spent 
outside the framework of the court-imposed plan. For the eight years for 
which audits and other figures are reasonably available, at least 902,473,047 
total desegregation dollars have been spent as of July 31, 1993, of which at 
least $405,463 ,357 has been spent on capital improvements. 


*My conclusion in this regard is, admittedly, based on limited information. 
In 1991-1992, the total KCMSD expenditure per pupil per year, including 
capital costs, was $13,500. The same year there were 36,349 students in the 
system. The 1991-1992 desegregation plan cost was $159,948,057.09 and the 
total school operation cost ($13,500 x 36,349 students) was $490,711 ,500. 


ote ee es 


: 
: 
é 
3 
é 
; 


Pt ee a ee ee 


—* pe 


KCMSD and (2) the district court’s denial of partial unitary 
status of the KCMSD through the order of June 17, 1992. 


A. 


The state contends, and I agree, that federal court orders in 
school desegregation cases must directly address the constitu- 
tional violation. Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267, 281-82 
(1977) (Milliken IT). An examination of the record supports the 
state’s contention that further blanket wage increases will not 
directly enhance the educational program of the KCMSD. It 
should be noted that since 1985-1986, the court plan has required 
a competitive, if not generous, pay scale in the KCMSD. Thus, 
in my view, the current effort by the KCMSD and the American 
Federation of Teachers (AFT), aided by the plaintiffs, to bypass 
the collective bargaining process is uncalled for and is probably 
not an exercise reasonably related to the constitutional violations 
found by the court in 1985. Further, it enables the KCMSD to 
involve the state, via the joint and several liability holdings of the 
court, in pay raises the KCMSD probably could not impose upon 
its constituents. The court’s salary order also enables the teach- 
ers’ union to achieve goals that would be unattainable under the 
bargaining process. 


Even so, I am willing to give the district court, and the panel, 
the benefit of the doubt with regard to wage increases for 
teaching and direct educational support personnel. The salary 
order affirmed by the panel, however, goes well beyond pay 
increases for these groups of KCMSD employees. I agree with 
the state that logic does not directly relate the pay of parking lot 
attendants, trash haulers and food handlers, for instance, to any 
facet or phase of the desegregation plan or to the constitutional 
violations. In my view, the panel was wrong in affirming this 
portion of the salary order. 


— A-58 — 


In early 1992, the KCMSD presented to the district court its 
proposed budget for year VIII of the desegregation plan. The 
state, in response, lodged numerous budgetary objections and 
contended that, under the holding in Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 
1430 (1992), the KCMSD had achieved partial unitary status in 
the “high-quality educational program” (the Milliken II pro- 
grams) prong of the remedial order. The district court conducted 
an evidentiary hearing on both the state’s budget complaints and 
its partial unitary status contention on May 27-28, 1992. On June 
17, 1992, the district court entered an order approving a year VIII 
budget and directing the KCMSD to submit a “Long Range 
Magnet Plan.” Order of June 17, 1992. The court made no 
findings on the unitary status of the KCMSD and the state 
appealed the court’s failure to address the issue. 


Whether the KCMSD has actually achieved partial unitary 
status in the quality of its educational program imposed by the 
desegregation plan is, perhaps, still an open question on the 
record before us today. Even so, the standard adopted by the 
district court and by the panel to evaluate this question misreads 
Freeman and creates a hurdle to the withdrawal of judicial 
intervention from public education that has no support in the law. 
The district court has, with the approbation of the panel, imbed- 
ded a student achievement goal measured by annual standard- 
ized tests into its test of whether the KCMSD has built a high- 
quality educational system sufficient to remedy past discrimina- 
tion. The Constitution requires no such standard. 


Although the district court has not yet visited the unitary status 
question with the diligence it deserves, three orders subsequent 
to the June 17, 1992, order enlightened the panel regarding the 
court’s analysis. First, on April 16, 1993, after additional hear- 
ings and ten months after the contested order, the court approved, 
in part, additional funding for magnet schools and directed the 


—_y 


KCMSD to submit further financing proposals. As part of this 
order, the court found that while the educational opportunities 
afforded in the magnet schools are better than those previously 
available and the magnet school plan has successfully gained the 
interest of a substantial pool of majority students in attending 
KCMSD schools, the KCMSD cannot be declared partially 
unitary because academic achievement is still at or below na- 
tional norms for many grade levels. Order of April 16, 1993, at 
9-13. Second, on June 30, 1993, after a hearing held on June 1- 
3, 1993, the district court entered the contested salary order. 
Finally, insofar as the petition for rehearing is concerned, the 
court entered an order on July 30, 1993, which states in part: 
“(t]he Court finds that it would be wholly inappropriate to deem 
the KCMSD unitary or partially unitary at this time.” Order of 
July 30, 1993, at 4. A July 7, 1993, hearing predated this order. 


In affirming the district court’s June 17, 1992, implied denial 
of partial unitary status, the panel refers to evidence received at 
the May 1992 hearing as well as to a statement on the goal of the 
desegregation remedy made by the district court during that 
hearing. In this regard, the district court said: “‘[t)he [cJourt’s 
goal was to integrate the Kansas City, Missouri, School District 
... and all these [Milliken IT| matters were elements to be used 
to try to integrate the [KCMSD] .. . . That’s the goal. And a high 
standard of quality education.”” Jenkins v. Missouri, 11 F.3d 
755, 761 (8th Cir. 1993) (quoting the district court). 


My examination of the record reveals no evidence directly 
relevant to the issue of unitary status other than that adduced at 
the May 1992 hearing. The panel, however, in responding to the 
state’s contention that the district court erred, as a matter of law, 
in failing to rule on the Freeman issue in the June 17, 1992, order, 
relies on conclusory and fact finding portions of the April 16, 
1993, order and, of course, on the district court’s specific ruling 
on July 30, 1993. The meager record on appeal that the panel was 
forced to assemble from these disjointed parts only complicated 
the panel’s attempt to engage in its own Freeman analysis. 


— A-60 — 


When the district court referred to academic achievement 
“below national norms” in its April 16, 1993, order, the informa- 
tion came directly from the May 27, 1992, testimony of Arthur 
Rainwater, Associate Superintendent for Instruction of the 
KCMSD, given during the hearing on the Year VIII budget plan 
and the state’s request for partial unitary status. The data before 
the court showed that at the beginning of the seventh year of the 
remedy, comparing similar tests administered at each grade level 
K through 12, in the same month of the year in 1985 and 1991, 
individual student achievement in the KCMSD remained below 
the “national norm,” at grades 4 and up, except in one subject in 
one grade. Joint Appendix A, Vol. VII at 1495. Achievement 
also remained under the national norm in some subjects in the 


_ earlier grades. /d. 


So, indeed, the district court was justified in finding that 
academic improvement in the seven years since the program 
began had been less than dramatic. It is this April 16 finding of 
fact that the panel appears to find sufficient to affirm the denial 
of partial unitary status. But, student achievement does not set 
the constitutional standard for determining partial unitary status. 


The appellees, in their response to the state’s petition for 
rehearing, contend that the panel did not rely on a student 
achievement standard in affirming the district court. The words 
“achievement test results” or even “test results,” so say the 
appellees, “are nowhere to be found in the panel decision” 
Response at 7. This argument, in my view, is disingenuous. The 
panel affirmed the district court. The district court obviously 
relied upon test scores below the national norm as the basis for 
its ruling. The district court, by its own statement, “[h]as gone to 
great lengths to provide the KCMSD with facilities and oppor- 
tunities not available anywhere else in the country.” Order of 
July 30, 1993, at 6 (emphasis added). And, as noted by the panel, 
the district court has adopted a goal that includes the “integrat[ion 
of] the Kansas City, Missouri School District . . . [a/nd a high 


e 
z 
2 
‘ 
rd 


PR RS IR AA PLS RNC RT, TRI It PBI IR Say AMT A I a gh 


— A-61 — 


standard of quality education.” Jenkins, 11 F.3d at 761 (citing 
the district court’s comments at the May 1992 hearing). The only 
factor the district court saw standing in the way of unitary status 
for the educational program was continued below average aca- 
demic performance. Indeed, there is no other evidence in the 
record to support a conclusion that the educational enhancement 
(Milliken IT) program of the KCMSD is wanting. Let’s examine 
the facts. 


Dr. Terrance Stewart of the Missouri Department of Elemen- 
tary and Secondary Education has been directly involved in the 
development and implementation of the KCMSD remedy since 
September of 1984. He testified without dispute at the May 1992 
hearing that the KCMSD was awarded the AAA rating in the 
1987-1988 school year and since that time has “maintained and 
greatly exceeded AAA requirements.” Joint Appendix A, Vol. V 
at 1008. Keeping in mind the fact that at the commencement of 
the remedial plan, school quality equal to that of the SSDs was 
a major goal, Dr. Stewart testified that “Kansas City School 
District [now] exceeds what’s available in all the suburban 
school districts in almost every area of classification that we 
looked at.” Jd. at 1012. The state then, through Dr. Stewart, 
discussed each of the Milliken II programs ordered by the district 
court in 1985, including, but not limited to magnet schools, 
reduced class size, improved library and computer programs, 
lower pupil-teacher ratios, full day kindergarten, extended day 
school, summer school, early childhood education and capital 
improvements. In every instance, the enhancement of resources 
and program improvements ordered by the district court had 
been implemented and were in place no later than the 1988-1989 
school year. Most of them predated that school year. Joint 
Appendix A, Vol. V at 995-1048. 


Dr. Walter Marks, Superintendent of the KCMSD, also testi- 


fied with regard to “appropriate buildings . . . equipping th[{e] 
buildings with proper teaching equipment, furniture and every- 


—S 


thing that goes into a building.” Joint Appendix A, Vol. IV at 
560. According to Dr. Marks, progress “has been fast, it has been 
pretty comprehensive; and in my judgment it has been well 
done.” Jd. However, Dr. Marks testified that the desegregation 
plan will not be fully implemented until “every school [in] . . . the 
District [has reached] the national norm, the 50th percentile” in 
student achievement as measured by the testing process. /d. at 
615. 


Finally, Arthur Rainwater testified at length on the specific 
successes and failures in student achievement. He concluded 
that the purpose of the remedial plan “was to achieve desegrega- 
tion and to change the levels of achievement in th[e] District.” He 
further testified: 


Q. Is it your contention that until those desegregation and 
achievement levels are met that the remedial plan must 
continue? 


Yes. That would be my understanding. 
Regardless of how many years it would take? 
Regardless of how many years it would take. 


O,r ef > 


Even 100 years? 
A. Regardless of how many years. 
Id. at 701. Id. at 159. 


Regardless of whether the panel used the exact words “achieve- 
ment test results” or “test results” it is abundantly clear that the 
panel felt that student achievement, or lack thereof, was the 
watermark up to which the tide of desegregation effort must 
flow. The panel said: “[t]he success of quality of education 
programs must be measured by their effect on the students, 
particularly those who have been the victims of segregation.” 
Jenkins, 11 F.3d at 766. The only measurement found anywhere 


t 
¥ 
- 
‘ 
? 
, 
z 
bs 


AEE SO REDEEM SAO OOO EE ASE ELAM FN ma Hi 


—*e— 


in the evidentiary record is the “achievement test results” which 
the district court refers to in the order of April 16, 1993. Thus, the 
state is correct in contending that the panel applied an achieve- 
ment test standard. 


There is no question that the reduced educational attainment 
discerned by the district court in 1984 resulted from acts of racial 
discrimination and represented “vestiges” of past unlawful seg- 
regation. The plan for a high-quality educational program was 
designed to: (1) attract nonminority students to the KCMSD 
system, (2) provide all KCMSD students with current and 
ongoing educational experiences equal to those available in the 
suburban school districts and (3) reverse the “reduction” in 
student achievement brought on by segregation and, in this way, 
remove the vestiges of past racial discrimination. I do not 
question these goals. The appropriate question now is, have 
some or all of the goals been met when the proper test is applied? 


Education, generally, is not among the rights afforded explicit 
protection under the Constitution. San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. 
v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 (1973). And, although the Consti- 
tution forbids schools from operating in a racially discriminatory 
fashion, Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education 
disclaims any right to “any particular degree of racial balance or 
mixing.” 402 U.S. 1, 24 (1971). Thus, by analogy, it seems clear 
that a victim of discrimination is guaranteed an equal opportu- 
nity in a high-quality educational program, but not a specific 
level of educational achievement under any set of conditions.’ 


* Although the magnet schools and several other innovative programs are 
part of the enhanced educational system in the KCMSD and are part of the 
calculus which must now be considered in deciding unitary status in this case, 
I do not agree that the novel and expensive ui.dertakings in Kansas City are 
a necessary part of a constitutionally sufficient effort, even one designed to 
eradicate the vestiges of discrimination. While Milliken I] validated compen- 
satory and remedial programs designed wo, over time, free a public school 

(Footnote 5 continued on next page) 


—? 


To require achievement test scores at or above the national norm 
is to require the school system to be responsible for circum- 
stances beyond its control. Segregated housing patterns, pov- 
erty, street violence, drug usage, criminal activities and lack of 
parental involvement, if they exist in the KCMSD, are not the 
responsibility of the public school system. 


For example, in Omaha, Nebraska, a city in which the school 
district has now been declared unitary after a period of operation 
under a court enforced remedial program, a gap in mathematic 
achievement between minority and majority eighth graders has 
been discovered. At a recent meeting on the problem, Mary Dean 
Harvey, Director of the Nebraska Department of Social Services 
stated: “If any plan to close the mathematics proficiency gap [in 
Omaha] is to succeed, . . . it must address the fact that many of 
the 15,000 babies who will be born in the Omaha area this year 
will be born out of wedlock to teen-age mothers.” Harold W. 
Andersen, “Fundamental Lesson in Math Proficiency,” Omaha 
World-Herald, Feb. 13, 1994, at 19-A. 


(Footnote 5 continued) 


system from the effects of de jure racial segregation, something much less 
than the present Kansas City program would clearly pass constitutional 
muster. See Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1448 (“[t}he vestiges of segregation . . 
must be so real that they have a causal link to the de jure violation being 
remedied”); Milliken IT, 433 U.S. at 282 (remedial programs tailored to cure 
the educational problems created by the constitutional violation); see also 
Swann, 402 U.S. at 24. Indeed, at the outset, the stated remedial goal was to 
provide schools of equal quality with those found in the average SSD in order 
to restore the victims of unconstitutional segregation “‘to the position they 
would have occupied absent such conduct.”” Jenkins I7, 855 F.2d at 1301 
(quoting district court Order of June 16, 1986). Whether the goal was reached 
was to be measured by the AAA rating. The evidence clearly establishes that 
this goal has long since been greatly exceeded and can now be easily 
maintained without many of the present activities. The magnet schools, for 
instance, as the nomenclature implies, were primarily designed to draw 
students back to the KCMSD and, thus, to address the desegregation, as 
opposed to the compensatory and remedial, prong of the plan. 


PFE ATLAS O POLL SPILT IN ERE RAF A RN Sart SMART i 4 go 


f 
i 
- 
. 


— A-65 — 


I recognize that I am citing material outside the record. But, 
whether or not Ms. Harvey is correct or was correctly quoted and 
whether or not her concerns have direct applications to minority 
and majority students in the KCMSD, she makes the valid point 
that school systems have no control over many conditions that 
directly affect the educational test results of students in public 
schools. Thus, such a “test results” standard goes well beyond 
practicality and the requirements of the Constitution. 


Freeman, relied upon heavily by the panel, is not to\ the 
contrary. The quality of education issue in Freeman was intro- 
duced by agreement of the parties and the district court consid- 
ered the point in connection with its findings on resource 
allocation. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1446. The Supreme Court did 
not have the opportunity in Freeman to consider whether quality 
of education is one of the factors that must be free from racial 
discrimination before a school district can be declared partially 
unitary. See id. at 1443; Green, 391 U.S. at 435. The panel’s 
declaration that “implementation of programs in and of itself is 
not sufficient” to prove unitary status without rising test scores 
finds no support in Freeman. Jenkins, 11 F.3d at 765. 


In fact, the panel seeks to turn Freeman on its head. Although 
the Freeman district court concerned itself with scores made on 
the Iowa Test for Basic Skills (ITBS) and the Scholastic Aptitude 
Test (SAT), the minority students in Freeman did very well on 
the standardized tests. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1441. The Free- 
man district court found, nonetheless, that specific “quality of 
education programs” concerning teacher qualifications, library 
books and other educational resources were not yet fully in place. 
It was lack of educational opportunity, not the results of test 
scores, that motivated the district court decision in Freeman. 


In this case, KCMSD students have in place a system that 
offers more educational opportunity than anywhere in America. 
The district court stated in its April 16, 1993, order, however, that 
it was “not satisfied that the District has reached anywhere close 


—_S 


to its maximum potential because the District is still at or below 
national norms at many grade levels.” Order of April 16, 1993, 
at 11. The question is “whether the vestiges of past discrimina- 
tion ha[ve] been eliminated to the extent practicable.” Board of 
Educ. v. Dowell, 498 U.S. 237, 249-50 (1991) (emphasis added). 
The words “to the extent practicable” have been lost in the 
shuffle. In our quest to eliminate the vestiges of de jure segrega- 
tion, we should not forget that: 


[rJeturning schools to the control of local authorities at the 
earliest practicable date is essential to restore their true 
accountability in our governmental system. . . . Itis the duty 
of the State and its subdivisions to ensure that [the effects 
of de jure segregation] do not shape or control the policies 
of its school systems. Where control lies, so too does 
responsibility. 

Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1445. I suggest that court supervision of 

a desegregation remedy for 100 years, as suggested by Associate 

Superintendent Rainwater, is neither practicable nor desirable. 


After the opinion in Jenkins v. Missouri, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th 
Cir. 1988) Jenkins 11), the full court denied en banc consider- 
ation Judge Bowman, joined by Judge Wollman, dissented from 
the denial stating: 


This is a case of exceptional importance. The remedies 
ordered go far beyond anything previously seen in a school 
desegregation case. The sheer immensity of the programs 
encompassed by the district court’s order — the large 
number of magnet schools and the quantity of capital 
renovations and new construction — are concededly with- 
out parallel in any other school district in the country. 
Similarly, in no other case has federal judicial power been 
used to impose a tax increase in order to provide funding for 
a desegregation remedy. 


— A-67 — 


In addition, the case presents the over-arching question 
of whether these court-ordered programs and court-ordered 
taxes are Constitutionally required in order to rectify the 
vestigial effects of legally mandated segregation (dead now 
for over thirty years) or instead represent an unsupportable 
exercise of judicial power in a legislative-style attempt to 
solve social problems that have their origins in other causes. 


In over five years on the bench, I have not seen a case 
more deserving than this one of thoughtful consideration by 
the entire Court. The decision as it stands appears to 
arrogate to the federal judiciary vast powers that under the 
Tenth Amendment are reserved to the states or to the 
people. I therefore regret that a majority of the Court has 
voted to deny the petition for rehearing en banc. 


Jenkins I1, 855 F.2d at 1318-19. In retrospect, I regret that I did 
not join the dissent at that time. In my view, this case, as it now 
proceeds, involves an exercise in pedagogical sociology, not 
constitutional adjudication. 

IIL. 


Even with the observations I make today, I am not prepared, 
at least without further briefing and oral argument before the 
court en banc, to decide that the KCMSD is unitary in the area of 
equal opportunity to a quality education. I am prepared to say, 
however, that when faced with the state’s request the district 
court, and the panel, embraced a measure, standardized test 
results, not required or permitted by the Constitution. 


If the state’s claim carries with it the unstated idea that having 
put the elements of a quality educational program in place it may 
now take its money and exit, stage left, leaving the KCMSD to 
finish the scene alone, I believe that partial unitary status is not 
at hand. But, if an equal opportunity to receive a quality educa- 
tion is now permanently available toeach student in the KCMSD, 


— 


and is thus available to erase, if the opportunity is reasonably 
pursued, the vestiges of past discrimination, then unitary status 
has been reached and control should be relinquished by the 
federal courts to the state and local governments. 


At a minimum, this court should consider, en banc, what 
issues are open and unanswered, except through faulty analysis, 
and remand the matter to the district court for further proceed- 
ings. See Freeman, 112 S. Ct. at 1450. If the evidence shows that 
the state and the KCMSD have an affirmative commitment to 
continue to provide a nondiscriminatory, quality educational 
program in Kansas City, unitary status should be declared, 
regardless of what the test scores show. 


Thus, I dissent from the order denying the suggestion for 
rehearing en banc. 


A true copy. 
Attest: 


CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, 
EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


= = 


APPENDIX E 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
WESTERN DIVISION 


No. 77-0420-CV-W-4 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 
STATE OF MISSOURI, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
[Filed: June 17, 1992] 


Before the Court is the KCMSD’s Year VIII Desegregation 
Plan. The parties have stipulated to budgets for certain compo- 
nents and the Court heard evidence regarding the remaining 
disputed components on May 27-28, 1992. The Year VIII 
Desegregation Budget wil) be approved as set forth below. 


The parties have stipulated to the following components and 
budgets: 
Stipulated Year VIII KCMSD Obligation 


Budget 

AAA 6,138,490 2,703,822 
Reduced Class Size 16,988,240 16,988,240 
Full Day Kindergarten 1,880,137 470,034 
Summer School 2,334,374 583,595 
Early Childhood 

Education 4,451,351 1,112,038 
Interest Expense 593,500 593,500 
Maintenance 4.233527 4.233.527 


36,619,619 26,684,756 


— A-70 — 


The parties dispute budgets for the following components: 


Extended Day, Effective Schools, 1986-87 Magnets, District 
Communications, Security, Special Education Compliance and 
High School Prep. In addition plaintiffs have requested an Eight 
Period Day at Westport High School, Playground Equipment for 
Faxon Montessori and Team Travel/Tournament Entrance Fees 
for Central High School. 


Extended Day—The KCMSD proposes a budget of $453,000 
to continue the extended day programs at Border Star, James, 
Greenwood, Rock Creek West, Scarritt and Askew. The State 
objects that this program is not attracting non-minority students 
to the District’s traditional schools. However, the KCMSD states 
that the program is an important factor in the decision of parents 
who chose these schools, particularly non-minority parents. The 
KCMSD also states that the program is having a significant 
impact on academic achievement. 


Effective Schools—The KCMSD proposes a budget of 
$7,250,000 to continue the effective schools program. The 
KCMSD has restructured the program to focus on instruction 
and school climate, as well as competitive grants based on school 
success. The State objects that the effective schools program has 
not been successful in improving student achievement through 
planning and implementation at the school level. 


The KCMSD admits that the program has resulted in mixed 
success. The KCMSD maintains that raw test score results when 
compared only with test score objectives do not adequately 
reflect improvements in achievement. Also, several school prin- 
cipals testified that their programs would suffer drastically 
without effective schools funding. The Court will continue 
funding for Year VIII. 


1986-87 Magnets—The KCMSD proposes a budget of 
$8,001,410 to fund the 1986-87 Magnets. During 1991 the 


——~ on 


District initiated discussions with the State and the DMC Budget 
Subcommittee on the desirability of providing Year VIII budgets 
in a manner that would more clearly depict the desegregation 
contributions of major activities funded by the Court. The Year 
VIII Magnet base budget reflects transfers of appropriate posi- 
tions to other budgets. Also the 1992-93 proposal delineates base 
and theme costs. This Court agrees with the KCMSD that these 
programs should remain viable with desegregation funding for 
Year VIII. 


District Communications—The KCMSD proposes a budget * 
of $31,125 to publish a District newspaper ten times during the 
1992-93 school year. The State objects that this component 
should be taken over by the District and placed in its operating 
budget. However, the newsletter is directly related to attracting 
non-minority suburban students into the KCMSD. 


Security—The KCMSD proposes a budget of $1,897,037 for 
security. The KCMSD requests the addition of twoclericals, two 
dispatchers, two patrol officers and an assistant to the Safety 
Manager. The KCMSD also requests overtime funding for 
approved desegregation budgets and the addition of five security 
vehicles. While this Court continues to believe that the primary 
responsibility for KCMSD security rests with the Kansas City 
Missouri Police Department, evidence at the hearing suggests 
that the KCPD is understaffed. Robert Livingston testified that 
personnel at the KCPD has not increased even though there has 
been a 300% increase in calls. Mr. Livingston concluded that the 
KCPD could not provide any additional help at this time. 


There was substantial evidence regarding the number of calls 
and incidents at District schools, as well as the need for docu- 
mentation and reports. The KCMSD clearly demonstrated the 
need for the additional security positions. The Court disagrees 
with the State’s position that adding security makes schools less 
desegregatively attractive. Instead, increased security should 


— A-72 — 


add to the attractiveness of a school which may be perceived as 
unsafe. 


The Court notes that the budget for the addition of security 
vehicles should be calculated as $65,000 with the trade-in value 
of the replaced vehicles to be included in the $65,000 budget cap. 


Special Education Compliance—The KCMSD proposes a 
budget of $990,044 for Special Education Compliance. The 
KCMSD suggests that the desegregation program has brought 
unique burdens to the KCMSD’s efforts to maintain compliance 
with State and Federal guidelines for providing equal educa- 
tional opportunities. The State argues that this request goes 
beyond the parameters of a desegregation remedy. This is an 
issue of State and Federal compliance with which each school 
district in the State must comply. The Court will deny desegre- 
gation funds for Special Education Compliance because the 
KCMSD has not shown that the desegregation program actually 
has presented a greater burden to maintain special education 
compliance. 


High School Prep—The KCMSD proposes a budget of 
$323,145 for continuation of the High School Prep program 
which the KCMSD initiated in 1991-92 and has funded out of its 
operating budget. The KCMSD maintains that the High School 
Prep program is a desegregation component because the District 
needs to improve the achievement levels within the system in 
order to attract non-minorities outside of the system. 


The High School Prep program focuses on significantly 
overaged middle school students who have been retained in a 
grade for two or more years. The voluntary program is designed 
to reduce the drop-out rate among high-risk students. The 
KCMSD states that the program makes a critical contribution to 
the overall success of the desegregation remedy by providing an 
opportunity to accelerate the educational progress of over-age 
students who are immediately at risk of leaving the educational 


a 73 — 


system. The program allows the student to re-enter the system at 
an age-appropriate level, substantially increasing the likelihood 
that the student will continue his education and graduate. The 
KCMSD notes that the program has been immensely popular. 


While the Court agrees that this program is vital to the 
KCMSD and should be continued, the Court cannot justify the 
use of desegregation funds to help remedy a nationwide problem 
which the KCMSD has not specifically shown to be a vestige of 


segregation. 


Eight Period Day at Westport High School—Plaintiffs re- 
quest a budget of $262,500 for the addition of an eight period day 
at Westport High School. Plaintiffs state that without an extra 
period students at Westport will not be able to take all of the 
required core curriculum courses and also be able to take two or 
three courses which would provide a more intense exposure to 
theme studies. 


Playground Equipment at Faxon Montessori—Plaintiffs re- 
quest a budget of $22,500 for playground equipment at the Faxon 
Elementary Montessori Magnet School. The original planning 
budget did not provide for the purchase of any playground 
equipment. Plaintiffs submit that this is a problem at a Montessori 
school with its popular early childhood program for three and 
four year old children. 


Team Travel/Tournament Entrance Fees for Central High 
School—Plaintiffs request a budget of $45,000 for travel and 
tournament costs. The evidence at the hearing demonstrated that 
athletes in programs such as fencing and weightlifting have been 
so successful that the teams must travel substantial distances in 
order to find comparably skilled teams for meaningful competi- 
tion. Steve Butler, one of the fencing coaches at Central High 
School, stated that the fencing team at Central High School is 
beginning to receive national as well as international attention. 
There is no doubt but that the success and notoriety of the athletic 


am AT om 


programs at Central High School will contribute to the 
desegregative attractiveness of the Classical Greek theme 


This Court will approve the following Year VIII budgets in 
addition to those components already stipulated to by the parties. 


Proposed Year VIII KCMSD Obligation 


Budget 

Extended Day 453,000 113,250 
Effective Schools 7,250,000 1,812,500 
1986-87 Magnets 8,001,410 3,745,050 
District Comm. 31,125 7,781 
Security 1,897,037 739,844 
Playground Eqpt. 22,500 5,625 
CHS Team/Travel 45,000 11,250 
Westport Ext. Day — 262.500 — 65.625 

17,962,572 6,500,925 


Also before the Court is the State’s motion to require the 
KCMSD to submit its proposal for a long-term extension of the 
LRMP in lieu of a proposal for a one-year extension. The 
KCMSD filed a motion for approval of the LRMP extension. 
Both parties filed responses and presented oral arguments on the 
issue 9n May 29, 1992. This Court will require the KCMSD’s 
LRMP proposal to be filed on or before September 1, 1992. It is 
important for students, patrons, parties and the Court to know 
which programs are effective and which programs should be 
changed or terminated. 


Accordingly, it is hereby 


ORDERED that the Year VIII Desegregation Budget is as 
follows: 


—_ 


Desegregation Budget KCMSD Obligation 


AAA 6,138,490 2,703,822 
Reduced Class Size 16,988,240 16,988,240 
Full Day Kindergarten 1,880,137 470,034 
Summer School 2,334,374 583,595 
Early Childhood 
Education 4,451,351 1,112,038 
Interest Expense — 593,500 593,500 
Maintenance 4,233,527 4,233,527 
36,619,619 26,684,756 
Extended Day 453,000 113,250 
Effective Schoois 7,250,000 1,812,500 
1986-87 Magnets 8,001,410 3,745,050 
District Comm. 31,125 7,781 
Security 1,897,037 739,844 
Playground Eqpt. 22,500 5,625 
CHS Team/Travel 45,000 11,250 
Westport Ext. Day — 262.500 65,625 
17,962,572 6,500,925 
Total Desegregation Budget 54,592,191 33,185,681 
and it is further 


ORDERED that the KCMSD submit its Long Range Magnet 
Plan on or before September 1, 1992. 


/s/ Russell G. Clark 
RUSSELL G. CLARK 
SENIOR JUDGE 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT COURT 


Date: June , 1992 


— A-76 — 


APPENDIX F 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
WESTERN DIVISION 


No. 77-0420-CV-W-4 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


STATE OF MISSOURI, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
[Filed: June 25, 1992] 


Before the Court is the AFT’s proposal for desegregation 
funding for teacher salary increases for fiscal years 1992-93 
through 1994-95. The KCMSD filed a separate salary proposal 
for 1992-93. The State filed a response to both proposals. The 
parties filed subsequent replies and responses to the proposals. 
The Court set this matter for a hearing on June 9-12, 1992 and 
will approve a teacher salary package as set forth below. 


At the end of the current fiscal year, desegregation funding for 
both the 1987 teacher salary package and the 1990 salary 
increase settlement will expire. If desegregation funding for 
salaries is not extended, teacher salaries will roll back to 1986- 
87 levels. The AFT has proposed a salary increase to keep the 
KCMSD competitive with the national urban market. The 
KCMSD has proposed to maintain salaries at their current levels 
with moderate equity adjustments. The State has proposed that 
this Court roll back teacher salaries to their 1986-87 levels 
because the salary increases have not met the goals set by the 
Court. 


on At} — 


AFT SALARY PROPOSAL 


The AFT’s salary proposal requests that continued and in- 
creased desegregation funding of teacher salaries is necessary in 
order to assure equitable and effective implementation of the 
desegregation plan. The AFT proposes to raise salaries to levels 
that are competitive with the national urban market. Specifically, 
the AFT requests that the Court establish teacher salary sched- 
ules for the next three years at a level at least equal to the 
projected national urban average teacher salaries. The AFT also 
suggests that the KCMSD redirect under-expended resources 
out of other desegregation programs and into the budget for 
teacher salaries. 


The AFT and the KCMSD assert that the most relevant market 
for setting teacher salaries in the KCMSD is the national urban 
school market. The AFT and KCMSD suggest that urban dis- 
tricts throughout the country provide a more meaningful com- 
parison with the KCMSD in terms of size of budget, enrollment, 
employees, inner-city working conditions, minority/non-minor- 
ity enrollment patterns, socio-economic levels and special needs 
of urban versus suburban student bodies. The surrounding local 
suburban school districts do not provide this same type of useful 
comparison. 

The AFT asserts that setting salaries that are competitive with 
the national urban market is necessary so that the District can 
retain and attract high quality teachers. The AFT stresses that 
high quality teachers are essential to successful implementation 
of the desegregation plan. The AFT proposes that current KCMSD 
teacher salaries be restructured and increased so that the District 
will be comparable to or higher than average salaries paid in 
urban school districts througuout the United States. 

The State disagrees that the national urban market is the most 
relevant market for purposes of comparison. The State of Mis- 
souri argues that the relevant labor market for teachers in the 


— A-78 — 


KCMSD is the “regional market.” The “regional market” is 
defined as Missouri and the eight states contiguous to Missouri: 
Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkan- 
sas, and Oklahoma. The State’s view is based on the origin of 
actual hires. 


Recruitment efforts by the KCMSD indicate that the District 
recruits on a national level and the pool of certified applicants 
indicate that the District competes at a national level. After the 
1990 salary order, 20.9 percent of the »>0vlicants were from 
Missouri, 23.2 percent of the applicants y ere from the eight 
contiguous states, 35.3 percent of the appiicants were from other 
States and 20.7 percent of the applicants were from unknown 
origin. See AFT Ex. 28. This Court does not accept the State’s 
contention that in order to find that the District competes in the 
national urban market, the District must show that it actually 
hires a substantial number of teachers or personnel from the 
national urban market. Also, Kansas City, Missouri is a part of 
the national urban market and other national urban cities are 
competing for Kansas City’s teachers and staff. Therefore the 
Court agrees with the AFT and KCMSD that the national urban 
market is the most relevant market for purposes of comparing 
salaries in the KCMSD. 


The AFT recommends that the best measure of the national 
urban market for teachers is the Department of Defense (“DOD”) 
salary schedule which is based upon the average salaries of all 
urban school systems in cities of 100,000 or more population in 
the United States. Each year the DOD compiles a database of 
teacher salaries paid in approximately 170 urban school districts 
in the United States. 


The AFT presented evidence that teacher salaries in the 
District lag significantly below the national urban average. 
According to the most recent statistics, teacher salaries in the 
national urban market have increased approximately 6.71% each 


— A-79 — 


year in the last eighteen years. In terms of the dollar differences, 
the gap between KCMSD teacher salaries and the national urban 
average today is close to the gap that existed in 1986-87, before 
any desegregation funding for salaries was provided by the 
Court. See AFT Proposal at 21. 


Thus, in the current 1991-92 school year, the gap between 
KCMSD teacher salaries and the actual and projected urban 
average salaries is considerable and will worsen unless signifi- 
cant salary increases are authorized and funded. For example, 
KCMSD salaries for beginning teachers in the B.A. and M.A. 
salary lanes are currently below the national urban average by 
approximately 4%. See AFT Ex. 14. At the top end of the B.A. 
and M.A. lanes the KCMSD’s most experienced teachers are 
currently earning, respectively, about 19% and 14% less than the 
national urban average. See AFT Ex. 14. The AFT cautions that 
if teachers are paid at the same level in 1992-93, the KCMSD’s 
ability to compete in the marketplace for teaching talent will be 
diminished even more severely. 


Moreover, if the current salary increase orders are allowed to 
expire on June 30, 1992, teacher salaries for the 1992-93 school 
year will fall from a starting salary of $22,215 to just over 
$17,000. The net result of a roll back would be that the KCMSD 
would be forced to compete in the national urban market for 
beginning teachers at a 40-45% disadvantage. See AFT Ex. 31. 
The AFT warns that if current salaries are allowed to expire, 
salaries will revert to a level which will result in intolerable 
consequences for the desegregation plan. Such a roll back would 
place the KCMSD teacher salary schedule thousands of dollars 
behind any comparable school district and would devastate the 
District’s ability to attract and retain teachers. The AFT fears that 
a roll back would essentially paralyze the District’s ability to 
recruit and retain quality teachers who are vital to the desegrega- 


tion program. 


— A-80 — 


Art Rainwater, Associate Superintendent for Instruction, tes- 
tified that a roll back would cause a number of teachers to defect 
to other markets and would definitely hurt the desegregation 
program. A salary decrease of this proportion could cause a mass 
exodus of District employees. Those teachers who could not 
leave the system would likely suffer from internal morale prob- 
lems which might be passed on to the schoolchildren. A salary 
roll back would inevitably affect the attitudes of teachers who 
stayed in the District. 


The AFT’s proposal would remedy other inequities in the 
current KCMSD salary schedule. In the current KCMSD teacher 
salary schedule there are a number of non-uniform salary steps. 
For example, when a teacher in the B.A. salary lane moves from 
step to step, he or she normally receives a raise of $778.00. 
However, when moving from step four to step five in the B.A. 
lane, the teacher receives a raise of $888.00. When moving from 
step five to step six the teacher gets a raise of $667.00. There has 
been no explanation for these arbitrary differences between 


steps. 


The AFT also urges that adoption of the DOD national urban 
market teacher salary schedule would permit the KCMSD to 
reform its current salary schedule by adding step increases for 
years of experience or “longevity” steps. Longevity steps are 
found in most urban salary schedules. The AFT proposes that the 
Court remedy disparities at the top end of the salary schedule by 
adding longevity steps. Longevity steps would account for 
additional salary shortfalls as compared to the national urban 
average. 


Another problem with the absence of step increases in the 
KCMSD salary schedule is that there are salary inequities among 
similarly-situated teachers. Teachers within the District have 
been frozen at their current levels for two years. For example, a 
teacher who began her teaching career in the KCMSD and has 


— A-81 — 


taught for ten years would be paid at step nine instead of step 
eleven. However, a teacher who taught for ten years in another 
school before being hired to teach in the KCMSD this year would 
be paid at step eleven. A two-step differential could result in a 
pay scale difference of $1,444 to $2,443 per year. Testimony at 
the hearing indicated that these types of inequities cause morale 
problems within the District and lead to internal dissatisfaction 
with the system. In turn, this leads to ineffective implementation 


of the desegregation program. 


In summary, the AFT requests that this Court adopt the 
national urban average as the relevant market in which the 
KCMSD competes for teachers, administrators and staff. The 
AFT proposes to raise salaries, eliminate step inequalities and 
add step increases for teachers. The AFT also proposes to raise 
salaries of all categories of classified personnel: paraprofession- 
als, administrators, professionals, technical, clerical, security, 
nurses, food service, operating, building managers, cafeteria 
managers, information systems, miscellaneous schedule five 
employees, part-time workers, operating, maintenance, and par- 
ent educators. 


The AFT urges this Court to order funding that will allow 
teachers to earn their regular hourly rate of pay for participating 
in workshops and inservice training outside of their regular work 
schedule. The AFT disagrees with the KCMSD that if current 
salary levels are maintained for 1992-93, the salaries will be 
roughly competitive with the national urban market. Finally, the 
AFT foresees particularly drastic consequences if salaries are 
rolled back to their 1986-87 levels. 


KCMSD SALARY PROPOSAL 


Due to the dire fiscal constraints currently facing the District, 
the KCMSD submitted a one-year proposal instead of support- 
ing the AFT’s three-year proposal. The KCMSD believes that 
the salary increases proposed by the AFT are larger than the 


— A-82 — 


District can responsibly propose at this time. The KCMSD 
teacher salary proposal requests that this Court maintain current 
salaries and provide for minor equity adjustments for those po- 
sitions which are paid substantially below relevant market rates. 


The KCMSD proposes to maintain inservice programs for 
teachers in the 1990 salary package and continue inservice 
training for paraprofessionals. The District strongly believes 
that inservice training provides a valyable opportunity to de- 
velop theme-related expertise and to share teaching innovations 
which enhance the quality of curriculum offerings. The KCMSD’s 
salary proposal would extend the work year for elementary 
principals by fifteen days to provide additional time for leader- 
ship and magnet theme training. In the past, many elementary 
principals have spent several uncompensated days addressing 
the needs of their schools. In addition, the KCMSD salary plan 
proposes to continue paying substitutes $75.00 per day, continue 
compensation for supervision of extra-curricular activities and 
maintain a reserve fund in the amount of $500,000. 


The District’s proposal offers a fiscally conservative, yet 
roughly competitive compensation plan for 1992-93. The 
KCMSD is confident that its proposal would enable District 
personnel to continue to attract and retain highly qualified 
personnel necessary to implement the desegregation plan. 


STATE SALARY PROPOSAL 


The State of Missouri responded to the salary proposals with 
a request that this Court discontinue desegregation funding for 
teacher salaries. The State asserts that its analysis of the effect of 
the 1990 salary increase demonstrates that the salary increase did 
not achieve its objectives. For instance, the State submits that the 
increase had virtually no effect on increasing the quality of new 
hires or decreasing the quality of staff who left the District. The 
State claims that the AFT and the KCMSD have virtually 
ignored the evaluative criteria approved by the Court. 


or 


The State concludes that the salary increases have had no 
demonstrable effect on improving the KCMSD’s ability to 
implement the desegregation remedy and therefore the Court 
should allow salaries to roll back to the 1986-87 levels. The State 
suggests that continuation of salary increases would constitute 
an unauthorized upgrade of District operations under the guise of 
desegregation. The State submits that to the extent KCMSD 
resident taxpayers wish to support the school system, they 
should be given an opportunity to show that support by approv- 
ing an operating levy increase sufficient to support the existing 
salary levels. 


The State adds that quite apart from its position that increasing 
salaries is not desegregation related, the AFT has presented no 
evidence that the KCMSD is having any great difficulty recruit- 
ing nurses. The State maintains that health care for students is not 
related to the desegregation effort and that the school nurse issue 
is beyond the parameters of the resolution the DMC passed 
regarding the salary issue. 


For that matter, the State maintains that all other categories of 
classified personnel for whom the AFT seeks salary increases are 
also non-instructional personnel, with the possible exception of 
paraprofessionals. The State argues that there is no data that the 
KCMSD is having difficulty attracting and retaining these per- 
sonnel. 


RESULTS OF THE SALARY INCREASES 


Pursuant to this Court’s previous orders, the KCMSD agreed 
to collect and report appropriate data regarding the results of the 
District’s recruiting efforts and to implement reorganization of 
personnel recruiting efforts by adopting a personnel recruitment 
plan and schedule. The Court also approved the use of eighteen 
evaluative criteria as a means to assess the effects of the salary 
increases approved in the July 23, 1990 Order. The Court noted 
that the evaluative criteria, which were designed to identify 


— v= 


trends, should not be construed as setting “absolute numerical 
requirements or bright lines.” /d. at 6. 


The AFT, KCMSD and the State have interpreted the results 
of the data differently. The AFT and KCMSD contend that the 
data generally indicate that the salary increases assisted the 
KCMSD in becoming more attractive to higher quality person- 
nel needed to implement the desegregation orders. The KCMSD 
emphasized that the results should be viewed in the context that 
the 1990 salary package did not provide a competitive salary 
advantage to the District but instead helped to alleviate a sub- 
stantial and growing competitive disadvantage. 


One issue of major contention was whether or not the salary 
increase had an effect on the District’s ability torecruit and retain 
teachers. The District maintains that while salary may not be the 
sole factor in the KCMSD’s recruiting and retention experience, 
no data are required to support the sound an@ logical conclusion 
that if salaries had lagged more than twenty percent below their 
current levels, it would have been considerably more difficult to 
attract and retain even nominally qualified and experienced 


personnel. 


The KCMSD asserts that since the salary increase, more new 
hires have cited salary as their reason for selecting the KCMSD. 
See KCMSD Exs. 12, 14and 15. However, the State’s expert, Dr. 
Gold, asserts that the primary selection criteria for choosing to 
work at the KCMSD was “non-salary based.” The District 
submits that this claim is not supported by the survey data which 
show that salary was identified as the number one reason newly 
hired certified personnel selected the KCMSD. See KCMSD Ex. 
11. More newly hired classified, administrative and professional 
staff also identified salary as their reason for selecting KCMSD 
after the salary increase. See KCMSD Exs. 12 and 13. 


The KCMSD argues that Dr. Gold’s conclusion is a result of 
the manner in which he combined certain reasons for selecting 


—_—S 


the KCMSD. The survey provides eight reasons for selecting the 
KCMSD: salary, family relocation, location, magnet plan, spe- 
cific magnet program, benefits, KCMSD reputation and other. 
Dr. Gold combined “family relocation” with “location” and he 
combined “magnet plan” with “specific magnet program.” He 
also separated “salary” and “benefits.” Dr. Gold’s results indi- 
cated that location and program-related interests are the primary 
selection criteria. 

Regardless of whether salary is the primary reason for select- 
ing the KCMSD, the results show that salary is a significant 
factor in the selection process. In light of the growing disparity 
between KCMSD salaries and salaries in the national urban 
market, it is no surprise that location and program-related 
interests are also significant factors which attract teachers to the 
KCMSD. 


Atthe hearing, the State also presented evidence regarding the 
results of other data as applied to the eighteen evaluative criteria. 
The State’s experts generally concluded that the salary increase 
did not produce statistically significant effects or trends. One 
aspect of the State’s analysis used a “quality index” which 
combined years of experience, degree and most recent degree 
grade point average as a basis to determine the quality compo- 
nents included in some of the eighteen evaluative criteria. 


The “quality index” was criticized for its limited value in 
measuring objective quality criteria. The AFT and the KCMSD 
emphasized that the index could not measure quality factors such 
as personality, charisma, motivation or enthusiasm. Nor did the 
quality index account for a teacher’s entire undergraduate grade 
point average, the prestige of a particular university, other 
interests, honors or publications. Therefore, while the parties 
agreed that the quality index is comprised of important factors in 
determining the quality of a teacher, it is by no means represen- 
tative of the whole spectrum of desirable teacher “qualities” that 
are considered in the hiring process. 


— A-86 — 


The “quality index” does not necessarily demonstrate that the 
District was unsuccessful in hiring and retaining quality staff. 
Instead it may show that it is impossible to evaluate the true 
quality of teachers with three objective criteria. The quality 
index formula measures quantifiable factors of acknowledged 
relevance. Yet, these factors alone are an imperfect yardstick by 
which to measure the quality of thousands of individual teachers 
at the KCMSD. 


The State concludes that the salary increase has not met the 
goals set by the Court and the salary increase should not be 
continued or expanded. The State insists that the lack of statis- 
tically significant trends in improvement signals the death knell 
for continued Court-ordered funding. 


FUNDING PROPOSALS 


Logic and empirical data show that in the absence of desegre- 
gation funding for salaries, the District will not be able to 
implement its desegregation plan. The AFT and KCMSD agree 
that the salary proposal adopted by the Court should be approved 
as a desegregation expense. The AFT requests that this Court 
impose joint and several liability with the State to pay 75% of the 
cost and the KCMSD to pay 25% of the cost. The AFT requests 
a three-year extension of the existing 96-cent property tax. The 
KCMSD urges the Court to approve its proposal as a desegrega- 
tion expense with the State contributing 75% and the District 
contributing 25% . The KCMSD proposes to fund its share with 
a continuation of the 96-cent tax levy. The KCMSD’s proposal 
would cost approximately $49.7 million and the AFT’s proposal 
would add another $17.5 million for a total proposal of approxi- 
mately $67.2 million. 


The State claims that the Court should not approve desegrega- 
tion funding for salaries because such funding would be beyond 
the scope of the Court’s remedial authority. However, the 
Supreme Court has recently stated that “[t]he essence of acourt’s 


— A-87 — 


equity power lies in its inherent capacity to adjust remedies in a 
feasible and practical way to eliminate the conditions or redress 
the injuries caused by unlawful action.” Freeman v. Pitts, 112 
S.Ct. 1430 (1992). It is well-settled that a district court may 
require the expenditure of funds to implement a desegregation 
remedy. See Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977). 


This Court and the Eighth Circuit have “made abundantly 
clear ‘that the constitutional violations must be remedied and 
these remedies fully funded.”” Jenkins v. Missouri, 931 F.2d 
470, 476 (8th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 437 (1991). “[A] 
court is entitled to require money for programs that materially 
aid the success of the overall desegregation effort.” See Arthur 
v. Nyquist, 712 F.2d 809, 813 (2d Cir. 1983). 


In 1989, this Court concluded that the KCMSD’s difficulty in 
hiring and retaining qualified personnel adversely affected the 
desegregation plan. This Court previously expressed concern 
about the District’s ability to implement the desegregation plan 
in light of its salary structure. July 5, 1989 Order at 23. In 
approving the 1990 salary package, this Court found that the 
salary increases for KCMSD personnel were “essential to com- 
ply with the Court’s desegregation orders.” July 23, 1990 Order 
at 6. 


High quality personnel are necessary not only to implement 
specialized desegregation programs intended to “improve edu- 
cational opportunities and reduce racial isolation” Jenkins v. 
Missouri, 855 F.2d 1295, 1301 (8th Cir. 1988), affd in part, 
rev'd in part on other grounds, 495 U.S. 33 (1990), but also to 
“ensure that there is no diminution in the quality of its regular 
academic program.” Jenkins v. Missouri, 672 F. Supp. 400, 410 
(Mo. 1987), aff'd, 855 F.2d 1295 (8th Cir. 1988). 


The KCMSD asserts that funding of the 1992-93 salary 
package as a desegregation expense is premised on the Court’s 
findings that the District has difficulties “hiring and retaining 


—itt— 


qualified personnel” which, in turn, negatively affect implemen- 
tation of the desegregation remedy. There is no question but that 
a salary roll back would have effects that would drastically 
impair implementation of the desegregation remedy. 


1992-93 TEACHER SALARY PACKAGE 


The Court will adopt the KCMSD’s salary proposal to main- 
tain salaries for the 1992-93 school year, provide moderate 
equity adjustments, add fifteen days to the school year for 
eleruentary principals, maintain inservice training, maintain 
substitute pay, maintain extracurricular pay rates and maintain a 
reserve fund. The Court will approve a joint and several funding 
allocation of 50%/50% between the State and the KCMSD. 


The KCMSD salary proposal is as follows: 


CURRENT ADDITIONAL 


FUNDS 
PROPOSED ALLOCATED $$ NEEDED 


Level for Teachers Currently Budgeted 35,016,077 


Provide Current Teacher Salary 


AMOUNT 


— A-89 — 


= 
A OF 
o S 
val w 
n oO 
a 
So 
> 4 
cn 
on 


564,715 


Level For Teachers Projected 


For Year VIII 


Maintain Current Teacher Salary 
Maintain Current Salaries of 


=8 $ 8 °RG 
eee 
eae EEE 
z = §8& 
53 8 = 8858 & 
ge ae RESaS 
g 
zs 
2 8 4 af 
TEESE 
gor 2s 2386 
225 pices 
Feoge325au 
pedissqiig 2 
pg" 3" p "3335 


—_r 


The additional funds needed for current teacher salary levels 
are for the cost of two summer school sessions, current vacan- 
cies, lane changes and fringe benefit increases. The District also 
estimates that there will be approximately 53 new teacher 
positions. These figures could change based on actual enroll- 
ment. The budget for maintenance of current salaries for other 
employees is increased slightly to include vacancies, new posi- 
tions, overtime costs and revised fringe benefits rates. 


The internal equity study cost projections for 1992-93 are as 
follows: 


Executive Secretaries 69,564 


Secretary A’s 479,176 
Secretary B’s 263,205 
Clerks 216,179 
Admin. Staff 44,498 
Nurses ___29.765 

1,102,388 


The State declares that, with the proposition of a salary roll 
back, “[the State] is not so naive as to believe” that the Court will 
not consider “the discomfort of those whose salaries would be 
reduced.” State Post-Hearing Brief at 34. However, the basis for 
this Court’s ruling is grounded in remedying the vestiges of 
segregation by improving the desegregative attractiveness of the 
KCMSD. In order to improve the desegregative attractiveness of 
the KCMSD, the District must hire and retain high quality 
teachers, administrators and staff. 


The success of the prior salary orders has been described as 
“qualified.” Yet, the Court agrees with the KCMSD and the AFT 
that the results must be viewed in the context of how KCMSD 
teacher salaries actually compared with the national urban aver- 


— A-91 — 


age teacher salaries. The State argues that the AFT and the 
KCMSD have improperly focused on the effect of a roll back. 
However, this is a relevant consideration. The success of the 
desegregation program rests in great measure upon those charged 
with implementing the plan. 


In light of the District’s current financial crisis, this Court will 
maintain salaries at their current levels for the 1992-93 school 
year and continue the 96-cent levy increase for an additional 
year. At this time, the AFT’s proposal is simply not economi- 
cally feasible. However, this Court rejects the State’s proposi- 
tion that “to tie salaries for employees to an asserted national 
urban market would be a gross misuse of public funds.” State 
Post-Hearing Brief at 5. Instead, the substantial increase sought 
by the AFT should be deferred. 


The State’s proposal would cause severe harm to the desegre- 
gation effort. It is critical to the success of the desegregation plan 
that the employees who carry it out are compensated at or near 
the relevant market rates of compensation so that the District can 
attract and retain employees with the training and experience 
necessary to implement the Court’s plan. A salary roll back 
would result in excessive employee turnover, a decline in the 
quality and commitment of work and an inability of the KCMSD 
to achieve the objectives of the desegregation plan. 


Accordingly, it is hereby 


ORDERED the KCMSD’s salary proposal for 1992-93 is 
approved as follows: 


28 2 

4 ies : 

a as S828 

rE 82 Boksp 

| a4: Sp od8oR 

gga: 4] EGER 
| GBR ae 3" 

fe 28 | 

: au 1e : 

Sete 


a ce ee eesnceesssi 


16€‘7P6'P 000‘008 ‘rr 16€‘TPrL‘6r IVLOL 
(eT OST) THT OS9 000 00S DAIISIY 
(680°901) 000‘S29 11689 savy Avg JeyNoUM)-enxg UTEUTEyy 
O€TILI 000‘0S+ O€I‘IZ9 Aeq 12g CL$ 18 NEY BNINsqng urmurey; 
0 889°07Z 889°07Z SOlAIISU] [eUOISsajold 
“BIB JO SAB] SAL] IPLACIg 
8018p 8E9°EIZ OPL‘19Z SIOYOVI], MON 
10} SAB SOLAJOSU] UTEIUTE| 
| 998°1EZ 0 998° 1EZ sjediouulg Areyuswery 
~ JO} JWI JOOYSS usp3us] 
< 88€°Z0I'T 0 88‘Z0I'I susunsnipy Anby spraaig 
| LIZ‘S8p'I 6S9°991'6 0L8‘rS9'0I ssohojdurg 121910 
JO SOLIBTRS JUSLINS UTEUTE| 
SIL‘'pOS 0 SIL‘POS INA 2824 10,j 
parsofoig SIoYIVI], 10,] [RAT] 
AreTeg Joyoea], UDLIND Spraaig 
vOT'86S'‘I EL8‘LIP'E€ LLO'OIO’SE + parcspng Apusuns sisyseay, 103 JOA] 
AreTes J2yows], JUSUND uTEUTEYW 
dsaqdaAN daALVOOTIV dasSOd0ud 
SGNNA LNNOWYV 
IVNOLLIGGY LNaYUND 


— so 


APPENDIX G 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
WESTERN DIVISION 


No. 77-0420-CV-W-4 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


STATE OF MISSOURI, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
[Filed: June 30, 1993] 


This matter comes before the Court on the American Federa- 
tion of Teachers, Local 691’s (“AFT”) motion for desegregation 
funding for certified and classified employee salary increases in 
Fiscal Years 1993-94 through 2002-3; AFT’s motion for deseg- 
regation funding for operating, warehouse, maintenance, 
mailroom, and food service employee wage increases in fiscal 
years 1993-94 through 1995-96; the Kansas City Missouri 
School District’s (“KCMSD”) motion for desegregation fund- 
ing of its salary proposal for 1993-94 through 1995-96; the State 
of Missouri’s (“State”) motion for an order expressly establish- 
ing the State’s right of contribution; and the State’s motion to 
strike the plaintiffs’ pleading filed post-hearing or in the alterna- 
tive for leave to file a response to said pleading. This matter has 
been the subject of extensive briefing by the parties. The State 
has responded by way of its consolidated response in Opposition 
to AFT’s and KCMSD’s salary motions. The KCMSD and AFT 
have each replied to the State’s memorandum in opposition to 
the motions. A hearing was held on June 1-3, 1993 and the Court 
received evidence on the issues presented in the above refer- 


— A-95 — 


enced pleadings. The plaintiffs filed a post-trial memorandum in 
support of desegregation funded salary increases for KCMSD 
employees. The State has filed a motion to strike plaintiffs’ 
pleadings or in the alternative for leave to file a response. The 
Court, after reviewing the evidence presented at trial and after a 
thorough examination of the pleadings submitted by the parties, 
will grant the AFT’s motion in part and deny it in part; grant the 
KCMSD’s motion in part and deny it in part; deny the State’s 
motion to strike; grant the State’s motion for leave to file a 
response to plaintiffs’ post-hearing memorandum; and defer 
ruling on the State’s motion for an order establishing a right of 
contribution as set out herein. 


The Court has previously addressed the issue of “law of the 
case” to the extent that it applies to the evidence presented herein. 
The Court announced to the parties at the trial of these issues that 
the “law of the case” doctrine applies only where the district 
court has decided an issue and that issue has been presented to 
and resolved by an appellate court. The same issues as those 
presented this year in the salary hearing were presented last year 
and are currently on appeal to the Eighth Circuit Court of 
Appeals. That being the case, the “law of the case” doctrine will 
not operate to bar the Court from considering the evidence and 
deciding the issues again this year. However, the Court is not 
inclined to make a different ruling where the evidence presented 
is substantially unchanged. The Court has reviewed the evidence 
in its entirety and finds that the evidence presented this year is 
strikingly similar to the evidence presented last year. Therefore, 
the Court will not change its rulings with respect to the issues 
contested by the State in this year’s hearing. There is no basis to 
find that the KCMSD is no longer in the national urban market 
nor that salaries of KCMSD personnel are not appropriately 
considered to be a desegregation expense. The Court does have 
inherent authority to modify its remedy in this matter. It is the 
intention of the Court to modify the salary component of the 
desegregation remedy as set out below. 


—* 


Due to the insignificant, if any, change in the evidence from 
last year to this year the Court will not elaborate on the evidence 
adduced at the trial on this issue. Rather, itis the Court’s intention 
to fashion a salary order which is appropriate under the contin- 
ued climate in the district. The one glaring problem made 
obvious by the testimony at this year’s hearing is the absence of 
the step increases over the last three years. The inequality created 
by the missed step increases is a fundamental flaw in the 
compensation package in the KCMSD. It is the purpose of this 
Order to rectify the inequality and allow those missing steps to 
be recompensed. The proposal of the AFT was to reinstate the 
lost steps over a period of three years. While this proposal would 
reduce the initial outlay of funds, it would not immediately 
correct the inequality in the salary package. The Court also notes 
that the immediate adjustment for lost steps would lessen the 
long-run costs in the salary component, albeit by a relatively 
small amount. Therefore, the Court will order that the KCMSD 
make reparation to those individual employees currently em- 
ployed by the district who have not been afforded step increases 
due to the structure of the salary package. 


The next issue raised in this litigation was whether the KCMSD 
participated in the national urban market. The Court has previ- 
ously held that the KCMSD did, in fact, compete in the national 
urban market for teachers. The State, again this year, sought to 
present evidence to the contrary. However, if anything, the 
State’s expert witnesses supported the proposition that the Dis- 
trict did compete in a national urban market. The Court finds no 
reason to alter its previous findings and would therefore reaffirm 
its finding that the KCMSD competes in the national urban 
market for teachers. 


The Court has found that the underlying issues of whether the 
national urban market is correctly applied, whether the salary 
component is properly a desegregation expense, and whether 
salary increases have a positive impact on the desegregation 


— A-97 — 


effort should be resolved again this year in the same manner as 
last. The Court, having found that the salary increases are a 
necessary component of the desegregation program, must now 
determine the extent to which a raise would be appropriate this 
year. 


State’s Plan 


The State submitted to the Court a plan by which the KCMSD 
classroom teachers and other instructional personnel would 
receive a 1% increase of their base salary for FY 1994 + $400. 
The Court, again, finds that the State has failed to bring to the 
Court a serious proposal for the issue currently pending. This 
proposal is reminiscent of “patch and paint” or “OBE in three 
schools in place of the magnet program”. The State’s proposal is 
simply not consistent with the meaningful implementation of the 
desegregation program. The State has argued repeatedly and 
currently on appeal that the salary component is not a valid 
component of the desegregation remedy. The State has every 
right to maintain its position. However, the State has the ability 
to offer a reasonable alternative while not jeopardizing its legal 
arguments currently on appeal. The proposals of the State have 
been of little or no benefit in the past and are of painfully little aid 
to the Court in this instance, as well. Therefore, it is left to the 
Court to craft a viable alternative given the constraints facing the 
district at this point in time. 

The Court will note that the testimony at trial reflected that the 
Missouri Legislature has had five years to pass legislation which 
would enable the KCMSD to fund its share of the desegregation 
expenses. While the State has not passed such legislation, as of 
this date, the Legislature has inserted a line item in this fiscal 
year’s budget to reflect the anticipated costs of a salary increase. 
The Court notes with approval the State’s effort to maintain its 
fiscal responsibility in this area. 


— A-98 — 


The Court has previously found that the AFT’s proposal for 
1992-93 was not economically feasible at the time but that the 
Court, if able, would provide for much of the salary increases 
proposed by the AFT. Additionally, the Court specifically re- 
jected “the State’s proposition that ‘to tie salaries for employees 
to an asserted national market would be a gross misuse of public 
funds.” (June 25, 1992 Order, at 16). Here again, the Court is 
compelled to consider the same alternatives. There is one major 
difference. The persons for whom raises are sought have fore- 
gone yet another year without salary adjustments. 


AFT’s Plan 


The AFT has submitted a proposal for certified and classified 
personnel to receive additional compensation as per the follow- 
ing scenarios. First, it is suggested that the Court adopt the 1992- 
1993 DOD salary schedule in 1993-94. Additionally, the AFT 
suggested that the Court also include Longevity Steps and make 
up the lost steps which current teachers have previously fore- 
gone. The estimated costs of these respective alternatives were 
presented in AFT Exhibit 32 and are set out below: 


ESTIMATED COST PROJECTIONS 


AFT SALARY PACKAGE 


1993-94 TO 1995-96 


1995-96 


1994-95 


1993-94 


Current Amount 


Allocated Proposed Proposed Proposed 


| 
" 
r 


al \o _ 
4 H & 
a & & 
se 3 
. 3s 
a o., 
\o —_ On 
2 & § 
ge. 
g 
a. 
. % 
aya § 
bei = 
23a 
Hae 
§ EE Z 
siaisé 
S535 2% 


311,744 
621,130 


568,911 


294,098 


277,451 


261,746 


621,130 


568,911 


Maintain inservice days for new teachers 
Maintain substitute rate at $75 per day 
Maintain extra-curricular pay rates 


621,130 
568,911 


0 2,394,576 2,573,532 


621,130 
568,911 


2,765,862 


__500,000 __ 500,000 _ 500,000 __ 500.000 
45,588,168 72,317,414 88,178,874 105,093,431 


Regular hourly rate for magnet inservice 


Reserve 
TOTAL 


1995-96 
Cost § Cost 


1994-95 


Cost 


1993-94 


ANALYSIS OF AFT SALARY PROPOSAL 


Proposal 


1992-93 DOD Implement in 1993-94 Includes all 


— A-100 — — A-101 — 


72,317,414 88,178,874 105,093,431 


= . © S The Court must consider the fiscal realities in which the Dis- 
o: ni - trict is forced to operate. Also, the Court must consider the need 
a SS S 2 to have successful implementation of the desegregation pro- 
x 4 ov gram. It has repeatedly been decided by this Court that the sal- 
= aries at issue herein are a proper expense under the desegregation 
a g o program. Therefore, the question, as correctly stated by the 
x S vo District, the AFT and the plaintiffs at the beginning of the trial on 
SS ~ =~ 4 this issue, is not whether to give a raise to those included in these 
a ~ sities programs, but rather how much of an increase is appropriate. 
S 4 4 S The Court views the fiscal horizon as changing for the district. 
at < The Legislature has adopted a new educational funding package 
a 3 o Fa which appears to result in a substantial gain for the KCMSD in 
S S - terms of a net increase in state non-desegregation funding. The 


Court has further noted that there has been some activity in the 
Legislature towards allowing the KCMSD some viable alterna- 
tives in financing its share of the desegregation expense. More- 
over, the Legislature, anticipating the salary increase contem- 
plated herein, included an increase in this year’s budget item for 
salaries over last year’s, Moreover, the Court in April of this year 
adopted a two-year extension of the LRMP with certain minor 
modifications. The Court adopted what was most certainly a less 
expensive plan than that offered by the KCMSD. It is expected 
that this cost savings would be used to the benefit of the 
desegregation program in general and specifically there should 
be some added ability of the District to fund its share of the salary 
increases. The Court finds that the fiscal climate in the District 
is changing for the better and that there is a substantial need to 
address the inequalities in teachers’ salaries created in the past. 


The Court finds that the area of foremost importance is the re- 
turn to the teachers of lost step increases. As noted above, the 
Court believes that the best approach in this instance is to return 
the lost steps in year one (FY93-94). This will result in an inordi- 
nate increase in year one but in the long-run will be the least-cost 
approach. Therefore, the Court will order that the missed salary 
steps for current KCMSD teachers be restored in FY93-94. 


(1992-93 DOD in 1993-94) 
Cost of Longevity Steps (1992-93 DOD in 1993-94) 


Lost Steps - No Longevity 
1992-93 DOD Implement in 1993-94 No Lost Steps - 


Lost Steps and Longevity 
1992-93 DOD Implement in 1993-94 Includes all 


No Longevity 


Annual Incremental Costs: 


Cost to Make Up Lost Steps (1992-93 DOD in 1993-94) 


Cost to Make Up Lost Steps and Grant Longevity 


— A-102 — 


The Court further finds that the teachers in the KCMSD have 
gone without a salary increase for long enough. It is essential to 
the success of the desegregation program that those persons 
charged with implementing the plan be the most qualified 
persons reasonably attainable. The Court has found that the 
KCMSD most assuredly competes in the national urban market. 
Therefore, it is appropriate for the Court to look to this market for 
guidance as to what the relevant teachers’ salary should be. The 
DOD schedule provides an accurate representation of what the 
national urban market will bear in terms of teachers’ salaries. 
The Court finds that the DOD schedule is the appropriate 
benchmark for the KCMSD to use in determining teachers’ 
salaries. While the Court does find that the AFT’s package would 
be of the greatest advantage to those represented, it is still not 
viable for the Court to implement at this time. However, as 
repeatedly announced herein, the Court does find that some 
increase is appropriate. 


KCMSD Plan 


The KCMSD has proposed for 1993-94 to set teachers salaries 
by reference to a teacher salary schedule prepared by the DOD 
for 1991-92. This would result in an approximately four percent 
increase in entry-level pay for KCMSD teachers with abachelor’s 
or a master’s degree. All eligible teachers would again receive 
regular annual step increases. The KCMSD recognizes that its 
proposal is not designed to allow the KCMSD to immediately be 
competitive in the national urban market. Rather, the plan 
offered by the District calls for the District to be “roughly 
competitive”. The Court expects that the District will one day be 
more than “roughly competitive”, however, at this date the 
District has offered the most fiscally sound alternative. There- 
fore, the Court will adopt the District’s proposal with the 
addition of the step increases as discussed above. The package 
offered by the District and approved by the Court is as follows: 


ESTIMATED COST PROJECTIONS* 


KCMSD SALARY PACKAGE 


1993-94 TO 1995-96 
(without step increases restored) 


1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 


Allocated Proposed Proposed Proposed 


Current Amount 


— A-103 — 


E & 
g 2 
ss 
5 &F 
ec ae 
o Ff 
> aH 
eo 
2 x 
“" = 
- oA) 
S 8 
> = 
g 8 
5 
_ a 


Maintain proposed teacher salary 
for teachers currently budgeted 
Maintain proposed salaries and work year 
of other employees 
Provide proposed salary increases for 


2,260,665 


1,671,709 


317 


l, 


564,715 


additional employees 


=8598 8 
ELE 
a? 
$82g8 : 
tae 
R582 3 
TELE 
8 38 

2859 a §2 
cadae di 
oe i 

5 > 

¢ 8 
i, if 
2 hs - 
oe)06|OUeS 
ze 28 
He rE 
8 B3 
sitet 
TEL 
$233 E 5 


— A-104 — 


The Court will further order that the District’s proposal for a 
2% per year increase for administrators and non-represented 
employees, as well as for classified employees (other than those 
listed below) be adopted for FY93-94 through FY95-96. Next 
the Court is asked to consider the “group exit” program. The 
program offered by the District is of the type which the Court 
would generally support. The Court will approve the KCMSD’s 
proposal to develop a “group exit” program but will reserve 
approval of any specific program until the District brings forth 
the completed version of any such program. 


AFT Proposal for SEIU Local 12 Bargaining Unit 


The Court will next address the AFT’s motion for desegrega- 
tion funding for operating, warehouse, maintenance, mailroom, 
and food service employee wage increases in FY93-94 through 
FY95-96. The evidence presented at trial reaffirmed the position 
that the support personnel of the district are critical to the 
successful implementation of the desegregation program. The 
AFT has put forth a proposal as follows: 


1994-95 and 1995-96 


1993-94 


4% Annual Increases 


4% Wage Increase 


+ Step Increase 


Operating Dept. 


+ Step Increases 
4% Annual Increases 


10% Wage Increase + 


Maintenance Dept. 


Equity Adjustments for Truck 


Driver and Warehouseperson 
Wage Increases Based on 


— A-105 — 


4% Annual Increases 


Warehouse Dept. 


Those Given Identical Job 


Titles in Maint. Dept 


4% Annual Increases 


Wage Increases Based on 


Mailroom Dept. 


Those Given Same/Similar Job 


Titles in Maint. Dept. 
6% Wage Increase + 


4% Annual Increases 
+ Step Increases 


Elementary School Manager 
Equity Adjustment 
+ Step Increases 


Food Services 


— A-106 — 


The Court has carefully considered the AFT’s proposal with 
respect to the employees listed above. The District has proposed 
a 4% annual salary increase for maintenance workers without 
annual step increases through FY95-96. While the Court has 
consistently found that the support personnel form an integral 
component of the desegregation program, the Court is not 
convinced that the increases sought by the AFT or the District are 
sufficiently well supported to allow for such a large increase at 
this time. The Court finds, however, that some increase is 
appropriate. The Court finds that the appropriate amount of 
increase in the wage rate for these departments is 2.5% for each 
of the periods listed above, for a total of 7.5%. The Court will not 
direct that the District implement the step increases as urged by 
the AFT. Rather, the Court finds that this matter is better left to 
the bargaining between the parties. 


The Court finds that it is important for the KCMSD to be able 
to continue to contribute to the salary expense incurred due to the 
desegregation program. Therefore, the Court will order that the 
KCMSD is authorized to maintain its property tax levy at a rate 
of $4.96 per $100 assessed valuation for the 1993-94, 1994-95, 
and 1995-96 school years. The funding for the salary package 
announced herein will be 50%/50% with joint and several 
liability between the State and the KCMSD. 


State’s Additional Motions 


The State has filed a motion to strike the plaintiffs’ post- 
hearing brief or in the alternative has requested leave to file a 
reply to plaintiffs’ memorandum. The Court does not condone 
haphazard disregard for the time limits which are imposed by the 
Court, usually after protracted negotiation between the parties. 
Additionally, the Court notes to plaintiffs that a discussion with 
the judge’s law clerk is in no way seeking leave of the Court to 
file a pleading out of time. The Court agrees that in the further 
pursuit of an equitable resolution of the matters herein it is 


— A-107 — 


appropriate to have the position of the plaintiff schoolchildren 
before the Court. The position taken is of surprise to no one. The 
Court finds that no party is prejudiced by the filing out of time of 
plaintiffs’ memorandum. However, in the interest of fairness the 
Court will grant the State’s motion for leave to file a reply. The 
Court has considered each of the pleadings in making the 
decision announced herein. 

Next, the State has moved the Court for an Order establishing 
an express right of contribution in the State. The Court has 
reviewed the briefs of the parties on this issue and finds them to 
be exemplary. It has come to the Court’s attention that there may 
be further evidence adduced at the forthcoming hearing on this 
issue. Thus, the Court finds that it is appropriate to defer ruling 
on the issue of the State’s right to contribution. The Court 
specifically finds that the issue for contribution with respect to 
the matters decided herein will be deferred pending the trial on 
the Milliken 11] issues on July 7, 1993. 


In summary, the Court has found that the salary package 
presented by the District is the most economically feasible at this 
time. There, is no basis for the Court to change its previous 
rulings on the issues presented herein. It is the Court’s intention 
that the lost-steps be recompensed in FY93-94. The Court will 
defer ruling on the State’s motion for contribution but expressly 
reserves any ruling on the issue of contribution for the salary 
package adopted herein. 


Accordingly, it is hereby 


ORDERED that the KCMSD’s salary proposal for 1993-94, 
1994-95, and 1995-96 is approved as follows: 


Current 


1995-96 


1993-94 1994-95 
Allocated Proposed Proposed Proposed 


Amount 


35,016,077 41,621,333 48,218,767 55,108,579 


Maintain proposed teacher salary 
for teachers currently budgeted 


| 
> 


Maintain proposed salaries and work year 


15,743,754 19,154,177 22,782,827 


12,209,812 


of other employees 


Provide proposed salary increases for 


_ 

i) 

oo 
| 


1,671,709 2,260,665 
277,686 


621,130 
568,911 


1,027,317 


564,715 


additional employees 


286,017 


269,598 


261,746 
621,130 


568,911 


Maintain inservice days for new teachers 


621,130 
568,911 


621,130 


568,911 


__500,000 _ 500.000 _ 500.000 __500,000 


49,742,391 60,352,043 71,012,380 82,128,129 


Maintain substitute rate at $75 per day 


Maintain extra-curricular pay rates 


Reserve 


TOTAL 


— A-109 — 


and it is further 


ORDERED that the foregone salary step increases are ordered 
restored for FY93-94; and it is further 


ORDERED that the Court approves funding for 2% annual 
wage increases in FY93-94 through FY95-96 for administrators 
and other non-represented employees as well as for classified 
personnel (other than those discussed herein); and it is further 


ORDERED that the Court approves a 2.5% annual wage 
increase for each of those persons represented by the AFT’S 
motion for operating, warehouse, maintenance, mailroom, and 
food service departments for FY93-94, FY94-95, and FY95-96 
for a total of 7.5%; and it is further 


ORDERED that the District’s request to develop a “group 
exit” program is granted; and it is further 

ORDERED that the State’s motion to strike plaintiffs’ post- 
trial memorandum is denied; and it is further 


ORDERED that the State’s motion for leave to file a reply to 
plaintiffs’ memorandum is granted; and it is further 


ORDERED that the Court will defer ruling the State’s motion 
for an order establishing an express right of contribution until 
after the July 7, 1993 hearing on Milliken II issues. 


/s/ Russell G. Clark 
RUSSELL G. CLARK, 
SENIOR JUDGE 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT COURT 


Date: June 30, 1993 


— A-110— 


APPENDIX H 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
WESTERN DIVISION 


No. 77-0420-CV-W-4 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


STATE OF MISSOURI, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
[Filed: July 30, 1993] 


The Court has pending before it several motions regarding the 
desegregation programs in the KCMSD. The first matter is the 
joint motion of the KCMSD and plaintiffs for approval of next 
two years of Milliken II desegregation plan. Also before the 
Court is the motion of the KCMSD for approval of final FY92 
costs for temporary relocation of students and programs (“Stag- 
ing’’). Lastly, the KCMSD has filed a motion to alter or amend 
the Court’s Order of June 30, 1993 (“Salary Order”’). 


The AFT has responded to the KCMSD’s motion to alter or 
amend the Salary Order. Additionally, the State has responded to 
the motion as well. The Court has previously indicated to the 
parties through informal communications that it intended to 
issue an order clarifying the Salary Order and will do so in 
response to the KCMSD’s motion to alter or amend. The Court 
will grant the KCMSD’s motion in part and deny it in part. 


With respect to the motion for approval of final FY92 staging 
costs, the parties have informally made known to the Court that 
there was no opposition to the District’s motion. A response has 


— A-111— 


not been filed by any party. The Court having duly considered 
the merits of the KCMSD’s motion for final FY92 staging costs 
will grant the KCMSD’s motion as proposed. 


The State has responded to the joint motion with respect to the 
Milliken II component of the desegregation program. A joint 
stipulation was filed in this matter resolving many of the compo- 
nents of the Milliken IT program. r July 7, 1993, the Court held 
a hearing on the remaining disputed items in the joint proposal. 
Upon consideration of the evidence presented at the hearing and 
the arguments made by the parties in pleadings previously 
submitted, the Court will grant the joint motion in part and deny 
it in part in accordance with the following discussion. 

MILLIKEN I 


The remaining Milliken 1] components for which the State has 
alleged factual disputes are (1) inclusion of additional special 
education teachers in the Base Budgets; (2) use of the 1986-87 
level for determination of the appropriate level of maintenance 
spending; (3) enhancements to the security program currently in 
effect; (4) extension of the Effective Schools program; (5) 
inclusion of the Full-Day Kindergarten program without offset 
for monies received as a result of $.B. 380. The State further 
argues that the Court should reject the joint motion in toto 
because the KCMSD has attained the sufficient levels of deseg- 
regation called for under Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S.Ct. 1430 
(1992). Based on this argument the State urges the Court to deny 
any additional funding of any of the Milliken II components 
requested in the joint motion. Lastly, the State again calls for an 
order of the Court expressly establishing a right of contribution 
in the State for monies expended under the previous orders of the 
Court allowing for joint and several liability for desegregation 
expenses in the KCMSD. 


The Court will first address the State’s argument that the 
desegregation programs called for under the Milliken I] compo- 


— A-112— 


nent have reached the necessary level of compliance with the 
desegregation decree in this case. The State offers the findings of 
the United States Supreme Court in Freeman v. Pitts, 112 S.Ct. 
1430 (1992) in support of its arguments. In Pitts the Court held 
that where a district court’s desegregation order has been sub- 
stantively complied with in certain areas the court may withdraw 
desegregation supervision of those areas even though the pro- 
gram has not been fulfilled in its entirety. The Court has heard 
evidence presented by the State in several recent hearings 
offered to show that the desegregation program in the KCMSD 
has been a complete failure. In the LRMP renewal hearing held 
early in this year the State repeatedly argued that the District has 
failed to show sufficient signs of improvement as a result of the 
magnet program to justify continuation of that program. The 
State has repeatedly taken the position that the desegregation 
programs ordered by the Court have been of absolutely no 
benefit to the school children of the KCMSD. 


It appears now that the State is arguing that all is cured. The 
State, as it has in the previous Milliken II hearings, has argued 
that the programs covered under this component have attained 
the necessary levels of desegregative effect and should therefore 
be turned over to the KCMSD for continued implementation. 
The Court has previously ruled as a result of the LRMP renewal 
process that the KCMSD has not met the goals and standards set 
by the Court in establishing the desegregation remedy. The 
Milliken II component is an integral part of the overall desegre- 
gation remedy and the Court finds chat the State’s arguments that 
these components have attained unitary status are unpersuasive. 
The State should not be heard to complain that the desegregation 
plan is a complete failure on the one hand and that the Milliken 
1] components are completely successful on the other. The Court 
finds that the State has made fundamentally flawed arguments in 
pursuit of an order determining unitary status in the KCMSD. 
The Court does find that the Milliken I] components have been 
partially successful in implementing the goals and standards of 


= ae a 


— A-113— 


the desegregation remedy. However, these components have not 
yet met these goals in their entirety. The Court finds that it would 
be wholly inappropriate to deem the KCMSD unitary or partially 
unitary at this time. Therefore, the Court will order the continued 
implementation and funding of the Milliken IT components for 
which the joint stipulation was entered for two years. 

The Court will next consider the individual programs with 
which factual issues have been raised regarding their further 
implementation as part of the Milliken II component of the 
desegregation remedy. The first issue is inclusion of additional 
special education teachers in the Base Budgets. The State op- 
poses the additional special education teachers on the basis that 
this expense is incurred as a result of an accounting mistake on 
the part of the District and the State argues that it should not be 
made to bear this burden. The Court finds that the teachers at 
issue herein are necessary to meet the special needs of some 
students who choose to attend magnet programs. The fact that 
these positions have been the subject of a previous accounting 
error is irrelevant to the future consideration of desegregation 
expenses as a result of the need to provide these services. The 
Court finds that these positions are legitimate desegregation 
expenses and their inclusion in the Base Budgets is appropriate. 
Therefore, the Court will approve the requested addition to the 
Base Budget component. 


Next, the Court will consider the use of the 1986-87 square 
footage level for determination of the appropriate level of 
maintenance spending. Mr. Robert Brogi, Deputy Superinten- 
dent, testified to the appropriate measurement of maintenance 
attributable to the desegregation program. In order to calculate 
this amount, Mr. Brogi compared the pre-remedy square footage 
to the post-remedy square footage and determined that the 
difference was the amount attributable to desegregation. He 
further testified that he believed that the maintenance in the 
KCMSD was getting better but there were some areas which 


— A-114— 


could use improvement. The Court has reviewed the mainte- 
nance component submitted as a part of the Milliken II program 
and finds that the Maintenance plan is an appropriate component 
to the overall desegregation remedy. It is imperative that the 
District be able to maintain the programs made available as a 
result of the desegregation remedy and the Court will do every- 
thing in its power to see that this goal is met. However, the 
concept of using the 1985-86 as the base year for attributing 
desegregation expenses presupposes that the KCMSD would 
never have incurred any growth in its physical plant over the time 
period contemplated. The Court does not have an exact method 
of determining the precise amount of square footage attributable 
to desegregation. However, it is the belief of the Court that the 
District should be responsible for some of the growth in the 
district and finds that the recommendation of the DMC to use 
August 1991 as the base year is the appropriate method for 
calculation. The Court will therefore order the extension of the 
maintenance component of the Milliken IT component as pro- 
posed by the District with the modification that the base year for 
comparison be August 1991. 


The Court will next consider the proposed enhancements to 
the security program offered by the District in the Milliken II 
proposal. Captain Livingston testified that the security of the 
KCMSD was a legitimate expense to be incurred by the deseg- 
regation program and that to fully implement the security plan it 
would need to be expanded as proposed. The Court concurs with 
Captain Livingston’ s assertion that the Security Component is a 
primary consideration in the implementation of the desegrega- 
tion remedy. Moreover, the Court finds that the security of the 
school children and the staff of the schools is of utmost impor- 
tance to the Court in fashioning the remedy in this case. 


The Court does wish to express its concern over the submis- 
sion of expenses for security as desegregation related expenses 
when there is no such relationship. These allegations were made 


— A-115— 


during the hearing, but not fully substantiated. The Court would 
suggest to the district that it use all due diligence in tracking such 
expenses and ensuring that there is no opportunity for misapply- 
ing already scarce resources. The Court will not look favorably 
on a return of such claims. The Court does not believe that it is 
imperative to have the additional officers as requested by the 
reorganization of the security department. While it is the Court’s 
opinion that there is no question that the additional personnel 
would heighten security the Court does not believe that the 
changes, as proposed, are fiscally sound. Therefore, the Court 
will deny the request for additional staffing. 


It is appropriate at this point for the Court to note that the City 
has a vested interest in the school system being rebuilt. The Court 
has gone to great lengths to provide the KCMSD with facilities 
and opportunities not available anywhere else in the country. 
The City must take some responsibility in maintaining these 
schools. The City receives the benefit of the attractiveness and 
acclaim of these schools. However, it appears to the Court that 
the City has shirked its responsibility in maintaining the school 
system being provided to it. It is entirely appropriate for the 
Police Department of Kansas City, Missouri to supply security 
to schools that are in need. The police in Kansas City have the 
responsibility of protecting its citizens and the many thousands 
of school children are just as deserving as any other citizen. The 
Court urges the District to approach the City and attempt to 
coordinate some provision of security by the police department 
whether it be in the form of sub-stations or some other alterna- 
tive. It is incumbent on the City to be responsible for ail of its 
citizens. 

The Security proposal included the request for additional 
vehicles. Captain Livingston testified that should the request for 
additional personnel be denied that there would be no need for 
additional vehicles. The Court, having found that the additional 
personnel will not be provided, further finds that the request for 


— A-116— 


additional vehicles will also be denied. The KCMSD has pro- 
posed the addition of walk-thru metal detectors for purposes of 
security. The Court finds that the climate of activity in the 
KCMSD is such that this is a reasonable expense. The Court will 
therefore grant the request for walk-thru metal detectors. The 
Court will extend the Security component of the Milliken II 
program for a concurrent two-year time period with the other 
components but the Court will deny the requested additions to 
the Security component with the exception of the walk-thru 
metal detectors. 


The Court will next consider the proposed extension of the 
Effective Schools program. The State has taken the position that 
the District failed to present any evidence for evaluation of the 
Effective Schools program and that the motion for extension of 
that component should therefore be denied. The District and 
plaintiffs argue that there exists no evidence of success or failure 
as the data has not been available for evaluation. The data will be 
available at the end of the 1993-94 school year to measure the 
impact of the Effective Schools program. The plaintiffs further 
argue that the Court, in its previous order, adopted the Effective 
Schools program for two years but funded it for only one. The 
plaintiffs argue that it was implicit in the Court’s previous order 
that it would extend funding for the second year even though it 
would be impossible to evaluate the program as the data would 
not yet be available. The Court finds that the Effective Schools 
program should be extended for one additional year per its 
previous order. The District is directed to continue to collect data 
to evaluate the impact of the Effective Schools program. The 
Court, in considering the appropriateness of a further extension 
of the Effective Schools program at the end of FY93-94, will 
expect that the District be able to submit a detailed analysis of the 
impact of this program for the Court’s review at that time. The 
Court will therefore grant the District’s motion for extension of 
the Effective Schools component and appropriate funding for 
FY93-94. 


ans Ap 197 <2 


The Court will next consider whether the inclusion of the Full- 
Day Kindergarten program without offset for monies received as 
a result of S.B. 380 is an appropriate component of the Milliken 
II program. The Court has previously found that the Full-Day 
Kindergarten was a benefit to the desegregation effort in the 
KCMSD andan essential part of the remedy. The Court finds that 
the evidence presented at the hearing on this issue did nothing to 
change the Court’s perception of this program. It is fundamental 
that the school children of the KCMSD be given every advantage 
at the earliest possible age and this program addresses that need. 
The State argues that the District is receiving a windfall because 
Full-Day Kindergarten is a qualifying requirement for certain 
monies under the new school foundation formula known as S.B. 
380. The Court finds that the fact that the district receives 
additional resources from the State’s formula because a portion 
of the formula recognizes the benefits of the Full-Day Kinder- 
garten program is of no consequence when determining whether 
to include that program as part of the remedy. The Court has 
found that the State is a constitutional violator and is required to 
fund the remedy as ordered by the Court. The fact that the District 
is going to receive additional revenues under the new founda- 
tional formula is irrelevant to the consideration of obligations 
due the plaintiff school children as a result of the constitutional 
violations of the State. The Court will not allow the offset of Full- 
Day Kindergarten monies by any additional amount received 
under S.B. 380. The Court will grant the joint motion with 
respect to the Full-Day Kindergarten component as proposed. 

SALARY ORDER 


With respect to the KCMSD’s motion to alter or amend the 


Salary Order the Court has previously indicated its inclinationto 


issue an order clarifying its original opinion. The Court has fully 
considered the arguments presented by the parties and finds that 
there exist two major issues to be addressed. First, is the issue of 
whether there is to be an actual cash outlay to current teachers in 


— A-118 — 


compensation for lost steps. It was the original intention of the 
Court to put the teachers in FY93-94 on the step where they 
would have been had there been consistent step increases in the 
past. The Court by its June 30, 1993 Order did not intend to have 
the District make a cash outlay to the teachers for foregone step 
increases. However, the teachers currently in the district will 
receive the prospective benefit of lost step increases by being 
placed on the higher steps for which they are eligible. 


The next issue addressed by the KCMSD’s motion to alter or 
amend the Salary Order is in the area of step increases for 
administrators. In its Order of June 30, 1993 the Court intended 
to restore lost step increases only to teachers. The Court granted 
a two percent pay increase to the administrators and it was the 
intention of the Court that such pay increase be a flat rate 
increase. As a matter of illustration, an administrator who made 
$100 in FY92-93 would receive $102 in FY93-94 and a similar 
two percent increase in each of the other years covered by the 
Salary Order. The Court did not intend to adopt the salary 
proposal of the District which allowed for step increases for 
administrators. It was the sole intention of the Court that the 
administrators receive a two percent flat rate increase. 


The Court, by this Order, does not intend to disparage the 
administrators and other non-represented personnel of the 
KCMSD and finds specifically that the proper administration of 
the district is imperative to the continued success of the deseg- 
regation program. However, as a matter of fiscal conservatism in 
the face of the budget constraints faced by the District the Court 
finds that it is appropriate only to allow for a small increase in 
compensation at this time. The Court believes that the District 
may have opportunity to provide further increases through the 
operating budget for administration but further finds that a 
sufficient level of support is currently provided through deseg- 
regation funding. 


: 
) 
; 
: 
: 
| 


— A-119— 


The KCMSD next queries whether it was the Court’s intent to 
disallow the equity adjustments previously provided by the 
Court in its Order of June 25, 1992. The Court finds that this 
equity adjustment for administrative and non-represented per- 
sonnel was previously approved by the Court but not fully 
implemented by the District. While this adjustment would result 
in an initial increase of over two percent in FY93-94 it is the 
intention of the Court that this equity adjustment be allowed. The 
Court having previously allowed such an adjustment is not 
inclined to subsequently disallow it. The Court considered the 
flat rate two percent per year incremental adjustment ordered on 
June 30, 1993 to be made in addition to the equity adjustments 
approved in the June 25, 1992 Salary Order. Therefore, the Court 
will disallow the step increases for those persons contemplated 
by the District’s motion but the Court will again approve the 
equity adjustments allowed in the June 25, 1992 Salary Order. 


The last issue for consideration by the Court is the State’s 
motion for an order expressly establishing aright of contribution 
both retroactively and prospectively. The matter was originally 
brought before the Court as a part of the Salary dispute previ- 
ously resolved by the Court’s Order of June 30, 1993. The Court 
is currently in the process of evaluating the submissions of the 
parties on this issue and expects that a ruling will issue in the near 
future. However, as of this date, the Court will not announce its 
findings as to the contribution issue. The Court will defer ruling 
on this issue at this time. 

Accordingly, it is hereby 


ORDERED that the KCMSD’s motion for approval of final 
FY92 staging costs is approved; and it is further 


ORDERED that the KCMSD’s motion to alter or amend the 
Court’s June 30, 1993 Salary Order is granted in part and denied 
in part; and it is further 


— A-120— 


ORDERED that the step increases for administrators and 
other non-represented personnel contemplated by the KCMSD’s 
motion to alter or amend the Salary Order of June 30, 1993 are 
not allowed by the Court; and it is further 


ORDERED that the equity adjustments previously ordered by 
the Court in its June 25, 1992 Salary Order are again approved 
for inclusion in the Salary Order of June 30, 1993 as amended 
herein and that the administrators and other non-represented 
personnel are to receive a flat two percent per year increase in 
compensation; and it is further 

ORDERED that the joint motion for approval of Milliken II 
funding is granted in part and denied in part; and it is further 

ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to those items 
subject to the joint stipulation is granted; and it is further 

ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to the adjust- 


ment for special education teachers in the Base Budget compo- 
nent is granted; and it is further 


ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to the mainte- 
nance component is granted except that the District is directed to 
use August 1991 as the baseline for calculation of desegregation 
related maintenance expenses; and it is further 


ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to the security 
component is granted in that the current budget is ordered 
extended but the Court denies the motion for additional person- 
nel or equipment except the Court will allow the expenditure of 
desegregation funds for walk-thru metal detectors as proposed; 
and it is further 

ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to the Effective 
Schools is granted and funding is approved for FY93-94 and the 
District is directed to submit to the Court a complete evaluation 
of the program in the event the District returns to the Court for 
renewal of funding; and it is further 


— A-121— 


ORDERED that the joint motion with respect to Full-Day 
Kindergarten is granted and the State’s request for offset of S.B. 
380 monies is denied; and it is further 


ORDERED that the Court approves the budgets as submitted 
except as modified herein with joint and several liability; and it 
is further 

ORDERED that the District shall use the AAA minimum 
standard; and it is further 

ORDERED that the motion of the State for an order expressly 
establishing a right of contribution is deferred pending further 
analysis by the Court. 


/s/ Russell G. Clark 
RUSSELL G. CLARK, 
SENIOR JUDGE 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT COURT 


Date: July 30, 1993 


—_—<. 


APPENDIX I 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
WESTERN DIVISION 


No. 77-0420-CV-W-4 


KALIMA JENKINS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


STATE OF MISSOURI, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
(Filed: April 16, 1993] 


This matter comes before the Court on the Kansas City 
Missouri School District (“KCMSD”) and Plaintiffs’ Joint Mo- 
tion for Approval of the Long Range Magnet Renewal Plan 
(“LRMRP”) and also, Plaintiffs’ Proposed Additions to the 
LRMRP. The State of Missouri (“State”) has responded as well 
as the American Federation of Teachers Local 691 (“AFT”). 
This matter was the subject of extensive briefing before this 
Court. A hearing was held in two parts and the Court received 
evidence concerning the LRMRP. Additionally, the Court re- 
ceived substantial post-trial briefing from the parties. Based on 
the arguments presented by the parties in the above referenced 
pleadings and on the evidence presented during the approxi- 
mately three weeks of hearings the Court will grant the KCMSD 
and Plaintiffs’ motions in part and deny them in part as set out 
below. 


The Court will first note that the District has been adjudged a 
constitutional violator in the action before this Court. It is 
somewhat ironic the posture that this case has taken over the 
many years it has been ongoing. The District, a constitutional 
violator, is now before this Court on joint motion with the 


— A-123 — 


plaintiff school children requesting that the Court extend for ten 
years a magnet program with an estimated budget, in 1992 
dollars, totalling well over $500 million. The State, also a 
constitutional violator, has historically opposed the implemen- 
tation of any program offered to desegregate the KCMSD. The 
Court recognizes that the State has had to bear the brunt of the 
costs of desegregation due to the joint and several liability 
finding previously made by the Court. However, the State has 
never Offered the Court a viable, even tenable, alternative and 
has been extremely antagonistic in its approach to effecting the 
desegregation of the KCMSD. 


The Court must consider the history of this case before it can 
pass on the ten-year extension proposed by the District. More 
importantly, a ten-year extension of the Magnet Program re- 
quires that the Court carefully evaluate both its perceptions and 
those of the parties of what the future of this case will bring. The 
Court recognizes that there has been substantial activity in the 
Missouri Legislature which could impact significantly on the 
ongoing administration of the KCMSD desegregation program. 
Additionally, there are other components of the desegregation 
program already implemented by the Court which must be 
considered before the Court may pass on a ten-year extension of 
the Magnet Program component. The Magnet Program does not 
operate in a vacuum, therefore, any proposed extension should 
not be considered without full weight being given to the other 
aspects of the KCMSD desegregation plan. 


A point of much concern to the Court, yet barely addressed by 
either the District or the plaintiffs, is how the KCMSD proposes 
to ultimately fund the school system developed under the deseg- 
regation plan. The Court finds it greatly satisfying that the 
District is willing to plan and assume its desegregation obliga- 
tion over the next ten years. It is without question a necessity to 
make sufficient plans to provide for a stable school system and 
to make it even more attractive to non-minority suburban and 


— A-124— 


private school children and their parents. However, a glaring 
omission is a plan by which the District proposes to fund this 
wonderful school system being built. 


Statement of the Case 


In the Joint Pretrial Order the parties listed their different 
views of the issues to be presented to the Court in the LRMRP 
Hearing. The Court finds it is appropriate to set out each of the 
parties understandings as it is necessary to the ultimate resolu- 
tion of these issues. 


The Kansas City. Missouri School District 


On September 1, 1992, the KCMSD, together with the Jenkins 
plaintiffs filed with this Court a Joint Motion for approval of the 
LRMRP. The LRMRP provides for the continuation and funding 
of existing magnet programs on a modified basis over the next 
ten years. Additionally, the LRMRP provides for the implemen- 
tation of certain new magnet programs, notably at the remaining 
traditional elementary schools as necessary to address an accel- 
erating trend of racial isolation in those schools. The LRMRP 
includes a ten-year budget (stated in 1992 dollars), to be funded 
by the State of Missouri and the KCMSD on a joint-and-several 
basis. The LRMRP is designed to enhance the KCMSD’s ability 
to attract to its schools new students, both minority and non- 
minority, and thereby present the most reasonable prospect of 
continuing desegregative progress in Kansas City’s schools. 
(Joint Pretrial Order at 1-2). 

Plaintiffs 

In addition to their role in working with the District to develop 
and submit to the Court the LRMRP, on November 13, 1992, 
plaintiffs separately filed with the Court a motion for an order 
approving certain additions and other changes to the proposed 
Renewal Plan. Plaintiffs thus seek approval by the Court of the 
LRMRP as modified by their subsequent proposal in 25 speci- 


— A-125 — 


fied respects. While the KCMSD agrees that most if not all of 
plaintiffs’ proposed modifications would enhance (to greater or 
lesser extent) the Renewal Plan, the District does not in most 
instances view them as absolutely to the future success 
yr , necessary 


The AFT 


The AFT generally supports the LRMRP with certain modi- 
fications. The AFT did not take an active role in the hearing 
except to the extent that it elicited testimony regarding the 
possible effects of any changes in the LRMRP on the ultimate 
ability of teachers to perform their responsibilities. 


The State of Missouri 


On November 13, 1992, the State submitted to the Court a 
memorandum in opposition to plaintiffs’ and the KCMSD’s 
Joint Motion for approval of the LRMRP. Characterizing the 
original (and current) Long Range Magnet Plan as a failure, the 
State requested that this Court reject the ten-year Renewal Plan 
and order only a one-year extension of the existing magnet 
programs at current budgetary levels. Moreover, the State pro- 
posed that there occur an additional analysis during the one-year 
extension of the status of the magnet program as a desegregation 
remedy in this litigation; such analysis would identify whatever 
particular magnet programs or schools should be preserved from 
termination after the conclusion of the one-year extension. 
Furthermore, the State requested a Court order that the KCMSD 
(beginning in 1994-95 and for a total of at least three school 
years) turn over to the Missouri Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education three District elementary schools forimple- 
mentation of an Outcome-Based Education pilot program. The 
State also proposed that, if the ten-year extension and expansion 
of the magnet plan is approved, the Court remove control of the 
operation of the KCMSD from the current Board and Adminis- 
tration. (Joint Pretrial Order at 3). 


— A-126 — 


Contested Issues of Fact and Law 


The parties were unable to agree on the contested issues of fact 
and law and submitted their own separate statements on what 
each thought the appropriate issues were. The District submitted 
the following issues. First, whether the magnet programs have 
contributed to improving the educational lot of the victims of 
unconstitutional segregation and whether approval of the LRMRP 
would likely result in additional educational progress. See, 
Jenkins v. Missouri, 855 F.2d 1295, 1302 (8th Cir. 1988), cert. 
denied in relevant part, 490 U.S. 1034 (1989). 


The second issue was whether implementation of the magnet 
plan has contributed toward the Court’s goal of regaining those 
students who earlier participated in white flight and retaining 
those who stayed in the KCMSD, and whether the LRMRP 
would result in the attraction and retention of additional non- 
minority students. Next was whether the magnet programs have 
redistributed the students within the KCMSD for maximum 
desegregation and whether the LRMRP would result in the 
stabilization and further enhancement of desegregative gains. 


The fourth issue raised by the District was whether the 
proposed LRMRP developed by the KCMSD and plaintiffs was 
appropriately based upon a careful analysis of the plan’s impact 
upon other components of the desegregation plan, and is geared 
toward (a) maximizing the future achievement of desegregation 
with a minimum amount of resources; (b) providing long-term 
stability, including in terms of future financing; and (c) incorpo- 
rating a carefully designed marketing program based upon 
clearly defined themes. Next, was whether the proposed staffing, 
non-salary resources, and related capital projects proposed in the 
LRMRP are necessary to the success of the programs and general 
curriculum at the magnet schools; and whether the staffing 
concems raised by plaintiffs in their supplemental proposal are 
necessary to the success of the magnet programs. See, Liddell v. 
Board of Education, 967 F.2d 1241, 1245 (8th Cir. 1992). 


— A-127 — 


The last issue raised by the District was whether approval by 
the Court of (1) the LRMRP, or (2) the one-year extension 
proposed by the State, including the takeover of three elementary 
schools for implementation of an OBE program with the express 
understanding that the magnet program would be partially or 
completely dismantled over time — would better promote de- 
segregation as envisioned by this Court throughout its monitor- 
ing of the present litigation. 

The plaintiffs raised the issue of whether the 25 separate 
proposed additions were appropriately considered as a necessary 
part of any LRMRP to promote and sustain the desegregation of 
the KCMSD. Plaintiffs’ next issue was whether their proposed 
additions were necessary to promote and achieve academic 
success in the KCMSD. Lastly, the plaintiffs raised the issue of 
whether it is necessary and appropriate to implement a ten-year 
LRMRP. 


The State raised a series of issues as to the previous effective- 
ness of the magnet programs in general and specifically as to any 
future implementation. The State first asked whether the current 
magnet program has had sufficient desegregation or academic 
achievement success to warrant a continuation or expansion of 
new, untested themes in the KCMSD. The State next presented 
the issue of whether the KCMSD under a new magnet program 
could attract sufficient additional non-minority students to attain 
a district-wide or school-by-school ratio of 60% minority 40% 
non-minority or whether the new magnet program could ever 
provide academic achievement to a level constitutionally re- 
quired to enable the KCMSD to attain unitary status. The State 
raised the further issue of whether magnetizing all of the cur- 
rently “traditional” elementary schools was necessary to meet 
the goals stated above. 


The next area of interest to the State was appropriately 
finance. The State raised the issue of whether a long-term 
financing program has been developed by the District to (1) fund 


— A-128 — 


the District’s share of the desegregation remedy beyond the 
current year and (2) provide a funding mechanism by which the 
District will continue the magnet programs after State funding is 
no longer required. The issue of whether the capital resources 
proposed for the first year of the LRMRP were justified was also 
raised. 

The State raised the further issue of whether a one-year 
interim continuation of the present magnet school program 
would be appropriate to allow for additional study and evalua- 
tion of the magnet program. Also offered was whether the 
Outcome Based Education model in three of the schools might 
provide a better basis for education in the KCMSD. Addition- 
ally, the State raised the issue of whether the possibility of a 
Voluntary Interdistrict Transfer program might allow for imple- 
mentation of a less costly magnet program. 


Lastly, the State brought forward the issue of whether the 
study of demographic trends within the KCMSD and surround- 
ing census areas and the public opinion survey of resident 
parents of the school districts surrounding the KCMSD, both of 
which were conducted by State experts and which (as argued by 
the State) limited additional attractiveness to non-minorities and 
virtually no potential to reach 60/40, provide a basis upon which 
the Court should deny the extension and expansion of the magnet 
plan and justify a one-year evaluation period. Moreover, the 
State was concerned with whether the proposal for neighbor- 
hood schools warranted additional time and consideration. 


With this background of the posturing of the case in mind, the 
Court will proceed to address the contentions it believes are 
necessary to the resolution of the main issue before the Court: 
whether the Court should order the ten-year extension and 
expansion of the magnet programs and hold the State financially 
accountable for the LRMRP throughout the entire period. 


— A-129 — 


FINDINGS OF FACT 


After due consideration of the evidence presented by the 
parties at both parts of the hearing on this matter, the Court makes 
the following findings of fact: 


1. Since 1986 the KCMSD magnet school plan has made 
substantial progress toward desegregating the schools of Kansas 
City. It has eliminated all fifteen elementary schools that had 
suffered the most intense racial isolation and it has substantially 
improved the elementary school exposure index. 


2. While several secondary magnet schools have not been 
in operation for more than a few years, some progress has been 
made in integrating those schools. Several middle and high 
schools have achieved high levels of integration, including King 
Middle School of the Arts, Lincoln Prep and Paseo Academy. 
Other secondary schools have programs that should, in the 
future, increase desegregative success. 


3. The KCMSD magnet school program has had some 
impact upon residential choices of Kansas Citians. There is 
evidence that because of the magnet schools some parents of 
white students who would earlier have moved out of the KCMSD 
have stayed and enrolled their children in the magnet schools. 


4. There remains a substantial pool of non-minority stu- 
dents, especially in surrounding Missouri school districts, who 
are interested in attending and may be persuaded to attend the 
KCMSD magnet schools. 


5. Aten year extension would have a positive impact on the 
attractiveness of the KCMSD magnet school programs by offer- 
ing stability and continuity to prospective participants. Addi- 
tionally, a ten-year extension would undoubtedly be of benefit in 
attracting quality teachers and administrators to the magnet 
schools. 


—_e: 


6. The District has gone through an extensive evaluation 
and planning process in its preparation of the LRMRP. However, 
the District has provided the Court with a plan based solely on the 
theory that all of the schools in the KCMSD should be magne- 
tized. 


7. Theevidence supports the conclusion that there has been 
increased racial isolation in the traditional elementary schools 
since the implementation of the LRMP. Moreover, there exists 
some evidence which suggests that some students have re- 
sponded positively with respect to academic achievement within 
the magnet elementary schools. 

8. The evidence before the Court supports the conclusion 
that a substantial number of patrons of the KCMSD advocate the 
continuation of some form of traditional elementary school 
education. 

9. Extending the magnet program to include all of the 
currently traditional elementary schools would not, based on the 
current evidence, significantly impact the desegregative or 
achievement effort of the current magnet plan. Furthermore, 
based on the current sentiment testified to in the hearing, there is 
a significant population supporting traditional elementary school 
education and this population is very important to the ultimate 
success of the desegregation effort in the KCMSD. 

10. The Montessori programs presently in the elementary 
schools have been an extremely popular theme. There have been 
long waiting lists for this theme. The evidence sufficiently 
supports the addition of one more Montessori elementary school. 

11. The Outcome Based Education (OBE) program off 
by the State has several components which are educationally 
attractive. However, the OBE program is an educational delivery 
methodology which does not rise to the level necessary to build 
an entire theme for a magnet school. 


— A-131 — 


12. The OBE program offered by the State is not a credible 
alternative to the LRMP currently in effect. 


13. There is an astounding lack of evidence to support the 
State’s proposition that it should take over and operate three 
elementary schools within the KCMSD. The proposal by the 
State, through its purported experts, lacked sufficient specificity 
to be considered in any way credible. 


14. The LRMRP, as proposed, makes significant changes to 
the current structure of the administration in the KCMSD. The 
current fiscal climate and the requirements of effective delivery 
of services within the magnet school program do not necessitate 
the extreme reorganization contemplated by the LRMRP. 


15. TheLRMRP, while making some very important changes 
in magnet themes, is too extensive a change at this time to justify 
its implementation. 


16. There are certain theme changes that are supported by the 
evidence. 


17. The Court finds that the evidence presented by the 
District with respect to achievement data to be generally cred- 
ible. The Court finds that the evidence is clear that there has been 
a trend of improvement in academic achievement in the KCMSD. 
However, the Court is not satisfied that the District has reached 
anywhere close to its maximum potential because the District is 
still at or below national norms at many grade levels. Nor does 
the Court find that the data presented by the District is necessar- 
ily indicative of a clear trend of the magnet schools consistently 
outperforming the traditional schools. The Court finds that there 
is MO way to make a competent comparison at the higher grade 
levels as no traditional schools exist at these grades. The Court 
finds that the achievement data provided by the District is 
reliable but is not probative to the extent which the District used 
to make its sweeping conclusions as to academic success. 


— A-132 — 


Moreover, the Court finds that the studies conducted by the State 
are reliable but not to the extent necessary todraw the doomsayer’ s 
conclusions reached by the State with respect to the success of 
the magnet program. The Court finds that the achievement 
success of the magnet schools has been positive overall but is not 
truly reflected by the conclusions asserted by either party. 


18. The Court finds that the District, through the magnet 
program, has made positive steps towards reaching the desegre- 
gation goals of the Magnet Plan. This is evidenced by the 
testimony of the District’s expert, Dr. Gary Orfield, showing the 
exposure index to have made positive changes during the course 
of the LRMP. However, the Court finds that the District’s overall 
minority/non-minority ratio of 74%/26% does not comport with 
the requirements previously announced by this Court for the 
desegregation objective of the Magnet Plan. 


19. Neither the District nor the plaintiffs has offered a plan 
for financing the expanded magnet school program. The Court 
finds that it would be inappropriate to order such a long-term 
extension of the magnet program without a clear method of 
financing it other than relying on State funding through joint and 
several liability. 


20. In order to have a clear view of the future of the magnet 
school program, as well as the desegregation program generally, 
and in light of the changes of state leadership and the activity in 
the Missouri Legislature, it is necessary for the Court to have 
before it a viable plan by which the District will fund and operate 
the magnet schools of the KCMSD after Court ordered funding 
by the State is withdrawn. 


Extension of the LRMP 


The Court is faced, as usual, with diametrically different 
proposals provided by the parties in this litigation. The Court has 
previously found that the desegregation program which this 


— A-133 — 


Court has undertaken requires a magnet component in order to 
succeed in reaching the goals which have been repeatedly 
articulated by this Court. However, neither of the proposals put 
forth by the parties in the LRMRP hearing phase comport with 
the requirements of the magnet component as envisioned by the 
Court. Each of the parties have submitted concepts which should 
definitely be included in the magnet component. However, the 
Court is left with the undesirable prospect of formulating, on its 
own, the magnet component for the desegregation plan. 


In the past the Court has consistently allowed the District to 
indulge in speculation as to what benefits different magnet 
programs will have in the KCMSD. In short, the Court has 
allowed the District planners to dream. The Court then has 
provided the mechanism for these dreams to be realized. The 
Court has found that many aspects of the LRMP have been 
completely successful. The testimony of the students, parents, 
and teachers as to the rejuvenated physical plant of the KCMSD 
stands in sharp contrast to the testimony which precipitated the 
Court’s original formulation of the magnet school program. 
There is no doubt that the educational opportunities afforded in 
the magnet schools are better than that previously available. 
However, the LRMRP offered by the District and plaintiffs 
illustrates the District’s ability to dream. The Court finds that it 
is time that the District be subject to a very definite reality check. 
The plaintiffs have recognized that in several areas the District 
has sought to cut the current magnet programs to justify its 
extravagance in the LRMRP. However, the plaintiffs are just as 
guilty in that they too, have included extravagant expansion of 


the magnet component. 


In fashioning the magnet component to the desegregation 
remedy initially, the Court ordered the construction and imple- 
mentation of certain well-defined magnets. Many of these mag- 
net themes have been very successful in attracting and retaining 
non-minority students. The Paseo Academy has been successful 


— A-134— 


as exhibited by the waiting lists for admission. Additionally, the 
Montessori programs have been quite attractive at the elemen- 
tary school level. The Lincoln College Preparatory Program also 
has been successful in attracting non-minority students. More- 
over, each of the above listed programs have impacted the 
achievement of both minority and non-minority students in a 


very positive way. 


The parties agree, if but on only one thing, that some of the 
themes implemented in the LRMP have not been as successful 
as predicted when they were submitted to the Court. The District 
has not appropriately identified the magnets which are unsuc- 
cessful. Rather, the District has used the LRMRP as an opportu- 
nity to again reassign responsibilities and job descriptions. There 
has been a very significant introduction of new themes at the 
elementary school level and an adjustment to feeder patterns 
throughout the magnet program. The Court applauds the better 
definition of feeder patterns by the District but finds that such 
accomplishments may be made without magnetizing all of the 
elementary schools in the district. 


The Court sets the following guidelines for the District to use 
in the further implementation of the LRMP. The Court will first 
note that it is not adopting the extensive restructuring of the 
LRMRP. It is just as true that the Court is not adopting the one- 
year roll-over, for the purpose of finding the best way to 
dismantle the magnet program, as proposed by the State. What 
the Court is adopting is an extension of the magnet component 
of the desegregation program with certain specific additions and 
with the express understanding that the District may make 
modification to themes within the current structure and budget 
in order to eliminate ineffective themes and ensure that the 
magnet program meets the previously announced goals of deseg- 
regation and achievement. 


The Court has found that the Montessori elementary educa- 
tion program has been a highly successful magnet theme. There- 


— A-135 — 


fore, the Court will order that the District establish one additional 
Montessori magnet theme. The District shall use the new el- 
ementary school which is to come into the school system in the 
1993-94 school year for the new Montessori school. The Court 
will allow for the modification of this school’s budget to account 
for the implementation of the Montessori theme. The budget 
offered by the District for such an additional Montessori elemen- 
tary school under the LRMRP presupposed a change in person- 
nel and structure which the Court does not adopt. Rather, the 
District should use the current Montessori program budgets as 
the model for implementation of the new elementary school. 


The six “1986-87 Magnets” — i.e., Lincoln College Prep, the 
Southwest Cluster, and Swinney- Volker — have been respon- 
sible for differing degrees of success. Nonetheless, the Court 
finds that they should be extended through the period contem- 
plated by this order. These 1986-87 Magnets should be funded 
under the Magnet Plan as adopted by this order. However, the 
Court finds that the District shall continue to fund the schools 
represented as the 1986-87 Magnets at the same level as they 
currently exist with the exception of modifications made neces- 
sary at Lincoln College Prep as discussed below. The Court 
specifically finds that the changes to the budgets of those other 
1986-87 Magnets as proposed by the District in the Renewal 
Plan are not to be implemented. The Court finds that it is 
imperative to the continued success of programs such as Swinney- 
Volker that the budgets be maintained at the current levels. The 
District should be able to continue the operation at the current 
levels as the Court is in essence ordering the transfer of the 1986- 


87 Magnet funds to be, appropriately, a component of the LRMP 
budget approved herein. 

The Lincoln College Preparatory program has been a very 
successful program. The Court finds that the expansion of seats 


proposed by the District for this program to be an appropriate 
method of expanding the accessibility of this program. More- 


— 


—— 


— A-136— 


over, the Court finds that the conversion of the Middle School 
facility and the integration of this program with that of the high 
school at Lincoln College Prep would have a beneficial effect on 
the ability of the District to implement this highly successful 
theme. The Court will order that the District implement the 
changes necessary to transform the Lincoln South facility into 
the College Prep middle school facility. Again, the Court finds 
that the current budget allocated to those programs to be trans- 
formed should be adequate to fund the resulting middle/high 
school programs. However, should the District find that there 
exists a budgetary shortfall or windfall in this area, as a direct 
result of the conversion, the Court will entertain motions for 
adjustments as necessary. 


The Court has considered the LRMRP’s modification to the 
Foreign Language Immersion Program and finds that the pur- 
ported benefits do not justify the significant changes to the 
program. This is a result of the Court’s refusal to magnetize all 
of the elementary schools in the district. The LRMRP’s adjust- 
ments to the Foreign Language Program presupposes total 
magnetization. The Court has not agreed that the traditional 
schools should take on the themes as suggested in the LRMRP. 
Therefore, the theme changes in the Foreign Language Program 
are inappropriate. The Court does find that the District is correct 
in its assumption that the Full Immersion programs are success- 
ful. The demonstration made by the third-grade science class, in 
french, at trial was very impressive. As the Court has stated on 
many occasions, it is not an expert on the methodology of 
educational instruction. Therefore, the Court will grant the 
District the appropriate latitude to implement full-immersion 
programs within the language programs available under the 
LRMP. The Court will deny any other modifications as they 
might apply to the traditional elementary schools. 


The Court finds that the Lengthened School Day and Ex- 
tended Year programs are both successful programs in promot- 


— A-137 — 


ing desegregation and achievement in the KCMSD. However, 
the changes promoted by the Renewal Plan are not going to be 
adopted by the Court as a part of the Renewal Plan. The Court 
finds that these programs should be continued as they are 
currently being administered. The Court will order continued 
funding of these programs as done under the LRMP and under 
the other funding components of the desegregation program. 
There shall be no changes as to these two programs. 


The Renewal Plan proposes significant changes in the area of 
staffing. This has been a primary concem to the Court throughout 
its evaluation of the Renewal Plan. The State is correct in its 
assertion that the management of the magnet program has been 
anything but stellar. (The Court has taken the liberty of summa- 
rizing the State’s consistent position on the management of the 
magnet program). The Renewal Plan proposes what the Court 
interprets to be an entirely new level of administration for the 
magnet plan. If there is one thing that the KCMSD certainly has 
enough of it is administration. The administration of the magnet 
schools has, in many instances, left much to be desired. The last 
thing this Court is inclined to do at this point in the development 
of the magnet program in the KCMSD is to add another layer of 
administration. The Court is quite satisfied that the teachers have 
given their best efforts in educating the young people in the 
KCMSD. However, the administration, from the building super- 
visors up, need to work with much more industry to effectively 
implement the current themes offered in the district. The Court 
has become aware on several occasions of administrators who 
have not adequately sought to become certified in their respective 
theme. It is because of the current state of the administration in the 


magnet programs that the Court finds that the implementation of the 
changes in the Renewal Plan are wholly inappropriate. 


The Renewal Plan proposes an extensive process for evalua- 
tion of the magnet plan. This process of evaluation appears to 
include a large amount of administration. While the Court finds 


— A-138 — 


that evaluation of the magnet program is desirable and neces- 
sary, the Court finds that the program offered by the District 
through the Renewal Plan does not attain the goal of evaluation 
in the most cost effective manner. The Court will instruct the 
District to make arrangements to effectively evaluate the magnet 
programs over the extension period. The Court will view the 
results of the District’s efforts with a very critical eye at the point 
in the future where the Court is called upon to determine any 
additional extensions. 

The next item considered by the Renewal Plan is the non- 
salary budget. The District has made extensive analysis of the 
individual magnet programs and developed an estimate of what 
the upkeep on these programs will be over the next ten years. The 
Court finds that the figures presented by the District are unreli- 
able because they are based on the primary assumption that the 
Renewal Plan would be adopted as proposed, including the many 
changes in themes. The Court does recognize that the equipment 
provided in the original LRMP has a finite life. The current 
budgeting process used by the district includes provisions for 
capital replacement. The District may argue that the inclusions 
are insufficient. The Court, at this point, will deny the extensive 
magnet resource component of the Renewal Plan and order the 
District to continue operation of the magnets within the budgets 
as currently set for their operation. The plaintiffs illustrated the 
problem of ordering a strict one-year roll-over of the budgets in 
that there are several items which were one-time expenses that 
do not need te be included in a subsequent budget. The Court has 
considered this fact and finds the plaintiffs’ point to be well 
taken. However, the Court will allow the District the budgetary 
flexibility, subject to review by the DMC as per the past course 
of business, to make appropriate adjustments for the upcoming 
school years. 


The last area of concern to the Court in the Renewal Plan is the 
capital facility requirements. The Court has reviewed with 


— A-139 — 


severe dismay the progress of the Capital Improvement Project 
previously ordered by this Court. The Court is aware of signifi- 
cant difficulties with the Project Management Team and bring- 
ing the project in on-time and on-budget. The Court has previ- 
ously denied the implementation of the many new themes 
requested by the District under the Renewal Plan. The prospects 
of a voluntary interdistrict transfer program and pending legis- 
lation in the Missouri Legislature both support the Court’s 
decision to deny the capital improvements requested by the 
District in th’ \tenewal Plan. As it has been well shown that the 
capital facility requirements are being met under the current 
plan, the Court finds that it would be inappropriate to extend that 
program at this point. 

The Court finds that a ten-year plan by the District as to the 
future of the magnet plan and the desegregation program in 
general is a superior concept. The Court supports the District’s 
effort in that regard. The Renewal Plan offered by the District is 
not supported by the evidence and for the reasons previously 
announced the Court will deny its adoption. 


The magnet program has provided significant advantages to 
the students of the KCMSD. The neighborhood school options, 
however, are a very important aspect of the KCMSD system 
generally. The Court has helped the District fashion a magnet 
program to allow a choice to the non-minority parents and 
students enrolling in the KCMSD. However, the District’s 
Renewal Plan fails to protect this same choice to those currently 
living in the KCMSD. The opportunities available in the tradi- 
tional schools are important to a significant number of parents 
and students in the KCMSD. The Court is troubled by the fact 
that these traditional schools have maintained a pattern of racial 
isolation. The Court finds that this is in part due to the poor 
planning and administration of the KCMSD. The District should 
explore more carefully its options in assigning students to reduce 
racial isolation. The evidence showed, on more than one occa- 


—_xy 


sion, that racially isolated schools (90+ % minority) exist in 
predominately non-minority neighborhoods. This evidences to 
the Court either a lack of effort or an intent on the part of the 
District. 

The Court has before it the motion for a ten-year extension of 
the magnet plan. It is impertant to the Court that the magnet plan 
be maintained, as is, due to its positive impact on both the 
desegregation effort and on achievement. However, the plan 
offered by the District does not accomplish the needs of the 
magnet plan. The Court will order a two-year extension of the 
current plan with the modifications as outlined above. This two- 
year extension is necessary to maintain the integrity of the 
programs currently offered and to allow the District to better 
measure ihe effectiveness of the programs. 


The District has repeatedly requested that the Court provide 
extravagant programs based on the hopes that they will succeed 
in the desegregation effort. The Renewal Plan offers many of 
these same types of extravagances. The Court finds that the 
current plan has both the present and future potential to succeed 
in its major effort of desegregation. What the Court needs from 
the parties is an effective method by which the District may fund 
its share of the programs. The District’s proposals do not include 
a viable method of financing any of the programs. 


The Court, in giving due consideration to the viability of any 
future extensions of the Long Range Magnet Plan, has found that 
certain information would be beneficial. The economic feasibil- 
ity of financing the desegregation effort in the KCMSD has not 
been addressed sufficiently for the Court. The Court, therefore, 
instructs the District to submit a financing proposal to the Court 
and in doing so it should follow the assumptions as set forth 
below. 


First, the District is instructed to submit a plan reflecting the 
ability of the District to fund the magnet schools and the entire 


— Aids — 


school district at a level commensurate with the current funding 
or at least at a level where the same quality of both facilities and 
instruction may be maintained. In formulating this plan, the 
District should assume that the current Court ordered funding 
would be withdrawn at the alternative intervals of three, five, 
seven, or ten years from the date of this order. Based on this 
assumption, the Court instructs the District to submit 2 plan 
showing what is necessary to fund the school district through the 
operating budget alone. The Court expects the District to provide 
fairly complete operating budget projections for each of the 
above listed scenarios. 

If the current method of financing is insufficient, the District 
should submit the financial ramifications of at least two financ- 
ing alternatives and should use the current bills pending in the 
State Legislature as guides. Next, the District should present the 
Court with its analysis with the assumption of a status quo in the 
Foundation Formula. If the District chooses to submit additional 
analyses with varying Foundation Formula funds its 
tions should be made clear to the Court. Lastly, should the 
District have a solid basis to include the effect of a Voluntary 
Interdistrict Transfer Plan the Court would be interested in 
having the analysis to include such an assumption. However, the 
Court will order that the District provide the Court with at least 
one analysis that includes no V'DT plan. 

Second, the State is instructed that if it so chooses, it may 
submit plans with the similar assumptions as outlined for the 
District above. The Court is not ordering the State to submit such 
a plan but if the State finds that it has sufficient information 
available to make an instructive proposal then the Court will 
certainly be willing to evaluate such information. The Court 
encourages the State to submit a financing plan. 


The Court has found that the above requested information 
would be most helpful in analyzing the long term planning for the 


— A-142 — 


desegregation plan. Therefore, the Court will order the District 
to submit its analysis by June 30, 1993. The State will also have 
until September 1, 1993 to submit any analysis which it finds 
would be of benefit to the Court. 


Accordingly, it is hereby 


ORDERED that the KCMSD and plaintiffs’ motion for ap- 
proval of the Long-Range Magnet Renewal Plan is denied in part 
and granted in part consistent with this order; and it is further 


ORDERED that the current LRMP is extended for a two-year 
period with the same budgetary levels subject to reasonable 
modifications with the supervision of the DMC; and it is further 


ORDERED that the District is to implement a procedure to 
consistently measure and evaluate the effectiveness of the mag- 
net programs and this is to be done within the current budgetary 
constraints of the magnet program; and it is further 

ORDERED that the District is to implement a Montessori 


theme at the new elementary school tocome on-line for the 1993- 
94 school year; and it is further 


ORDERED that the District request to modify the themes at 
Lincoln College Prep and Middle School is granted; and it is 
further 


ORDERED that the State’s request to operate three District 
schools under an OBE program is denied; and it is further 

ORDERED that the District is to submit a financing proposal 
as outlined herein by June 30, 1993; and it is further 


ORDERED that the State may, but is not required to, submit 
a financing proposal by September 1, 1993; and it is further 


ORDERED that the capital improvements requested by the 
District are granted only to the extent necessary to implement the 
theme additions and modifications approved by the Court herein. 


a 


Date: April 16th, 1993 


— A143 — 


/s/ Russell G. Clark 
RUSSELL G. CLARK, 
SENIOR JUDGE 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT COURT 


