Supreme Court, U.S. 
FiLED 


94 ZS8S8NOV 1 4994 


No. _ Office Ue ine CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
+ 


CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 


Petitioner, 


CEMENT DIVISION, NATIONAL GYPSUM 
COMPANY, et al., 


Respondents. 
+ 


Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 


. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
7 


GRANT F. LANGLEY 
City Attorney 
Counsel of Record 


RupoitepH M. Konrap 

Deputy City Attorney 

800 City Hall 

200 East Wells Street 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202 
(414) 286-2601 


Counsel for Petitioner 
October 31, 1994 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


In an admiralty collision case, is a genuine dispute 
regarding liability in a mutual fault case a peculiar cir- 
cumstance permitting the district court in its discretion to 
deny a request for prejudgment interest by a party bear- 
ing twice as much fault as the party from whom interest 
is sought? 


ii 


LIST OF PARTIES 


The parties to the proceedings below were the peti- 
tioner City of Milwaukee and the respondents Cement 
Division, National Gypsum Company; Reed & Brown, 
Inc.; New York Marine Managers, Inc.; Allstate Insurance 
Company, c/o American Marine Underwriters, Inc.; 
Highlands Insurance Company; Employers Casualty 
Company of Texas, c/o Texas Marine Underwriters 
Agency, Inc.; Donald H. Miller, Inc.; U.S. Fidelity and 
Guarantee Company; Great Lakes Protective Association; 
The Atlantic Companies; Lloyds Underwriters, Institute 
Companies, including: Commercial Union Assurance Co. 
Ltd., “I” A/o. Andrew Weir Insurance Co. Ltd., English & 
American Insurance Co. Ltd., “M” 1 A/o., Orion Insur- 
ance Co. Ltd., “T” A/o. Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance 
Co. (U.K.) Ltd., “T” A/o., Atlas Assurance Co. Ltd., “T” 
A/o., Phoenix Assurance Co. Ltd., British Law Insurance 
Co. Ltd., Road Transport and General Insurance Co. Ltd., 
Insurance Company of North America (U.K.) Ltd., “G” 
A/o., Insurance Company of North America (U.K.) Ltd., 
“O” A/o., Home Insurance Co. Ltd., “X” A/o., London & 
Hull Maritime Insurance Co. Ltd., Hanover Insurance Co. 
Ltd., Sphere Insurance Co. Ltd., Drake Insurance Co. 
Ltd., Bishopsgate Insurance Co. Ltd., “F” A/o., British 
Law Insurance Co. Ltd., No. 2 A/o., Minster Insurance 
Co. Ltd., No. 2 A/o., Insurance Corporation of Ireland, 
“L” A/o., Folksam International Insurance Co. (U.K.) 
Ltd., Terra Nova Insurance Co. Ltd. per Andrew Drysdale 
Ltd., Economic Insurance Co. Ltd., “GENERAL” A/o., 
c/o Willis, Faber & Dumas Ltd., Ten Trinity Square, Lon- 
don EC3P 3AX England. 


Petitioner, City of Milwaukee, has no parent com- 
panies, subsidiaries, or affiliates to list pursuant to Rule 
29.1. 


ili 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
Sg ee. se 9 rae Keowee 
CE ee eee ii 
pe pe 8 sg) iv 
Ee ee 1 
ee TEAC Ls aba btw ae.cese eases eeecs 2 
eee GPP BOE CAGE... 2. occ c ccc eces eves 3 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........... 7 


The Seventh Circuit’s Decision, Although Consis- 
tent with the Decisions of the Ninth and Sixth 
Circuits, Directly Conflicts with Decisions of the 


Piten ance Eleventh Circuits...............2.c00ee. 7 
ee bas sae baae wend ees 14 
APPENDIX 


Decision of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Seventh Circuit (August 5, 1994).......... la 


Amending Order of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (August 22, 
EEE ES ee ee eee eee 16a 


Judgment in a Civil Case of the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of Wis- 
re 18a 


Decision and Order of the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin 
EE Sib Sh bins 64k oisio ps obec cece revenues 19a 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
FEDERAL CASES 
Alkmeon Naviera, S.A. v. M/V Marina L., 633 F.2d 
Fae Te GS RN kw devin dyna essen seadee«rs passim 
Anderson v. Whittaker Corp., 894 F.2d 804 (6th Cir. 
Peer TTC Terre Tey TT roe Tere 7,9 
Ceja v. Mike Hooks, Inc., 690 F.2d 1191 (5th Cir. 
| rer ere re err Tre rT ere re tere Tr eer 11 
Cement Div., Nat. Gypsum Co. v. City of Milwaukee, 
915 F.2d 1154 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 
SI Se RPE A nob 0k s SSS o 6 vee Avg ae VRdEEUS sures e ees 4 
Cement Div., Nat. Gypsum Co. v. City of Milwaukee, 
oe Fo Re oe | peer r er rrr errr rcrer 1 
Inland Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing 
Co., GO6-F.2G Fil (OU Cie. TOGO) oc ces ccc secses passim 
McDermott, Inc. v. Clyde Iron, 979 F.2d 1068 (5th 
Cir. 1992), rev'd on other grounds, 511 U.S. __, 
REO DAA. Be CHE occ seed ee seceinteceiacceves 13 
Nat G. Harrison Overseas Corp. v. American Tug 
Them, SiG P20 BP. (5 CA. F070) a6 ciiennstccccnass 12 
Parker Towing Co. v. Yazoo River Towing, Inc., 794 
PAG Fe CER Gy BO a i 6 6 60854 sence asa egers ss 11 
Pluyer v. Mitsui O.S.K. Lines, Ltd., 664 F.2d 1243 
CO SO Roe aos ck deb ek abel secre eeeane ess: 12 
Sinclair Refining Co. v. S.S. Green Island, 426 F.2d 
OD Ce Gi Ba ha ies a ehh Fe Ry ve 6 


The Maggie J. Smith, 123 U.S. 349 (1887)...........-- 14 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 

United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 
CIDTS) ccc divceunscencanenanicensentewnecerans passim 
West Virginia v. United States, 479 U.S. 305 (1987)..... 6 

Unrtep STATES CODE 

28 U.S.C. § 1254(a) ..... cece cree cece ence eeeeececcees 2 
28 U.S.C. § 1291......ccrccccccccccccccencscercececes 2 
28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(3)..-- ee eee e eee eee e teen eecees 3 


gt de Gn ory era eer re ter eres 24 


H 


* 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
¢ 


CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 


Petitioner, 


CEMENT DIVISION, NATIONAL GYPSUM 
COMPANY, et al., 


Respondents. 


¢ 


Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 
2 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
¢ 


The petitioner, City of Milwaukee, respectfully prays 
that a writ of certiorari issue to review the judgment and 
opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Seventh Circuit entered in the above-entitled proceeding 
on August 5, 1994. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Seventh 
Circuit is reported at 31 F.3d 581 (7th Cir. 1994), and is 
reprinted in the appendix hereto. [1a] 


The decision and order of the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin has not been 
reported. It is reprinted in the appendix hereto. [19a] 


* 


JURISDICTION 


Invoking federal jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1333, 
the respondents brought this suit in admiralty in the 
Eastern District of Wisconsin. The Eastern District bifur- 
cated the trial of liability and damages, and liability was 
ultimately established as follows: two-thirds against 
respondents and one-third against petitioner. 


After liability was established the parties settled all 
damages issues except whether respondents are entitled 
to prejudgment interest on the damages paid by the City. 
On May 28, 1993, the Eastern District adjudged that the 
petitioner was not liable to respondents for payment of 
prejudgment interest and dismissed the action on its 
merits. [18a] 


Respondents appealed the decision of the Eastern 
District to the Seventh Circuit under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. On 
August 5, 1994, the Seventh Circuit entered an opinion 
and judgment reversing the Eastern District’s denial of 
prejudgment interest. [1a] 


The jurisdiction of this Court to review the judgment 
of the Seventh Circuit is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1254(a). 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


On December 24, 1979, the SS EM FORD, a self- 
unloading bulk cement carrier, loaded with 5,700 tons of 
bulk cement, was moored in a slip in Milwaukee’s outer 
harbor on southern Lake Michigan. In the course of a 
severe winter storm, the FORD, over a twelve-hour 
period, broke loose from its moorings, battered against 
the headwall of the slip, tore holes in its hull, took on 
water and sank to the bottom of the slip. 


The owners of the vessel, National Gypsum, and its 
insurers brought this suit in admiralty pursuant to 28 
U.S.C. § 1333 against the City seeking $6.5 million in 
damages. The suit alleged, among other things, that the 
City had negligently breached its duty as a wharfinger by 
failing to warn National Gypsum of the danger posed by 
weather to vessels in the berthing slip. The City denied 
fault and alleged in its counterclaim that National Gyp- 
sum was negligent in leaving the FORD moored in an 
outer harbor in winter virtually unmanned, and with no 
means of monitoring weather or summoning tugs or a 
pilot for assistance. The City sought to recover $250,000 
for damages to the dockwall caused by the vessel. 


The trial was bifurcated, with the liability portion 
tried in January, 1986 to the district court without a jury. 
The district court, in an opinion rendered in June, 1989, 
found both National Gypsum and the City negligent and 
contributorily negligent, and found National Gypsum 96 
percent at fault and the City 4 percent at fault. 


National Gypsum by means of an interlocutory 
appeal pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(3), appealed that 
portion of the district court’s decision apportioning fault 


) 


96/4. The Seventh Circuit held that the district court’s 
apportionment of fault was clearly erroneous and reap- 
portioned fault two-thirds upon National Gypsum and 
one-third upon the City. Cement Div., Nat. Gypsum Co. v. 
City of Milwaukee, 915 F.2d 1154 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. 
denied, 499 U.S. 960 (1991). 


Following remand, the parties negotiated a settlement of 
the damages issue. The parties agreed that the City owed the 
plaintiffs the amount of $1,677,541.86 in damages, which the 
City promptly paid in January, 1992. The parties were unable 
to reach an agreement on the issue of prejudgment interest 
and submitted the issue to the district court to decide. 
National Gypsum requested the district court to award 
$5,317,807.70 in prejudgment interest, which the City 
opposed. Following briefing on the issue, the district court 
denied the request for prejudgment interest. 


The district court, although recognizing that an 
award of prejudgment interest is the general rule in 
admiralty, decided that under the peculiar circumstances 
of this case, it would be inequitable to require the City to 
pay prejudgment interest. The district court found that 
the case involved a genuine dispute over a good faith 
claim in a mutual fault case, and held that the mutual 
fault of the parties, including the fact that National Gyp- 
sum was two-thirds at fault, rendered any award of pre- 
judgment interest inequitable. The district court also 
found that the City’s status as a municipality undercut 
one of the reasons for awarding prejudgment interest. 
Prejudgment interest is awarded generally, the district 
court noted, because the shipowner has been deprived of 
money to repair the ship, while the wrongdoer is accru- 
ing interest on the money. In this case, however, the City 


had not accrued interest on the amount owed and, 
accordingly, should not be treated as if it had. [19a] 
National Gypsum appealed. 


In deciding the appeal, the Seventh Circuit examined 
the Ninth Circuit’s decision in Alkmeon Naviera, S.A. v. 
M/V Marina L., 633 F.2d 789 (9th Cir. 1980). The Ninth 
Circuit in Alkmeon Naviera held that in light of the com- 
parative fault rule announced by this Court in United 
States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 (1975), mutual 
fault can no longer constitute a reason to deny an other- 
wise appropriate award of prejudgment interest. The 
Ninth Circuit reasoned that prior to this Court’s ruling in 
Reliable Transfer, collision cases were decided in accor- 
dance with the equal division of damages rule. Under 
that rule, where both parties were found to be at fault for 
a collision, the parties’ damages would be added together 
and the total would be divided between them. The party 
whose damages were lesser would pay to the other party 
one-half of the difference between their respective losses. 
The less culpable party would be required to pay one-half 
of the other party’s damages. To award prejudgment 
interest to the more culpable party would penalize the 
less culpable party who, having paid one-half of the other 
party’s damages, would have to pay interest on that 
amount as well. This potential for distortion of compen- 
sation led some courts to deny requests for prejudgment 
interest where the party seeking it was substantially more 
at fault. The Ninth Circuit reasoned that because this 
Court in Reliable Transfer replaced the equal division of 
damages rule with the comparative fault rule “distortions 
in compensation can no longer occur.” Alkmeon Naviera, 


633 F.2d at 798 n.12. Accordingly, the reason for denying 
prejudgment interest no longer exists. [7a-9a] 


The Seventh Circuit rejected what it characterized as 
the balancing of the equities approach used by the Fifth 
Circuit in Inland Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing 
Co., 696 F.2d 321 (5th Cir. 1983). In rejecting the Fifth 
Circuit’s approach, the Seventh Circuit relied upon this 
Court’s decision in West Virginia v. United States, 479 U.S. 
305 (1987), which held that parties owing a debt to the 
federal government must pay prejudgment interest where 
the underlying claim is a contractual obligation to pay 
money. [9a-10a] 


The Seventh Circuit also rejected the rationale of the 
Fifth Circuit stated in Sinclair Refining Co. v. S.S. Green 
Island, 426 F.2d 260, 262 (5th Cir. 1970), that uncertainty 
concerning ultimate liability which characterizes mutual 
fault cases mitigates against awarding prejudgment inter- 
est. The Seventh Circuit reasoned that the uncertainty 
concerning ultimate liability which existed under the 
equal division of damages rule does not exist under the 
comparative fault rule. [11la-12a] 


Finally, the Seventh Circuit held that the City’s status 
as a municipality does not constitute a peculiar circum- 
stance warranting denial of prejudgment interest. The 
court found no precedent for the district court’s decision, 
although the issue had not been raised in previous cases. 
[13a] 


The Seventh Circuit adopted the rationale of the 
Ninth Circuit in Alkmeon Naviera and held that mutual 
fault of the parties in an admiralty collision case does not 
constitute a peculiar circumstance justifying denial of 


prejudgment interest. Accordingly, the Seventh Circuit 
held that the district court’s holding that a genuine dis- 
pute in a mutual fault case is a peculiar circumstance 
justifying the denial of prejudgment interest was clearly 
erroneous, reversed the judgment of the district court, 
and remanded for the calculation of prejudgment interest. 
[13a, 15a] 


+ 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


The Seventh Circuit’s Decision, Although Consistent 
with the Decisions of the Ninth and Sixth Circuits, 
Directly Conflicts with Decisions of the Fifth and Elev- 
enth Circuits. 


The Seventh Circuit, in deciding that mutual fault of 
the parties in an admiralty collision case is not a peculiar 
circumstance justifying denial of prejudgment interest, 
followed the decision of the Ninth Circuit in Alkmeon 
Naviera, S.A. v. M/V Marina L., 633 F.2d 789 (9th Cir. 1980), 
and of the Sixth Circuit in Anderson v. Whittaker Corp., 894 
F.2d 804 (6th Cir. 1990). The decision of the Seventh 
Circuit in this case and the decisions of the Ninth Circuit 
in Alkmeon Naviera and the Sixth Circuit in Anderson 
directly conflict with decisions of the Fifth and Eleventh 
Circuits. In addition, the decision of the Seventh Circuit 
that the degree of fault of the party seeking interest is 
irrelevant, conflicts with the decision of the Fifth Circuit 
on this point. 


A. Mutual Fault 


In Inland Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing Co., - 
696 F.2d 321 (5th Cir. 1983), the Fifth Circuit affirmed the 
district court’s denial of plaintiff-tow’s request for prejudg- 
ment interest where the court found the plaintiff-tow 25 
percent at fault for the collision and the defendant-tow 75 
percent. The Fifth Circuit held that “the existence of a genu- 
ine dispute regarding ultimate liability or the complexity of 
the factual and legal issues to be resolved” constitutes a 
“peculiar circumstance, justifying denial of prejudgment 
interest.” Id. at 328. The Fifth Circuit rejected plaintiff's 
argument that because a “serious dispute” always exists at 
trial, it should not be a basis for denying prejudgment 
interest. The court stated as follows: 


Yet a finding that a plaintiff was partially at 
fault weakens his equitable claim that his funds 
have been withheld by a recalcitrant party. Not 
surprisingly then, our cases have consistently 
upheld denials of prejudgment interest in cases 
of apportioned fault. 


Id. at 328. 


The Seventh Circuit held, contrary to the foregoing, 
that mutual fault is no longer a valid reason for denying 
prejudgment interest because comparative fault princi- 
ples now apply in all admiralty collision cases, citing 
United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 (1975). 
The Seventh Circuit reasoned that the rationale which 
compelled the Court to abrogate the equal division of 
damages rule in Reliable Transfer supports the conclusion 
that neither mutual fault nor the degree of fault of the 
party seeking interest is germane to the question of 
whether prejudgment interest should be awarded. 


Reliable Transfer did hold that comparative fault prin- 
ciples were to apply in all admiralty collision cases, but 
did not discuss, much less address, the question of 
whether mutual fault justifies denial of prejudgment 
interest because that question was not before the Court. 
Several circuits have addressed the question in the con- 
text of a request for prejudgment interest of a party who 
had been found to be contributorily negligent. No circuit 
has previously addressed the question in the context of a 
request of a party who had been found to be primarily 
responsible for the casualty, as is the case with the 
insured shipowner here. 


In support of its position, the Seventh Circuit cites 
Alkmeon Naviera and Anderson. Both cases utilize an anal- 
ysis that has been rejected as flawed by the Fifth and 
Eleventh Circuits. In Alkmeon Naviera, the Ninth Circuit 
held that there were no “peculiar circumstances” justify- 
ing denial of prejudgment interest notwithstanding a 
finding that the plaintiff was 40 percent at fault. The 
rationale for the court’s decision was that the abrogation 
of the equal division of damages rule in Reliable Transfer 
made it no longer necessary to deny prejudgment interest 
on mutual fault grounds because the distortion in com- 
pensation, which would occur by awarding prejudgment 
interest against parties who were slightly negligent, 
would no longer occur. Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 798 
n.12. 


In Anderson, the Sixth Circuit followed Alkmeon 
Naviera in holding that mutual fault alone should not 
justify the denial of prejudgment interest in a wrongful 
death case brought under maritime law. The decision was 


10 


made in an action brought against the boat manufac- 
turers, boat owners, and others by the families and repre- 
sentatives of boaters who had drowned. Plaintiffs’ 
decedents were found to be 20 percent at fault. 


The Fifth Circuit has not only declined to reconsider 
the rule governing the award of prejudgment interest in 
mutual fault cases, but has specifically rejected the ratio- 
nale relied upon by the Ninth and Sixth Circuits. Inland 
Oil and Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing Co., 696 F.2d 321, 
329. Commenting on the rationale in Alkmeon Naviera, the 
Fifth Circuit noted that prior to the decision in Reliable 
Transfer, courts made no distinction between denying pre- 
judgment interest in collision cases and denying it in 
personal injury cases, although personal injury cases 
were not subject to the equal division of damages rule 
abrogated in Reliable Transfer, but instead were subject to 
the same comparative negligence rule that the court held 
was to apply in collision cases. Id. The court stated: 


The flaw in this analysis is that comparative 
fault has long been the rule in maritime per- 
sonal injury actions. See United States v. Reliable 
Transfer Co., 421 U.S. at 408 at n. 13, 95 S.Ct. at 
1714 n. 13. Yet courts drew no distinction 
between denials of prejudgment interest in colli- 
sion cases and such denials in personal injury 
cases. The Ninth Circuit’s intimation that 
denials of prejudgment interest were somehow 
tied up with the rule of divided damages is not 
persuasive. We conclude that Reliable Transfer 
does not require reexamination of the law 
regarding denials of prejudgment interest. 


Inland Oil and Transport Co., 696 F.2d at 329. 


11 


The Eleventh Circuit has followed the Fifth Circuit 
and has held that the existence of a genuine dispute 
regarding liability is one “peculiar circumstance” which 
may warrant denial of prejudgment interest, and that 
“the existence of such a peculiar circumstance is gener- 
ally assumed in cases of apportioned fault.” Parker Towing 
Co. v. Yazoo River Towing, Inc., 794 F.2d 591, 594 (11th Cir. 
1986). 


B. Degree of Fault 


The Seventh Circuit rejected the idea that awarding 
prejudgment interest to a party two-thirds at fault for the 
collision might be inequitable. In contrast, the Fifth Cir- 
cuit has consistently held that a high degree of contribu- 
tory negligence constitutes a peculiar circumstance that 
would make it inequitable to award prejudgment interest. 


In Ceja v. Mike Hooks, Inc., 690 F.2d 1191 (5th Cir. 
1982), the Fifth Circuit vacated a judgment rendered in 
favor of a deck hand which had been reduced 75 percent 
due to the deck hand’s contributory negligence. The dis- 
trict court had denied prejudgment interest because of 
the degree of contributory negligence found on the part 
of the deck hand. The Fifth Circuit reversed the finding of 
75 percent contributory negligence against the deck hand 
because the district court had considered a factor in the 
case that reflected an impermissible expansion of the 
limited duties placed upon seamen in the safe perfor- 
mance of their duties. Id. at 1194. Because the Fifth Cir- 
cuit reversed the district court’s finding on the 


12 


underlying issue of the degree of contributory negli- 
gence, it also reversed and remanded the derivative find- 
ing denying prejudgment interest. Id. at 1196. Having 
remanded the case for a new finding concerning contrib- 
utory negligence and prejudgment interest, the court 
stated: 


On remand, the issue for the trial court is 
whether the degree of contributory negligence it 
finds gives rise to a “peculiar circumstance” that 
would make it inequitable to apply the usual 
rule granting prejudgment interest. In the 
proper case, a high degree of contributory negli- 
gence might well be considered by the district 
court in invoking its discretion to deny prejudg- 
ment interest. 


Id. at 1197. 


In Inland Oil and Transport Co., the Fifth Circuit relied 
in part upon this statement in upholding a denial of 
prejudgment interest claimed by a party who had been 
found 25 percent at fault. 696 F.2d at 328. The Fifth 
Circuit also noted with approval two of its previous cases 
where it had affirmed the denial of prejudgment interest 
because of the degree of contributory negligence by the 
party seeking the interest award: Nat G. Harrison Overseas 
Corp. v. American Tug Titan, 516 F.2d 89 (5th Cir. 1975) 
[affirming the denial of prejudgment interest to a 
bargeowner whose claim against a stevedoring operation 
had been reduced 50 percent because of the barge’s 
unseaworthiness.]; and Pluyer v. Mitsui O.S.K. Lines, Ltd., 
664 F.2d 1243 (5th Cir. 1982) [upholding denial of pre- 
judgment interest in a personal injury suit brought by a 


13 


longshoreman who had been found 40 percent contrib- 
utorily negligent.] Id. 


The Fifth Circuit recently reaffirmed its reasoning in 
Inland Oil in McDermott, Inc. v. Clyde Iron, 979 F.2d 1068 
(Sth Cir. 1992), rev’d on other grounds, 511 U.S. __, 114 
S.Ct. 1461 (1994). There the Fifth Circuit upheld a denial 
of prejudgment interest to the purchaser of a crane which 
was damaged along with the offshore platform deck it 
was lifting when the crane hook and sling broke. Fault 
was allocated 32 percent to the crane manufacturer, 38 
percent to the hook manufacturer, and 30 percent to the 
purchaser and sling defendants with which the purchaser 
had settled. The court based its conclusion upon the 
existence of a genuine dispute over good faith claims in a 
mutual fault setting. The court stated: 


“Our cases have consistently upheld denials of 
prejudgment interest in cases of apportioned 
fault.” 


Id. at 1081 (quoting Inland Oil and Transport Co., 696 F.2d 
at 328). The court also approved a jury instruction which 
charged: 


The circumstances which may justify denial of 
an award for pre-judgment interest are as fol- 
lows: A genuine dispute over a good faith claim 
exists in a mutual fault situation - mutual fault 
setting; the damages awarded are substantially 
less than the amount claimed by the Plaintiff; the 
Plaintiff's contributory negligence is to such a mag- 
nitude as to make and [sic] award of pre-judgment 
interest inequitable. (emphasis added) 


McDermott, Inc., 979 F.2d 1068 at 1081 n.17. 


¢ 


14 


CONCLUSION 


For over a century, this Court has held that an award 
of prejudgment interest in admiralty “rested in the discre- 
tion of the court below.” The Maggie J. Smith, 123 U.S. 349, 
356 (1887). In The Maggie J. Smith, this Court held that 
denying prejudgment interest to a party found not to be 
at fault for a collision is a proper exercise of the district 
court’s discretion. This Court’s decision in Reliable Trans- 
fer did not discuss, much less address, the question of 
whether the century old rule governing the awarding of 
prejudgment interest should be changed. 


The decisions of the Seventh, Ninth and Sixth Cir- 
cuits have replaced the discretion of the district court to 
equitably decide applications for prejudgment interest in 
mutual fault admiralty cases with a mechanical rule 
requiring the awarding of prejudgment interest irrespec- 
tive of the degree of fault of the party seeking interest. 
The error in their reasoning is their conclusion that under 
the comparative fault rule “distortions in compensation 
can no longer occur.” Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 798 
n.12. The fallacy of this conclusion is illustrated by this 
case. 


The parties in this case agreed that National Gyp- 
sum’s damages, less the offset for the City’s damages, 
were $5,032,625. Under the equal division of damages 
rule, the City would have been required to pay one-half 
of the damages amount to National Gypsum, or 
$2,516,312, but the City would not have been obligated to 
pay prejudgment interest because it was the party lesser 
at fault. Under the equal division of damages rule, there- 
fore, the City would have been required to pay $838,771 


15 


more in damages than it would have been required to pay 
under the comparative fault rule, excluding interest. 
Under the comparative fault rule and the interest rule in 
Alkmeon Naviera, the City is required to pay one-third of 
the stipulated damages amount, $1,677,541, plus prejudg- 
ment interest. In this case, National Gypsum claims 
$5,317,807 in prejudgment interest, which would require 
the City to pay a total of $6,995,348, which is $1,962,723 
more than the total stipulated damages amount, and 
$4,479,036 more than it would have paid under the equal 
division of damages rule. It is therefore obvious that each 
rule results in distortion in compensation; however, the 
rule in Alkmeon Naviera can result, as in this case, in 
greater distortion in compensation in favor of the party 
who has the greater degree of fault than the equal divi- 
sion of damages rule. 


It is no answer to say that the City enjoyed the 
benefit of holding on to the money while this case was 
pending, because the City, in fact, did not hold on to any 
money, and the fact that the litigation was lengthy was 
not the fault of the City. Some distortion in compensation 
will occur under either rule; however, whatever distor- 
tion occurs should be in favor of the party least respons- 
ible for the collision, and not in favor of the party 
primarily responsible for the collision. To impose upon a 
party one-third at fault damages in excess of the total 
damages incurred by the party two-thirds at fault is not 
only inequitable and unjust, but unconscionable. 


The conflict between the Fifth and Eleventh Circuits, 
on the one hand, and the Seventh, Ninth and Sixth Cir- 
cuits, on the other hand, will not resolve itself because 


16 


both sides have already considered and rejected the rea- 
soning of the other side. The question can only be 
resolved by this Court and this Court should resolve it in 
this case so that the distortion in compensation which has 
occurred in this case is corrected and will not occur in the 
future. 


For these reasons, the petitioner respectfully requests 
the Court to grant the petition. 


Respectfully submitted, 


GRANT F. LANGLEY 
Milwaukee City Attorney 
Counsel of Record 


RupoLteH M. Konrap 

Deputy City Attorney 

800 City Hall 

200 East Wells Street 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202 
(414) 286-2601 


Counsel for Petitioner 


October 31, 1994 


APPENDIX 


la 


IN THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-2545 


CEMENT Division, NATIONAL GypsuM CompPaNy, REED & 
BROWN, INCORPORATED, New YorK MARINE MANAGERS, INCOR- 
PORATED, et al., 


Plaintiffs-Appellants, 


City oF MILWAUKEE, 


Defendant-Appellee. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of Wisconsin. 
No. 80 C 1001 - Thomas J. Curran, Judge. 


ARGUED FEBRUARY 25, 1994 -— Decipep Aucust 5, 1994 


Before CumMMINGS AND Manion, Circuit Judges, and 
Mitter, Jr., District Judge.” 


Manion, Circuit Judge. While moored at a berth in the 
Port of Milwaukee, a ship broke away, crashed into a 
headwall and sank. The ship’s owners and insurers sued 
the city. The first appeal to this court resulted in a divi- 
sion of liability, two-thirds to the ship’s owners and one- 


*Hon. Robert L. Miller, Jr., District Judge for the Northern Dis- 
trict of Indiana, is sitting by designation. 


2a 


4 
re 


third to the city. On remand, the district court determined 
that because the parties were mutually at fault, and 
because the defendant was a municipality, the defendant 
would not be liable for prejudgment interest on its share 
of the amount of damages incurred. We reverse the dis- 
trict court and remand for the calculation of prejudgment 
interest. 


I. 


This appeal is the latest chapter in a 15-year-old 
dispute arising out of an accident involving a ship called 
the S/S EM FORD (“FORD”). The facts surrounding the 
damage to the FORD and its cargo have been set out in 
copious detail in our previous disposition of this matter 
in Cement Div., Nat. Gypsum Co. v. City of Milwaukee, 915 
F.2d 1154 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 111 S.Ct. 1583 (1991). 
For purposes of the present appeal, we offer only the 
following. The FORD was moored at a berth at the Port of 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. During a storm, the FORD broke 
away, crashed into the headwall of its berth and sank to 
the bottom of the Milwaukee Harbor. Following this, the 
FORD’s owner, the Cement Division of the National Gyp- 
sum Company, along with the ship’s various insurers 
(referred to collectively as “National Gypsum”), com- 
menced an admiralty action against the City of Mil- 
waukee (“City”), claiming $4.5 million in damages to the 
FORD and her cargo. The City denied liability, alleged 
contributory negligence on the part of National Gypsum 
and sought $250,000 from National Gypsum for damage 
to the City’s dockwall caused by the FORD. 


3a 


At a bifurcated trial on the issue of liability, the 
district court found National Gypsum to be 96% negli- 
gent and the City 4% negligent. Following an interlocu- 
tory appeal, we reversed the district court’s allocation of 
liability, and reapportioned the parties’ liability, two- 
thirds to National Gypsum, one-third to the City. See Nat. 
Gypsum Co., 915 F.2d at 1160. 


Following remand, the parties negotiated the issue of 
damages. Pursuant to a settlement agreement, a judgment 
was entered against the City in the amount of 
$1,788,541.86, which the City promptly paid over to the 
court. Hence, the only issue left for the district court to 
determine was whether National Gypsum was entitled to 
collect prejudgment interest — to the tune of $5,317,807.70 
- on the damages paid by the City. Following briefing on 
the issue, the district court denied National Gypsum’s 
request for prejudgment interest. Although recognizing 
that an award of prejudgment interest is the general rule 
in admiralty, the district court determined that under the 
peculiar circumstances of this case it would be inequita- 
ble to require the City to pay prejudgment interest. Speci- 
fically, the district court determined that the mutual fault 
of the parties, including the fact that National Gypsum 
was two-thirds contributorily negligent, rendered any 
award of prejudgment interest inequitable. 


Alternatively, the district court found that the City’s 
status as a municipality undercut one of the reasons for 
awarding prejudgment interest. The district court noted 
that an admiralty plaintiff is awarded prejudgment inter- 
est because from the date of the loss, the plaintiff-ship- 
owner has been deprived of the money to repair his ship 
while, at the same time, the wrongdoer has enjoyed the 


da 


use of the victim’s money and is accruing interest on it. 
The district court observed that a municipality, “is not in 
[a] position. . . . to set aside an interest bearing fund at 
the time of loss, but can only levy taxes to pay a settle- 
ment or final judgment.” Decision and Order at 5. The 
district court apparently reasoned that since the City had 
not been accruing interest on the amount owed to 
National Gypsum from the date of the accident, it should 
not be treated as if it had. This unique circumstance, the 
district court determined, constituted another reason why 
an award of interest would be inappropriate. This appeal 
followed. . 


II. 


The issue before us is whether the district court erred 
in denying National Gypsum’s request for prejudgment 
interest. “The general rule in admiralty, in order to fully 
compensate the plaintiff, is to award prejudgment inter- 
est from the date of the accident.” Central Rivers Towing v. 
City of Beardstown, 750 F.2d 565, 574 (7th Cir. 1984); accord 
United States v. Peavey Barge Line, 748 F.2d 395, 401, 402 
(7th Cir. 1984); Bunge Corp. v. American Comm. Barge Line 
Co., 630 F.2d 1236, 1242 (7th Cir. 1980); First Nat. Bank of 
Chicago v. Material Serv. Corp., 597 F.2d 1110, 1120 (7th Cir. 
1979). This general rule notwithstanding, admiralty law 
also recognizes that a district court has discretion to deny 
prejudgment interest where it finds that special or pecu- 
liar circumstances would render such an award inequita- 
ble. See Central Rivers Towing, 750 F.2d at 574; accord 
Hillier v. Southern Towing Co., 740 F.2d 583, 585 (7th Cir. 
1984). Examples of such peculiar circumstances include: 
(1) the unreasonable delay in filing the action by the 


9 et Renner DORMS 


5a 


party seeking prejudgment interest; (2) false or frivolous 
claims; (3) the inability to determine liability and the 
extent of damages eligible for an award of prejudgment 
interest; and (4) the mutual fault of the parties. See Central 
Rivers Towing, 750 F.2d at 574. The existence of a peculiar 
circumstance is a factual determination which we will 
review for clear error. Hillier, 740 F.2d at 585. If the 
determination is not clearly erroneous, then the decision 
to deny prejudgment interest based on the existence of 
those peculiar circumstances is left to the district court’s 
discretion. Id. But this discretion “is not unbridled; it is 
exercised by law.” In Re Oil Spill By The Amoco Cadiz, 954 
F.2d 1279, 1334 (7th Cir. 1992); see also Afran Transport Co. 
v. The Bergechief, 285 F.2d 119, 120 (2d Cir. 1960) (stating 
that a district court’s discretion to deny prejudgment 
interest is “a legal discretion, rather than merely one at 
will.”); The Wright, 109 F.2d 699, 702 (2d Cir. 1940) (same). 
In other words, “[d]iscretionary choices are not left to a 
court’s inclination, but to its judgment; and its judgment 
is to be guided by sound legal principles.” Amoco Cadiz, 
954 F.2d at 1334 (quotations omitted) (citations omitted). 
As a result, while prejudgment interest in admiralty is 
within the district court’s discretion, “this discretion must 
be ‘exercised with a view to the right to interest unless 
the circumstances are exceptional.’ ” Alkmeon Naviera, 
S.A. v. M/V MARINA L., 633 F.2d 789, 797 (9th Cir. 1908) 
(quoting The President Madison, 91 F.2d 835, 847 (9th Cir. 
1937)). 


National Gypsum raises two challenges to the district 
court’s refusal to award prejudgment interest. First, it 
contends that the district court incorrectly denied pre- 
judgment interest on the basis of mutual fault. National 


6a 


Gypsum does not claim that the district court’s finding of 
mutual fault was clearly erroneous; rather, it maintains 
that, as a matter of law, mutual fault can no longer 
constitute a peculiar circumstance justifying the denial of 
interest. Second, National Gypsum challenges the district 
court’s determination that the City’s status as a munici- 
pality shields it from having to pay prejudgment interest. 
We will address each of these contentions in turn. 


A. Mutual Fault 


National Gypsum argues that the mutual fault of the 
parties cannot constitute a special or peculiar circum- 
stance justifying the denial of prejudgment interest. 
While acknowledging at oral argument that this court, in 
Central Rivers Towing, Hillier and First Nat. Bank of Chi- 
cago, listed mutual fault as a peculiar circumstance, it also 
correctly pointed out we have never actually relied on 
this in affirming a district court’s denial of prejudgment 
interest. Accordingly, National Gypsum asks us to con- 
sider whether mutual fault should be recognized in this 
circuit as a valid basis to deny an award of prejudgment 
interest. In support of its position, National Gypsum 
urges us to adopt the reasoning of the Ninth Circuit in 
Alkmeon Naviera, which has stated that, in light of the 
proportionate fault rule announced by the Supreme Court 
in United States v. Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. 397 (1974), 
mutual fault can no longer constitute a reason to deny an 
otherwise appropriate award of prejudgment interest. 
Therefore, in determining the merits of National Gyp- 
sum’s arguments, we must first examine the Ninth Cir- 
cuit’s decision in Alkmeon Naviera. 


7a 


Alkmeon Naviera involved a collision between two 
vessels which were both at fault. In ruling on the parties’ 
requests for prejudgment interest, the district court sum- 
marily denied the requests, stating without elaboration 
that the peculiar circumstances of the case did not entitle 
either party to an award of interest. On appeal, the Ninth 
Circuit found no basis in the record before it that would 
justify the district court’s determination and, accordingly, 
reversed and remanded for a determination of existence 
of special or [sic] circumstances that would warrant the 
denial of prejudgment interest. See Alkmeon Naviera, 633 
F.2d at 798. | 


The portion of Alkmeon Naviera relevant to the case 
before us is where the court discusses the reasons behind 
the mutual fault exception. The court observed that dis- 
trict courts “denied prejudgment interest in mutual fault 
cases in order to mitigate the harsh effects of the old 
equal division of damages rule.” Alkmeon Naviera, 633 
F.2d at 798 n.12. Under that rule, whenever there was a 
collision resulting from the fault of both parties, then the 
parties’ damages would be added together and the total 
would be equally divided between them. Under that for- 
mula, if one party’s damages were greater than the 
other’s, then the court would order the party with the 
lesser damages to pay over to the other party one-half of 
the difference between their respective losses, the ratio- 
nale being that this would equalize the burden. See The 
Manitoba, 122 U.S. 97, 111 (1887); accord The North Star, 
106 U.S. 17, 22 (1882). Under this regime, however, courts 
soon recognized that in cases where one party was only 
slightly negligent, an award of prejudgment interest to 
the more culpable party would, in effect, penalize the less 


8a 


culpable party. This is because that party, having already 
been saddled with paying one-half of the other party’s 
damages, would now have to pay prejudgment interest 
on that amount as well, even though he was significantly 
less responsible for the damages incurred. This led some 
courts in divided damages cases either to award prejudg- 
ment interest to the party who was only slightly at fault, 
or to deny prejudgment interest in cases where the party 
seeking it was substantially more at fault. See Alkmeon 
Naviera, 633 F.2d at 798 n.12; see alsa Iberian Tankers Co. v. 
Gates Constr. Corp., 504 F.2d 747, 748 (2d Cir. 1974) (stating 
that in a collision case involving mutual fault “the district 
court has discretion to deny [prejudgment] interest where 
the party to whom it would be awarded is substantially at 
fault.”); Afran Transport Co., 285 F.2d at 120 (suggesting 
that an award of prejudgment interest to the less culpable 
party in a case involving mutual fault would be appropri- 
ate to “ameliorate somewhat the harsh American rule 
that division of damages must be equal without reference 
to the degree of fault.”). 


But as stated earlier, the divided damages rule was 
thrown overboard by a unanimous Court in United States 
v. Reliable Transfer and was replaced with comparative 
fault. That being the case, the court in Alkmeon Naviera 
reasoned that “distortions in compensation can no longer 
occur.” Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 798 n.12. In other 
words, because Reliable Transfer extinguished the divided 
damages rule and thus its harsh effects, there no longer 
exists a reason to deny prejudgment interest in collisions 
cases involving mutual fault. In fact, if comparative fault 
“penalizes wrongdoing [] in proportion to measure of 


9a 


fault,” Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. at 405 n.11, then, accord- 
ing to Alkmeon Naviera, to continue denying prejudgment 
interest on the basis of mutual fault would, in essence, be 
penalizing the more culpable party twice for the same 
mistake. See Alkmeon Naviera, 633 F.2d at 798 n.12 (citing 
Complaint of B.F.T. No. Two Corp., 433 F.Supp. 854, 876 
(E.D. Pa. 1977)). For these reasons, the court in Alkmeon 
Naviera concluded that it no longer made sense to invoke 
the mutual fault of the parties as a basis to deny prejudg- 
ment interest. More recently, the Sixth Circuit in Anderson 
v. Whittaker Corp., 894 F.2d 804 (6th Cir. 1990), took note 
of and agreed with Alkmeon Naviera’s reasoning in hold- 
ing that it would no longer consider mutual fault to be a 
peculiar circumstance justifying the denial of prejudg- 
ment interest. Anderson, 894 F.2d at 810. We, too, are 
persuaded by the reasoning in Alkmeon Naviera and like- 
wise conclude that, as a matter of law, the mutual fault of 
the parties should not constitute a reason to deny an 
award of prejudgment interest in admiralty. 


The City raises several reasons to follow the mutual 
fault exception, none of which merits extended discus- 
sion. First, the City appears to argue that the rationale for 
mutual fault has nothing to do with offsetting the divided 
damages rule. Instead, the City, relying on Inland Oil and 
Transport Co. v. Ark-White Towing, 696 F.2d 321 (5th Cir. 
1983), argues that where the party making a claim to 
interest is partially at fault, this “weakens his equitable 
claim that his funds have been withheld by a recalcitrant 
party.” Inland Oil, 696 F.2d at 328. The City’s contention 
that the language from Inland Oil best provides a basis for 
denying prejudgment interest in cases involving mutual 
fault would require a balancing of the equities approach, 


10a 


an approach we believe cannot be sustained following the 
Supreme Court’s decision in West Virginia v. United States, 
479 U.S. 305 (1987). There, the United States sought 
recovery of prejudgment interest on a debt incurred by 
the state of West Virginia for emergency relief provided 
by the Army Corps of Engineers. The district court in that 
case held that the question of whether interest had to be 
paid depended on a balancing of equities between the 
parties. The Supreme Court’s assessment of this method 
for refusing to award prejudgment interest was simple: 
“{Tjhe Court of Appeals rejected such an approach, as do 
we.” West Virginia, 479 U.S. at 311 n.3 (emphasis added); 
accord Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d at 1334-35.! 


Second, the City contends that where there is mutual 
fault, the exact amount of the funds due and owing from 
each party to the other is not immediately ascertainable 
and fixed before trial. Because of this uncertainty, the 
City argues, it is inequitable to charge a party interest for 


1 We note that the court in Inland Oil heard arguments 
urging that it adopt the reasoning in Alkmeon Naviera and abol- 
ish the mutual fault exception. The Fifth Circuit, however, 
rejected this invitation, claiming that the reasoning in Alkmeon 
Naviera was flawed. This was because, according to Inland Oil, 
“comparative fault has long been the rule in maritime personal 
injury actions. Yet courts drew no distinction between denials of 
prejudgment interest in collision cases and such denials in per- 
sonal injury cases.” Id. (citation omitted). We point out, how- 
ever, that, except for citing Reliable Transfer for the proposition 
that interest has long been allowed in personal injury cases in 
admiralty, the court in Inland Oil cited no other authority for its 
statements that admiralty decisions made no distinction 
between personal injury and collision cases. Therefore, we do 
not accept Inland Oil’s reasons for rejecting Alkmeon Naviera in 
reaching today’s conclusion. 


| 


lla 


not paying an unknown sum. We agree that there are 
decisions stating that, at least where fault is mutual, 
prejudgment interest from the date of the collision should 
be denied due to the uncertainty as to which party will 
bear the ultimate liability to make paymeni to the other. 
See, e.g., First Nat. Bank of Chicago, 597 F.2d at 1121 (adopt- 
ing the rationale of the Fifth Circuit in Sinclair Refining 
Co. v. S.S. Green Island, 426 F.2d 260, 262 (5th Cir. 1970), 
and stating that in cases involving mutual fault, the 
uncertainty respecting the party having the ultimate lia- 
bility should be considered in deciding whether to award 
prejudgment interest); The Wright, 109 F.2d at 702 (“Sev- 
eral cases deny the award of interest .. . where damages 
are divided as a result of joint fault. This is based on the 
uncertainty as to the party which will have the ultimate 
liability to make payment on determination of the bal- 
ance due.”). Of course, using uncertainty as a basis to 
deny interest in a mutual fault case made sense under the 
old divided damages regime. This is because under that 
rule, it was not until after trial that there would be a 
determination from the district court as to which of the 
parties would have to come up with the extra money to 
make the other party whole. But now with the abolition 
of the divided damages rule and the adoption of compar- 
ative fault both parties are liable to each other in relation 
to their respective degree of fault. In other words, 
although the exact amount of damages may not be known 
until after trial, neither party can now claim pretrial 
uncertainty as to whether he will in fact be liable to the 
other. Thus, after Reliable Transfer, it only makes sense 
that uncertainty as to eventual liability can no longer be a 


12a 


factor to consider in determining whether to deny pre- 
judgment interest in cases involving mutual fault. 


Lastly, the City contends that this court, on two occa- 
sions, in Central Rivers Towing and Hillier, has had the 
opportunity to adopt the reasoning of Alkmeon Naviera 
and scuttle mutual fault but has refused to do so. We 
think the reason for this is clear: the issue of mutual fault 
was not presented in either case. Central Rivers Towing, 
for example, did not involve a plaintiff who was contrib- 
utorily negligent; Hillier only addressed whether the 
plaintiff (who was not negligent) could recover prejudg- 
ment interest on an award of damages arising out of 
future losses for pain and suffering. Hence any mention 
of mutual fault in either of these cases was mere dicta. In 
fact the only decision from this circuit that comes close to 
applying the mutual fault exception is First Nat. Bank of 
Chicago. In that case, we reversed the district court’s 
initial determination that the plaintiff was not contrib- 
utorily negligent, and directed the court on remand to 
reallocate fault between the parties. We also directed the 
court on remand to determine whether, given the mutual 
fault of the parties, an award of prejudgment interest to 
the plaintiff would be inappropriate. See First Nat. Bank of 
Chicago, 597 F.2d at 1121. However, unlike decisions from 
the Fifth Circuit, which consistently uphold denials of 
prejudgment interest in mutual fault cases, see, e.g., Inland 
Oil, 696 at 328 (summarizing cases), this court in First 
Nat. Bank of Chicago did not adopt a per se rule against 
prejudgment interest in a case involving mutual fault; 
rather, the case merely noted that mutual fault was one 
“factor[] to be considered by the trier of fact along with 
other facts and circumstances in determining if there exist 


13a 


the necessary peculiar circumstances that will authorize 
the exercise of discretion to award less than full compen- 
sation by denying interest.’” First Nat. Bank of Chicago, 
597 F.2d at 1121 (quotations omitted) (citations omitted) 
(emphasis added). Nevertheless, in order to remove any 
uncertainty, we depart from this portion of First Nat. Bank 
of Chicago and reiterate our holding that the mutual fault 
of the parties in an admiralty collision case does not 
constitute a peculiar circumstance justifying the denial of 
prejudgment interest.** 


B. Municipality Status 


This justification for denying prejudgment interest 
need not detain us very long. We have found no cases, 
nor has the City cited us any, from this circuit or else- 
where which have stated that an award of interest should 
be denied where the party against whom it is sought is a 
municipality. In fact, in Central Rivers Towing, the plaintiff 
sought and obtained an award of prejudgment interest at 
the rate of 12% per annum against the city of Beardstown 
without the district court or this court ever raising an 
objection to such an award on the basis that it was being 
levied against a city. The City has not suggested that we 
disavow this portion of Central Rivers Towing. Accord- 
ingly, we refuse to recognize municipality status as a 
peculiar circumstance warranting the denial of prejudg- 
ment interest. 


“This opinion was circulated before release to all judges in 
active service. See Circuit Rule 40(f). No judge favored a hearing 
en banc. 


14a 


C. Calculating the Award 


Having determined that National Gypsum is entitled 
to an award of prejudgment interest, we offer the follow- 
ing to the district court on remand as guidance in calcu- 
lating that award. First, in keeping with the general rule, 
the district court should calculate the interest from the 
date of the accident, see Central Rivers Towing, 750 F.2d at 
574, which in this case was 1978. As far as the rate at 
which interest should be calculated, we recognize that 
such a determination is traditionally left to the district 
court’s discretion. Id. But we have said on previous occa- 
sions that the best starting point is to award interest at 
the market rate, which means an average of the prime 
rate for the years in question. See Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d at 
1332; accord Gorenstein Enterprises, Inc. v. Quality Care- 
USA, Inc., 874 F.2d 431, 436-37 (7th Cir. 1988); Central 
Rivers Towing, 750 F.2d at 574. In addition, the district 
court may also want to consider the City’s status as a 
municipality, not as basis to deny prejudgment interest 
altogether, but as a guide to setting the interest rate. As 
pointed out by Amoco Cadiz and Gorenstein, one of the 
factors used in determining the rate of prejudgment inter- 
est is the creditworthiness of the judgment debtor. Thus, 
the district court could, in its discretion, set the rate of 
interest to match that which lenders would charge the 
City for short-term, unsecured loans. See Amoco Cadiz, 954 
F.2d at 1332; Gorenstein, 878 F.2d at 436. As to whether to 
award compound interest, we conclude that that, too, is a 
determination better left to the discretion of the district 
court. See Transorient Navigators Co., S.A. v. M/S South- 
wind, 788 F.2d 288, 293 (5th Cir. 1986). Finally, in calculat- 
ing its eventual award, we ask the district court to 


tia 


15a 


memorialize its reasoning in order to assist us in the 
event of future review. 


ITI. 


The district court’s order denying prejudgment inter- 
est is REVERSED. This case is REMANDED to the district 


court for a determination of prejudgment interest consis- 
tent with this opinion. 


A true Copy: 
Teste: 


Clerk of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 


l6a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 


For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 


August 22, 1994 


Before 
Hon. Walter J. Cummings, Circuit Judge 
Hon. Daniel A. Manion, Circuit Judge 
Hon. Robert L. Miller, Jr., District Judge* 


CEMENT DIVISION, Appeal from the United 
NATIONAL .GYPSUM States District Court for 
COMPANY, REED & the Eastern District of 
BROWN, Wisconsin. 


INCORPORATED, NEW 

YORK MARINE 

MANAGERS, 

INCORPORATED, et al. No. 80 C 1001 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 


No. 93-2545 Thomas Be Curran, 


V. Judge. 
CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 
Defendants-Appellee. 


AMENDING ORDER 


The court’s opinion, issued August 5, 1994, is 
amended as follows: 


° Hon. Robert L. Miller, Jr., of the Northern District of Indi- 
ana, is sitting by designation. 


17a 


Page 3, lines 1-2: changed to read “ ... in 
the amount of $1,677,541.86, which the City 
promptly paid over to the plaintiffs.” 


Page 12, line 5: change date to read “1979.” 


pe a el ee Oe vane 


18a 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN District of WISCONSIN 


CEMENT DIVISION, ETAL JUDGMENT IN 
A CIVIL CASE 


v. 
CASE NUMBER: 
CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 80-C-1001 
i (Filed 
EDWARD E. GILLEN CO., ET AL May 2, 1993) 


[ ] Jury Verdict. This action came before the Court for a 
trial by jury. The issues have been tried and the jury has 
rendered its verdict. 


[X] Decision by Court. The action came to hearing 
before the Court. The issues have been heard and a 
decision has been rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the Defen- 
dant City of Milwaukee is not liable to the Plaintiffs for 
payment of prejudgment interest on the amount paid in 
settlement. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that 
this action is dismissed upon its merits. 


SOFRON B. NEDILSKY 
Clerk 


/s/ C. Brock 
(By) Deputy Clerk 


May 28, 1993 
Date 


Copy mailed to attorneys for 
parties by the Court pursuant 
to Rule 77 (d) Federal Rules of 
Civil Procedure. 


19a 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


CEMENT DIVISION, NATIONAL GYPSUM 
COMPANY; REED & BROWN, INC.; NEW YORK 
MARINE MANAGERS, INC.; ALLSTATE INSURANCE 
COMPANY, c/o American Marine Underwriters, Inc.; 
HIGHLANDS INSURANCE COMPANY; EMPLOYERS 
CASUALTY COMPANY OF TEXAS, c/o Texas Marine 
Underwriters Agency, Inc; DONALD H. MILLER, 
INC.; U.S. FIDELITY AND GUARANTEE COMPANY: 
GREAT LAKES PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION; THE 
ATLANTIC COMPANIES; LLOYDS UNDERWRITERS, 
INSTITUTE COMPANIES, including: COMMERCIAL 
UNION ASSURANCE CO. LTD., “I” A/o. ANDREW 
WEIR INSURANCE CO. LTD., ENGLISH & 
AMERICAN INSURANCE CO. LTD., “M” 1 A/o., 
ORION INSURANCE CO. LTD., “T” A/o. YASUDA 
FIRE & MARINE INSURANCE CO. (U.K.) LTD., “T” 
A/o., ATLAS ASSURANCE CO. LTD., “T” A/o., 
PHOENIX ASSURANCE CO. LTD., BRITISH LAW 
INSURANCE CO. LTD., ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
GENERAL INSURANCE CO. LTD., INSURANCE 
COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA (U.K.) LTD., “G” 
A/o., INSURANCE COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA 
(U.K.) LTD., “O” A/o., HOME INSURANCE CO. LTD., 
“X” A/o., LONDON & HULL MARITIME 
INSURANCE CO. LTD., HANOVER INSURANCE CO. 
LTD., SPHERE INSURANCE CO. LTD., DRAKE 
INSURANCE CO. LTD., BISHOPSGATE INSURANCE 
CO. LTD., “F” A/o., BRITISH LAW INSURANCE CO. 
LTD., No. 2 A/o., MINSTER INSURANCE CO. LID., 
No. 2 A/o., INSURANCE CORPORATION OF 
IRELAND, “L” A/o., FOLKSAM INTERNATIONAL 
INSURANCE CO. (U.K.) LTD., TERRA NOVA 
INSURANCE CO. LTD. per ANDREW DRYSDALE 
LTD., ECONOMIC INSURANCE CO. LTD., 


20a 


“GENERAL” A/o., c/o Willis, Faber & Dumas Ltd., 
Ten Trinity Square, London EC3P 3AX England, 


Plaintiff, Case No. 80-C-1001 
V. (Filed May 28, 1993) 
CITY OF MILWAUKEE, 


Defendant and 
Third-Party Plaintiff, 


V. 


EDWARD E. GILLEN COMPANY, 
a corporation, and GREAT LAKES 
TOWING COMPANY, a corporation, 


Third-Party Defendants. 


DECISION AND ORDER 


This admiralty case is before this court after remand 
from the Seventh Circuit. See Cement Division, National 
Gypsum Company v. City of Milwaukee, 915 F.2d 1154 (7th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 111 S.Ct. 1583 (1991). On appeal, 
the Seventh Circuit found that the Plaintiffs were two- 
thirds negligent in causing damage to the SS EM FORD 
when that ship was involved in an allision with a berth in 
the Milwaukee Harbor. The Defendant City of Milwaukee 
was held to be one-third causally negligent. See Id. at 
1160. 


After liability was established, the parties settled all 
damage issues except the one presently before this court 
—- whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to prejudgment inter- 
est on the damages paid by the City. The parties have 
briefed this issue which is now ready for resolution. 


21a 


Although an award of prejudgment interest calcu- 
lated from the date of the loss is the rule rather than the 
exception in cases brought under a district court’s admi- 
ralty jurisdiction, a court may exercise its discretion to 
deny prejudgment interest if unusual circumstances exist. 
See In Re Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d 1279, 
1331-35 (7th Cir. 1992). A court’s discretion is not 
unbridled, but must be guided by “sound legal princi- 
ples.” Albermarle Paper Company v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 
416 (1975). The Fifth Circuit recently suggested a number 
of these principles when it approved a jury instruction 
which charged: 


In admiralty cases, the award of pre-judgment 
interest from the date of the loss is the rule 
rather than the exception. The decision to deny 
pre-judgment interest must be based on the exis- 
tence of peculiar circumstances because pre- 
judgment interest is awarded as a compensation 
for a wrong done. It is your responsibility to 
determine whether to award McDermott, Inc. 
pre-judgment interest. If you determine that the 
- that the Plaintiff is entitled to pre-judgment 
interest; that is, interest from the date of the loss 
until the date you render your verdict, you must 
determine the rate at which the interest will be 
calculated. The circumstances which may justify 
denial of an award for pre-judgment interest are 
as follows: A genuine dispute over a good faith 
claim exists in a mutual fault situation — mutual 
fault setting; the damages awarded are substan- 
tially less than the amount claimed by the Plain- 
tiff; the Plaintiff’s contributory negligence is to 
such a magnitude as to make an award of pre- 
judgment interest inequitable. 


22a 


McDermott, Inc. v. Clyde Iron, 979 F.2d 1068, 1080 n.17 (5th 
Cir. 1992), petition for cert. filed, 61 U.S.L.W. 3653 (March 
12, 1993) (No. 92-1479). See also Inland Oil and Transport 
Company v. Ark-White Towing Company, 696 F.2d 321, 
327-29 (5th Cir. 1983). 


In the instant case the record shows that from the 
outset there has been a genuine dispute over the Plain- 
tiffs’ good faith claim that the City of Milwaukee was 
negligent for failing to warn the agents of the Defendants 
(who were planning to leave the FORD unmanned during 
the Christmas holidays) that a winter storm could create 
conditions in the outer harbor at Milwaukee which could 
damage the ship. The trial court and the court of appeals 
both found mutual fault for the damage which ensued to 
the ship and to the Defendant’s dock. The court of 
appeals ascribed two-thirds of the negligence to the 
Defendant. Thus, in this situation the court concludes 
that the Plaintiffs’ contributory negligence was of such 
magnitude that an award of prejudgment interest would 
be inequitable. 


One rationale for awarding prejudgment interest is 
that, from the date of loss, the shipowner has been 
deprived of the use of the ship or the money expended to 
replace or repair the vessel, while the other party has 
enjoyed the use of its money for the same time period 
and could be accruing market rate interest on the funds. 
See, e.g., In re Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz, 954 F.2d at 1331. 
The City of Milwaukee is not in this position. As a munic- 
ipality, it has no power to set aside an interest bearing 
fund at the time of a loss, but can only levy taxes to pay a 
settlement or final judgment. See Wis. Stat. ch. 62. There- 
fore, this unique circumstance also leads the court to 


23a 


conclude that prejudgment interest is unwarranted in this 
case. 


For these reasons, the court ORDERS that the Plain- 
tiffs’ request for prejudgment interest on the amount paid 
in settlement by the Defendant IS DENIED. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, all issues in this case 
having been resolved, this action is dismissed upon its 
merits. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, pursuant to Federal 
Rule of Civil Procedure 58, the Clerk of Court shall enter 
a final judgment as a separate document. This judgment 
shall provide that: 


This action came on for a hearing before the 
Court, Honorable Thomas J. Curran, District 
Judge, presiding, and the issues having been 
duly heard and a decision having been duly 
rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the 
Defendant City of Milwaukee is not liable to the 
Plaintiffs for payment of prejudgment interest 
on the amount paid in settlement. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED AND ADJUDGED 
that this action is dismissed upon its merits. 


Done and Ordered in Chambers at the United States 
Courthouse, Milwaukee, Wisconsin this 28th day of May, 
1993. 


/s/ Thomas J. Curran 
Thomas J. Curran 
United States District Judge 


