PAGE 604
604
OCTOBER TERM, 1995
Syllabus
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMMITTEE et al. v. FEDERAL ELECTION
COMMISSION
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the tenth circuit
No. 95–489.
Argued April 15, 1996—Decided June 26, 1996
Before the Colorado Republican Party selected its 1986 senatorial candi-
date, its Federal Campaign Committee (Colorado Party), a petitioner
here, bought radio advertisements attacking the Democratic Party’s
likely candidate.
The Federal Election Commission (FEC) brought suit
charging that the Colorado Party had violated the “Party Expenditure
Provision” of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), 2
U. S. C. §441a(d)(3), which imposes dollar limits upon political party “ex-
penditure[s] in connection with the general election campaign of a [con-
gressional] candidate.”
The Colorado Party defended in part by claim-
ing that the expenditure limitations violated the First Amendment as
applied to its advertisements, and ﬁled a counterclaim seeking to raise
a facial challenge to the provision as a whole.
The District Court inter-
preted the “in connection with” language narrowly and held that the
provision did not cover the expenditure at issue.
It therefore entered
summary judgment for the Colorado Party, dismissing the counterclaim
as moot.
In ordering judgment for the FEC, the Court of Appeals
adopted a somewhat broader interpretation of the provision, which, it
said, both covered this expenditure and satisﬁed the Constitution.
Held: The judgment is vacated, and the case is remanded.
59 F. 3d 1015, vacated and remanded.
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice O’Connor and Justice Souter,
concluded that the First Amendment prohibits application of the Party
Expenditure Provision to the kind of expenditure at issue here—an
expenditure that the political party has made independently, without
coordination with any candidate.
Pp. 613–623.
(a) The outcome is controlled by this Court’s FECA case law.
After
weighing the First Amendment interest in permitting candidates (and
their supporters) to spend money to advance their political views,
against a “compelling” governmental interest in protecting the electoral
system from the appearance and reality of corruption, see, e. g., Buckley
v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 14–23 (per curiam), the Court has ruled unconstitu-
tional FECA provisions that, inter alia, limited the right of individuals,


PAGE 605
605
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Syllabus
id., at 39–51, and political committees, Federal Election Comm’n v.
National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S. 480, 497, to
make “independent” expenditures not coordinated with a candidate or
a candidate’s campaign, but has permitted other FECA provisions that
imposed contribution limits both when an individual or political commit-
tee contributed money directly to a candidate, and when they contrib-
uted indirectly by making expenditures that they coordinated with the
candidate, see Buckley, supra, at 23–36, 46–48.
The summary judg-
ment record indicates that the expenditure here at issue must be
treated, for constitutional purposes, as an “independent” expenditure
entitled to First Amendment protection, not as an indirect campaign
contribution subject to regulation.
There is uncontroverted direct evi-
dence that the Colorado Party developed its advertising campaign inde-
pendently and not pursuant to any understanding with a candidate.
Since the Government does not point to evidence or legislative ﬁndings
suggesting any special corruption problem in respect to political parties’
independent expenditures, the Court’s prior cases forbid regulation of
such expenditures.
Pp. 613–619.
(b) The Government’s argument that this expenditure is not “inde-
pendent,” but is rather a “coordinated expenditure,” which this Court
has treated as a “contribution” that Congress may constitutionally regu-
late, is rejected.
The summary judgment record shows no actual coor-
dination with candidates as a matter of fact.
The Government’s claim
for deference to FEC interpretations rendering all party expenditures
“coordinated” is unpersuasive.
Federal Election Comm’n v. Demo-
cratic Senatorial Campaign Comm., 454 U. S. 27, 28–29, n. 1, distin-
guished.
These regulations and advisory opinions do not represent
an empirical judgment by the FEC that all party expenditures are coor-
dinated with candidates or that party independent and coordinated
expenditures cannot be distinguished in practice.
Also unconvincing
are the Government’s contentions that the Colorado Party has conceded
that the expenditure here is “coordinated,” and that such coordination
exists because a party and its candidate are, in some sense, identical.
Pp. 619–623.
(c) Because this expenditure is “independent,” the Court need not
reach the broader question argued by the Colorado Party: whether, in
the special case of political parties, the First Amendment also forbids
congressional efforts to limit coordinated expenditures.
While the
Court is not deprived of jurisdiction to consider this facial challenge by
the failure of the parties and the lower courts to focus speciﬁcally on the
complex issues involved in determining the constitutionality of political
parties’ coordinated expenditures, that lack of focus provides a pruden-
tial reason for the Court not to decide the broader question.
This is


PAGE 606
606
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Syllabus
the ﬁrst case to raise the question, and the Court should defer action
until the lower courts have considered it in light of this decision.
Pp. 623–626.
Justice Kennedy, joined by The Chief Justice and Justice
Scalia, concluded that, on its face, FECA violates the First Amend-
ment when it restricts as a “contribution” a political party’s spending “in
cooperation, consultation, or concert, with . . . a candidate.”
2 U. S. C.
§441a(a)(7)(B)(i).
The Court in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (per cu-
riam), had no occasion to consider limitations on political parties’
expenditures, id., at 58, n. 66, and its reasoning upholding ordinary con-
tribution limitations should not be extended to a case that does.
Buck-
ley’s central holding is that spending money on one’s own speech must
be permitted, id., at 44–58, and that is what political parties do when
they make the expenditures that §441a(a)(7)(B)(i) restricts as “contribu-
tion[s].”
Party spending “in cooperation, consultation, or concer[t]
with” a candidate is indistinguishable in substance from expenditures
by the candidate or his campaign committee.
The First Amendment
does not permit regulation of the latter, see id., at 54–59, and it should
not permit this regulation of the former.
Pp. 626–631.
Justice Thomas, joined by The Chief Justice and Justice Scalia,
concluded in Parts I and III that 2 U. S. C. §441a(d)(3) is unconsti-
tutional not only as applied to petitioners, but also on its face.
Pp. 631–634, 644–648.
(a) The Court should decide the Colorado Party’s facial challenge to
§441a(d)(3), addressing the constitutionality of limits on coordinated
expenditures by political parties.
That question is squarely before the
Court, and the principal opinion’s reasons for not reaching it are unper-
suasive.
In addition, concerns for the chilling of First Amendment
expression counsel in favor of resolving the question.
Reaching the
facial challenge will make clear the circumstances under which politi-
cal parties may engage in political speech without running afoul of
§441a(d)(3).
Pp. 631–634.
(b) Section 441a(d)(3) cannot withstand a facial challenge under the
framework established by Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (per curiam).
The anticorruption rationale that the Court has relied on is inapplicable
in the speciﬁc context of campaign funding by political parties, since
there is only a minimal threat of corruption when a party spends to
support its candidate or to oppose his competitor, whether or not that
expenditure is made in concert with the candidate.
Parties and candi-
dates have traditionally worked together to achieve their common goals,
and when they engage in that work, there is no risk to the Republic.
To the contrary, the danger lies in Government suppression of such
activity.
Pp. 644–648.


PAGE 607
607
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Syllabus
Justice Thomas also concluded in Part II that, in resolving the facial
challenge, the Buckley framework should be rejected because there is
no constitutionally signiﬁcant difference between campaign contribu-
tions and expenditures: Both involve core expression and basic asso-
ciational rights that are central to the First Amendment.
Curbs on
such speech must be strictly scrutinized.
See, e. g., Federal Election
Comm’n v. National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S.
480, 501.
Section 441a(d)(3)’s limits on independent and coordinated ex-
penditures fail strict scrutiny because the statute is not narrowly tai-
lored to serve the compelling governmental interest in preventing the
fact or appearance of “corruption,” which this Court has narrowly de-
ﬁned as a “ﬁnancial quid pro quo: dollars for political favors,” id., at 497.
Contrary to the Court’s ruling in Buckley, supra, at 28, bribery laws
and disclosure requirements present less restrictive means of prevent-
ing corruption than does §441a(d)(3), which indiscriminately covers
many conceivable instances in which a party committee could exceed
spending limits without any intent to extract an unlawful commitment
from a candidate.
Pp. 640–644.
Breyer, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opin-
ion, in which O’Connor and Souter, JJ., joined.
Kennedy, J., ﬁled an
opinion concurring in the judgment and dissenting in part, in which Rehn-
quist, C. J., and Scalia, J., joined, post, p. 626.
Thomas, J., ﬁled an opin-
ion concurring in the judgment and dissenting in part, in which Rehn-
quist, C. J., and Scalia, J., joined as to Parts I and III, post, p. 631.
Stevens, J., ﬁled a dissenting opinion, in which Ginsburg, J., joined,
post, p. 648.
Jan Witold Baran argued the cause for petitioners.
With
him on the briefs were Thomas W. Kirby, Carol A. Laham,
and Michael E. Toner.
Solicitor General Days argued the cause for respondent.
With him on the brief were Deputy Solicitor General
Bender, Malcolm L. Stewart, Lawrence M. Noble, Richard
B. Bader, and Rita A. Reimer.*
*Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the American
Civil Liberties Union et al. by David H. Remes, David H. Miller, Arthur
B. Spitzer, Steven R. Shapiro, Joel M. Gora, and Arthur N. Eisenberg;
for the Democratic National Committee et al. by Joseph E. Sandler and
Robert F. Bauer; for the National Right to Life Committee, Inc., by
James Bopp, Jr., and Richard E. Coleson; and for the Washington Legal


PAGE 608
608
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Justice Breyer announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered an opinion, in which Justice O’Connor and
Justice Souter join.
In April 1986, before the Colorado Republican Party had
selected its senatorial candidate for the fall’s election, that
party’s Federal Campaign Committee bought radio adver-
tisements attacking Timothy Wirth, the Democratic Party’s
likely candidate.
The Federal Election Commission (FEC)
charged that this “expenditure” exceeded the dollar limits
that a provision of the Federal Election Campaign Act of
1971 (FECA or Act) imposes upon political party “expendi-
ture[s] in connection with” a “general election campaign” for
congressional ofﬁce.
90 Stat. 486, as amended, 2 U. S. C.
§441a(d)(3).
This case focuses upon the constitutionality of
those limits as applied to this case.
We conclude that the
First Amendment prohibits the application of this provision
to the kind of expenditure at issue here—an expenditure that
the political party has made independently, without coordina-
tion with any candidate.
Foundation et al. by Benjamin L. Ginsberg, Daniel J. Popeo, and Paul
D. Kamenar.
Briefs of amici curiae urging afﬁrmance were ﬁled for the Brennan
Center for Justice by Burt Neuborne; and for Common Cause et al. by
Roger M. Witten, Donald J. Simon, and Alan Morrison.
Briefs of amici curiae were ﬁled for the State of Kentucky et al. by A.
B. Chandler III, Attorney General of Kentucky, Pamela J. Murphy, Dep-
uty Attorney General, Morgan G. Ransdell, Assistant Attorney General,
Sheryl G. Snyder, Richard Blumenthal, Attorney General of Connecticut,
Hubert H. Humphrey III, Attorney General of Minnesota, Tom Udall,
Attorney General of New Mexico, W. A. Drew Edmondson, Attorney Gen-
eral of Oklahoma, and Darrell V. McGraw, Jr., Attorney General of West
Virginia; for the Committee for Party Renewal et al. by E. Mark Braden
and Stephen E. Gottlieb; and for the Republican National Committee by
George J. Terwilliger III, John P. Connors, E. Duncan Getchell, Jr., Rob-
ert L. Hodges, and Darryl S. Lew.


PAGE 609
609
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
I
To understand the issues and our holding, one must begin
with FECA as it emerged from Congress in 1974.
That Act
sought both to remedy the appearance of a “corrupt” political
process (one in which large contributions seem to buy legisla-
tive votes) and to level the electoral playing ﬁeld by reducing
campaign costs.
See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 25–27
(1976) (per curiam).
It consequently imposed limits upon
the amounts that individuals, corporations, “political commit-
tees” (such as political action committees, or PAC’s), and
political parties could contribute to candidates for federal
ofﬁce, and it also imposed limits upon the amounts that candi-
dates, corporations, labor unions, political committees, and
political parties could spend, even on their own, to help a
candidate win election.
See 18 U. S. C. §§608, 610 (1970 ed.,
Supp. IV).
This Court subsequently examined several of the Act’s
provisions in light of the First Amendment’s free speech and
association protections.
See Federal Election Comm’n v.
Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238 (1986);
Federal Election Comm’n v. National Conservative Politi-
cal Action Comm., 470 U. S. 480 (1985) (NCPAC); California
Medical Assn. v. Federal Election Comm’n, 453 U. S. 182
(1981); Buckley, supra.
In these cases, the Court essen-
tially weighed the First Amendment interest in permitting
candidates (and their supporters) to spend money to advance
their political views against a “compelling” governmental in-
terest in assuring the electoral system’s legitimacy, protect-
ing it from the appearance and reality of corruption.
See
Massachusetts Citizens for Life, supra, at 256–263; NCPAC,
supra, at 493–501; California Medical Assn., supra, at 193–
199; Buckley, 424 U. S., at 14–23.
After doing so, the Court
found that the First Amendment prohibited some of FECA’s
provisions, but permitted others.


PAGE 610
610
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
Most of the provisions this Court found unconstitutional
imposed expenditure limits.
Those provisions limited candi-
dates’ rights to spend their own money, id., at 51–54, limited
a candidate’s campaign expenditures, id., at 54–58, limited
the right of individuals to make “independent” expenditures
(not coordinated with the candidate or candidate’s campaign),
id., at 39–51, and similarly limited the right of political
committees to make “independent” expenditures, NCPAC,
supra, at 497.
The provisions that the Court found constitu-
tional mostly imposed contribution limits—limits that apply
both when an individual or political committee contributes
money directly to a candidate and also when they indirectly
contribute by making expenditures that they coordinate with
the candidate, §441a(a)(7)(B)(i).
See Buckley, supra, at 23–
36.
See also 424 U. S., at 46–48; California Medical Assn.,
supra, at 193–199 (limits on contributions to political com-
mittees).
Consequently, for present purposes, the Act now
prohibits individuals and political committees from making
direct, or indirect, contributions that exceed the following
limits:
(a) For any “person”: $1,000 to a candidate “with re-
spect to any election”; $5,000 to any political committee
in any year; $20,000 to the national committees of a polit-
ical party in any year; but all within an overall limit
(for any individual in any year) of $25,000.
2 U. S. C.
§§441a(a)(1), (3).
(b) For
any
“multicandidate
political
committee”:
$5,000 to a candidate “with respect to any election”;
$5,000 to any political committee in any year; and
$15,000 to the national committees of a political party
in any year.
§441a(a)(2).
FECA also has a special provision, directly at issue in this
case, that governs contributions and expenditures by politi-
cal parties.
§441a(d).
This special provision creates, in
part, an exception to the above contribution limits.
That


PAGE 611
611
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
is, without special treatment, political parties ordinarily
would be subject to the general limitation on contributions
by a “multicandidate political committee” just described.
See §441a(a)(4).
That provision, as we said in subsection
(b) above, limits annual contributions by a “multicandi-
date political committee” to no more than $5,000 to any can-
didate.
And as also mentioned above, this contribution limit
governs not only direct contributions but also indirect contri-
butions that take the form of coordinated expenditures, de-
ﬁned as “expenditures made . . . in cooperation, consultation,
or concert, with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candi-
date, his authorized political committees, or their agents.”
§441a(a)(7)(B)(i).
Thus, ordinarily, a party’s coordinated ex-
penditures would be subject to the $5,000 limitation.
However, FECA’s special provision, which we shall call the
“Party Expenditure Provision,” creates a general exception
from this contribution limitation, and from any other limita-
tion on expenditures.
It says:
“Notwithstanding any other provision of law with
respect to limitations on expenditures or limitations
on contributions, . . . political party [committees] . . .
may make expenditures in connection with the general
election campaign of candidates for Federal ofﬁce . . . .”
§441a(d)(1) (emphasis added).
After exempting political parties from the general contribu-
tion and expenditure limitations of the statute, the Party
Expenditure Provision then imposes a substitute limitation
upon party “expenditures” in a senatorial campaign equal to
the greater of $20,000 or “2 cents multiplied by the voting
age population of the State,” §441a(d)(3)(A)(i), adjusted for
inﬂation since 1974, §441a(c).
The provision permitted a po-
litical party in Colorado in 1986 to spend about $103,000 in
connection with the general election campaign of a candidate
for the United States Senate.
See FEC Record, vol. 12,
no. 4, p. 1 (Apr. 1986).
(A different provision, not at issue


PAGE 612
612
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
in this case, §441a(d)(2), limits party expenditures in connec-
tion with Presidential campaigns.
Since this case involves
only the provision concerning congressional races, we do not
address issues that might grow out of the public funding of
Presidential campaigns.)
In January 1986, Timothy Wirth, then a Democratic Con-
gressman, announced that he would run for an open Senate
seat in November.
In April, before either the Democratic
primary or the Republican convention, the Colorado Republi-
can Federal Campaign Committee (Colorado Party or Party),
a petitioner here, bought radio advertisements attacking
Congressman Wirth.
The State Democratic Party com-
plained to the FEC.
It pointed out that the Colorado Party
had previously assigned its $103,000 general election allot-
ment to the National Republican Senatorial Committee, leav-
ing it without any permissible spending balance.
See Fed-
eral Election Comm’n v. Democratic Senatorial Campaign
Comm., 454 U. S. 27 (1981) (state party may appoint national
senatorial campaign committee as agent to spend its Party
Expenditure Provision allotment).
It argued that the pur-
chase of radio time was an “expenditure in connection with
the general election campaign of a candidate for Federal of-
ﬁce,” §441a(d)(3), which, consequently, exceeded the Party
Expenditure Provision limits.
The FEC agreed with the Democratic Party.
It brought
a complaint against the Colorado Party, charging a violation.
The Colorado Party defended in part by claiming that the
Party Expenditure Provision’s expenditure limitations vio-
lated the First Amendment—a charge that it repeated in a
counterclaim that said the Colorado Party intended to make
other “expenditures directly in connection with” senato-
rial elections, App. 68, ¶48, and attacked the constitution-
ality of the entire Party Expenditure Provision.
The Fed-
eral District Court interpreted the provision’s words “ ‘in
connection with’ the general election campaign of a candi-
date” narrowly, as meaning only expenditures for advertis-


PAGE 613
613
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
ing using “ ‘express words of advocacy of election or defeat.’ ”
839 F. Supp. 1448, 1455 (Colo. 1993) (quoting Buckley, 424
U. S., at 46, n. 52).
See also Massachusetts Citizens for
Life, 479 U. S., at 249.
As so interpreted, the court held, the
provision did not cover the expenditures here.
The court
entered summary judgment for the Colorado Party and dis-
missed its counterclaim as moot.
Both sides appealed.
The Government, for the FEC, ar-
gued for a somewhat broader interpretation of the statute—
applying the limits to advertisements containing an “elec-
tioneering message” about a “clearly identiﬁed candidate,”
FEC Advisory Op. 1985–14, 2 CCH Fed. Election Camp. Fin.
Guide ¶5819, p. 11,185 (May 30, 1985)—which, it said, both
covered the expenditure and satisﬁed the Constitution.
The
Court of Appeals agreed.
It found the Party Expenditure
Provision applicable, held it constitutional, and ordered judg-
ment in the FEC’s favor.
59 F. 3d 1015, 1023–1024 (CA10
1995).
We granted certiorari primarily to consider the Colorado
Party’s argument that the Party Expenditure Provision vio-
lates the First Amendment “either facially or as applied.”
Pet. for Cert. i.
For reasons we shall discuss in Part IV,
infra, we consider only the latter question—whether the
Party Expenditure Provision as applied here violates the
First Amendment.
We conclude that it does.
II
The summary judgment record indicates that the expendi-
ture in question is what this Court in Buckley called an
“independent” expenditure, not a “coordinated” expenditure
that other provisions of FECA treat as a kind of campaign
“contribution.”
See Buckley, supra, at 36–37, 46–47, 78;
NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 498.
The record describes how the
expenditure was made.
In a deposition, the Colorado Par-
ty’s Chairman, Howard Callaway, pointed out that, at the
time of the expenditure, the Party had not yet selected a


PAGE 614
614
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
senatorial nominee from among the three individuals vying
for the nomination.
App. 195–196.
He added that he ar-
ranged for the development of the script at his own initiative,
id., at 200, that he, and no one else, approved it, id., at 199,
that the only other politically relevant individuals who might
have read it were the Party’s executive director and political
director, ibid., and that all relevant discussions took place at
meetings attended only by Party staff, id., at 204.
Notwithstanding the above testimony, the Government ar-
gued in District Court—and reiterates in passing in its brief
to this Court, Brief for Respondent 27, n. 20—that the
deposition showed that the Party had coordinated the adver-
tisement with its candidates.
It pointed to Callaway’s state-
ment that it was the practice of the Party to “coordinat[e]
with the candidate” “campaign strategy,” App. 195, and for
Callaway to be “as involved as [he] could be” with the indi-
viduals seeking the Republican nomination, ibid., by making
available to them “all of the assets of the party,” id., at 195–
196.
These latter statements, however, are general descrip-
tions of Party practice.
They do not refer to the advertising
campaign at issue here or to its preparation.
Nor do they
conﬂict with, or cast signiﬁcant doubt upon, the uncontro-
verted direct evidence that this advertising campaign was
developed by the Colorado Party independently and not pur-
suant to any general or particular understanding with a
candidate.
We can ﬁnd no “genuine” issue of fact in this
respect.
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 56(e); Matsushita Elec. In-
dustrial Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U. S. 574, 586–587
(1986).
And we therefore treat the expenditure, for consti-
tutional purposes, as an “independent” expenditure, not an
indirect campaign contribution.
So treated, the expenditure falls within the scope of the
Court’s precedents that extend First Amendment protection
to independent expenditures.
Beginning with Buckley, the
Court’s cases have found a “fundamental constitutional
difference between money spent to advertise one’s views


PAGE 615
615
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
independently of the candidate’s campaign and money con-
tributed to the candidate to be spent on his campaign.”
NCPAC, supra, at 497.
This difference has been grounded
in the observation that restrictions on contributions impose
“only a marginal restriction upon the contributor’s ability
to engage in free communication,” Buckley, supra, at 20–21,
because the symbolic communicative value of a contribution
bears little relation to its size, 424 U. S., at 21, and because
such limits leave “persons free to engage in independent po-
litical expression, to associate actively through volunteering
their services, and to assist to a limited but nonetheless sub-
stantial extent in supporting candidates and committees with
ﬁnancial resources,” id., at 28.
At the same time, reasonable
contribution limits directly and materially advance the Gov-
ernment’s interest in preventing exchanges of large ﬁnancial
contributions for political favors.
Id., at 26–27.
In contrast, the Court has said that restrictions on inde-
pendent expenditures signiﬁcantly impair the ability of indi-
viduals and groups to engage in direct political advocacy and
“represent substantial . . . restraints on the quantity and di-
versity of political speech.”
Id., at 19.
And at the same
time, the Court has concluded that limitations on independ-
ent expenditures are less directly related to preventing cor-
ruption, since “[t]he absence of prearrangement and coordi-
nation of an expenditure with the candidate . . . not only
undermines the value of the expenditure to the candidate,
but also alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given
as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the candi-
date.”
Id., at 47.
Given these established principles, we do not see how a
provision that limits a political party’s independent expendi-
tures can escape their controlling effect.
A political party’s
independent expression not only reﬂects its members’ views
about the philosophical and governmental matters that bind
them together, it also seeks to convince others to join those
members in a practical democratic task, the task of creating


PAGE 616
616
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
a government that voters can instruct and hold responsible
for subsequent success or failure.
The independent expres-
sion of a political party’s views is “core” First Amendment
activity no less than is the independent expression of individ-
uals, candidates, or other political committees.
See, e. g., Eu
v. San Francisco County Democratic Central Comm., 489
U. S. 214 (1989).
We are not aware of any special dangers of corruption
associated with political parties that tip the constitutional
balance in a different direction.
When this Court consid-
ered, and held unconstitutional, limits that FECA had set
on certain independent expenditures by PAC’s, it reiterated
Buckley’s observation that “the absence of prearrangement
and coordination” does not eliminate, but it does help to
“alleviate,” any “danger” that a candidate will understand
the expenditure as an effort to obtain a “quid pro quo.”
See
NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 498.
The same is true of independent
party expenditures.
We recognize that FECA permits individuals to contribute
more money ($20,000) to a party than to a candidate ($1,000)
or to other political committees ($5,000).
2 U. S. C. §441a(a).
We also recognize that FECA permits unregulated “soft
money” contributions to a party for certain activities, such
as electing candidates for state ofﬁce, see §431(8)(A)(i), or
for voter registration and “get out the vote” drives, see
§431(8)(B)(xii).
But the opportunity for corruption posed
by these greater opportunities for contributions is, at best,
attenuated.
Unregulated “soft money” contributions may
not be used to inﬂuence a federal campaign, except when
used in the limited, party-building activities speciﬁcally des-
ignated in the statute.
See §431(8)(B).
Any contribution
to a party that is earmarked for a particular campaign is
considered a contribution to the candidate and is subject
to the contribution limitations.
§441a(a)(8).
A party may
not simply channel unlimited amounts of even undesignated
contributions to a candidate, since such direct transfers are


PAGE 617
617
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
also considered contributions and are subject to the con-
tribution limits on a “multicandidate political committee.”
§441a(a)(2).
The greatest danger of corruption, therefore,
appears to be from the ability of donors to give sums up to
$20,000 to a party which may be used for independent party
expenditures for the beneﬁt of a particular candidate.
We
could understand how Congress, were it to conclude that the
potential for evasion of the individual contribution limits was
a serious matter, might decide to change the statute’s limita-
tions on contributions to political parties.
Cf. California
Medical Assn., 453 U. S., at 197–199 (plurality opinion) (dan-
ger of evasion of limits on contribution to candidates justiﬁed
prophylactic limitation on contributions to PAC’s).
But we
do not believe that the risk of corruption present here could
justify the “markedly greater burden on basic freedoms
caused by” the statute’s limitations on expenditures.
Buck-
ley, 424 U. S., at 44.
See also id., at 46–47, 51; NCPAC,
supra, at 498.
Contributors seeking to avoid the effect of
the $1,000 contribution limit indirectly by donations to the
national party could spend that same amount of money (or
more) themselves more directly by making their own inde-
pendent expenditures promoting the candidate.
See Buck-
ley, supra, at 44–48 (risk of corruption by individuals’ inde-
pendent expenditures is insufﬁcient to justify limits on such
spending).
If anything, an independent expenditure made
possible by a $20,000 donation, but controlled and directed
by a party rather than the donor, would seem less likely to
corrupt than the same (or a much larger) independent
expenditure made directly by that donor.
In any case, the
constitutionally signiﬁcant fact, present equally in both in-
stances, is the lack of coordination between the candidate
and the source of the expenditure.
See Buckley, supra, at
45–46; NCPAC, supra, at 498.
This fact prevents us from
assuming, absent convincing evidence to the contrary, that a
limitation on political parties’ independent expenditures is


PAGE 618
618
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
necessary to combat a substantial danger of corruption of the
electoral system.
The Government does not point to record evidence or leg-
islative ﬁndings suggesting any special corruption problem
in respect to independent party expenditures.
See Turner
Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 664 (1994)
(“When the Government defends a regulation on speech as a
means to . . . prevent anticipated harms, it must do more
than simply posit the existence of the disease sought to
be cured” (citation and internal quotation marks omitted));
NCPAC, supra, at 498.
To the contrary, this Court’s opin-
ions suggest that Congress wrote the Party Expenditure
Provision not so much because of a special concern about
the potentially “corrupting” effect of party expenditures, but
rather for the constitutionally insufﬁcient purpose of reduc-
ing what it saw as wasteful and excessive campaign spend-
ing.
See Buckley, supra, at 57.
In fact, rather than indi-
cating a special fear of the corruptive inﬂuence of political
parties, the legislative history demonstrates Congress’ gen-
eral desire to enhance what was seen as an important and
legitimate role for political parties in American elections.
See Federal Election Comm’n v. Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Comm., 454 U. S., at 41 (Party Expenditure Pro-
vision was intended to “assur[e] that political parties will
continue to have an important role in federal elections”);
S. Rep. No. 93–689, p. 7 (1974) (“[A] vigorous party system
is vital to American politics . . . .
[P]ooling resources from
many small contributors is a legitimate function and an inte-
gral part of party politics”); id., at 7–8, 15.
We therefore believe that this Court’s prior case law con-
trols the outcome here.
We do not see how a Constitution
that grants to individuals, candidates, and ordinary political
committees the right to make unlimited independent expend-
itures could deny the same right to political parties.
Having
concluded this, we need not consider the Party’s further
claim that the statute’s “in connection with” language, and


PAGE 619
619
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
the FEC’s interpretation of that language, are unconstitu-
tionally vague. Cf. Buckley, supra, at 40–44.
III
The Government does not deny the force of the precedent
we have discussed.
Rather, it argued below, and the lower
courts accepted, that the expenditure in this case should be
treated under those precedents, not as an “independent ex-
penditure,” but rather as a “coordinated expenditure,” which
those cases have treated as “contributions,” and which those
cases have held Congress may constitutionally regulate.
See, e. g., Buckley, supra, at 23–38.
While the District Court found that the expenditure in
this case was “coordinated,” 839 F. Supp., at 1453, it did not
do so based on any factual ﬁnding that the Party had con-
sulted with any candidate in the making or planning of the
advertising campaign in question.
Instead, the District
Court accepted the Government’s argument that all party
expenditures should be treated as if they had been coordi-
nated as a matter of law, “[b]ased on Supreme Court prece-
dent and the Commission’s interpretation of the statute,”
ibid.
The Court of Appeals agreed with this legal conclu-
sion.
59 F. 3d, at 1024.
Thus, the lower courts’ “ﬁnding”
of coordination does not conﬂict with our conclusion, supra,
at 613–614, that the summary judgment record shows no ac-
tual coordination as a matter of fact.
The question, instead,
is whether the Court of Appeals erred as a legal matter in
accepting the Government’s conclusive presumption that all
party expenditures are “coordinated.”
We believe it did.
In support of its argument, the Government points to a
set of legal materials, based on FEC interpretations, that
seem to say or imply that all party expenditures are “coordi-
nated.”
These include: (1) an FEC regulation that forbids
political parties to make any “independent expenditures . . .
in connection with” a “general election campaign,” 11 CFR
§110.7(b)(4) (1995); (2) FEC Advisory Opinions that use the


PAGE 620
620
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
word “coordinated” to describe the Party Expenditure Pro-
vision’s limitations, see, e. g., FEC Advisory Op. 1984–15, 1
CCH Fed. Election Camp. Fin. Guide ¶5766, p. 11,069 (May
31, 1984) (AO 1984–15); FEC Advisory Op. 1988–22, 2 CCH
Fed. Election Camp. Fin. Guide ¶5932, p. 11,471, n. 4 (July
5, 1988) (AO 1988–22); (3) one FEC Advisory Opinion that
says explicitly in a footnote that “coordination with candi-
dates is presumed and ‘independence’ precluded,” ibid.; and
(4) a statement by this Court that “[p]arty committees are
considered incapable of making ‘independent’ expenditures,”
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Comm., supra, at 28–29,
n. 1.
The Government argues, on the basis of these materials,
that the FEC has made an “empirical judgment that party
ofﬁcials will as a matter of course consult with the party’s
candidates before funding communications intended to in-
ﬂuence the outcome of a federal election.”
Brief for Re-
spondent 27.
The FEC materials, however, do not make
this empirical judgment.
For the most part those materials
use the word “coordinated” as a description that does not
necessarily deny the possibility that a party could also make
independent expenditures.
See, e. g., AO 1984–15, ¶5766,
at 11,069.
We concede that one Advisory Opinion says, in
a footnote, that “coordination with candidates is presumed.”
AO 1988–22, ¶5932, at 11,471, n. 4.
But this statement, like
the others, appears without any internal or external evi-
dence that the FEC means it to embody an empirical judg-
ment (say, that parties, in fact, hardly ever spend money
independently) or to represent the outcome of an empirical
investigation.
Indeed, the statute does not require any such
investigation, for it applies both to coordinated and to inde-
pendent expenditures alike.
See §441a(d)(3) (a “political
party . . . may not make any expenditure” in excess of the
limits (emphasis added)).
In any event, language in other
FEC Advisory Opinions suggests the opposite, namely, that
sometimes, in fact, parties do make independent expendi-


PAGE 621
621
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
tures.
See, e. g., AO 1984–15, ¶5766, at 11,069 (“Although
consultation or coordination with the candidate is permissi-
ble, it is not required”).
In these circumstances, we cannot
take the cited materials as an empirical, or experience-based,
determination that, as a factual matter, all party expendi-
tures are coordinated with a candidate.
That being so, we
need not hold, on the basis of these materials, that the ex-
penditures here were “coordinated.”
The Government does not advance any other legal reason
that would require us to accept the FEC’s characterization.
The FEC has not claimed, for example, that, administratively
speaking, it is more difﬁcult to separate a political party’s
“independent,” from its “coordinated,” expenditures than,
say, those of a PAC.
Cf. 11 CFR §109.1 (1995) (distinguish-
ing between independent and coordinated expenditures by
other political groups).
Nor can the FEC draw signiﬁcant
legal support from the footnote in Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Comm., 454 U. S., at 28–29, n. 1, given that this
statement was dicta that purported to describe the regula-
tory regime as the FEC had described it in a brief.
Nor does the fact that the Party Expenditure Provision
fails to distinguish between coordinated and independent ex-
penditures indicate a congressional judgment that such a dis-
tinction is impossible or untenable in the context of political
party spending.
Instead, the use of the unmodiﬁed term
“expenditure” is explained by Congress’ desire to limit all
party expenditures when it passed the 1974 amendments,
just as it had limited all expenditures by individuals, corpo-
rations, and other political groups.
See 18 U. S. C. §§608(e),
610 (1970 ed., Supp. IV); Buckley, 424 U. S., at 39.
Finally, we recognize that the FEC may have character-
ized the expenditures as “coordinated” in light of this Court’s
constitutional decisions prohibiting regulation of most inde-
pendent expenditures.
But, if so, the characterization can-
not help the Government prove its case.
An agency’s simply
calling an independent expenditure a “coordinated expendi-


PAGE 622
622
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
ture” cannot (for constitutional purposes) make it one.
See,
e. g., NAACP v. Button, 371 U. S. 415, 429 (1963) (the gov-
ernment “cannot foreclose the exercise of constitutional
rights by mere labels”); Edwards v. South Carolina, 372
U. S. 229, 235–238 (1963) (State may not avoid First Amend-
ment’s strictures by applying the label “breach of the peace”
to peaceful demonstrations).
The Government also argues that the Colorado Party has
conceded that the expenditures are “coordinated.”
But
there is no such concession in respect to the underlying facts.
To the contrary, the Party’s “Questions Presented” in its pe-
tition for certiorari describes the expenditure as one “the
party has not coordinated with its candidate.”
See Pet. for
Cert. i.
In the lower courts the Party did accept the FEC’s
terminology, but it did so in the context of legal arguments
that did not focus upon the constitutional distinction that we
now consider.
See Reply Brief for Petitioners 9–10, n. 8
(denying that the FEC’s labels can control constitutional
analysis).
The Government has not referred us to any place
where the Party conceded away or abandoned its legal claim
that Congress may not limit the uncoordinated expenditure
at issue here.
And, in any event, we are not bound to decide
a matter of constitutional law based on a concession by the
particular party before the Court as to the proper legal char-
acterization of the facts.
Cf. United States Nat. Bank of
Ore. v. Independent Ins. Agents of America, Inc., 508 U. S.
439, 447 (1993); Massachusetts v. United States, 333 U. S.
611, 623–628 (1948); Young v. United States, 315 U. S. 257,
259 (1942) (recognizing that “our judgments are precedents”
and that the proper understanding of matters of law “cannot
be left merely to the stipulation of parties”).
Finally, the Government and supporting amici argue that
the expenditure is “coordinated” because a party and its can-
didate are identical, i. e., the party, in a sense, “is” its candi-
dates.
We cannot assume, however, that this is so.
See,
e. g., W. Keefe, Parties, Politics, and Public Policy in America


PAGE 623
623
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
59–74 (5th ed. 1988) (describing parties as “coalitions” of dif-
fering interests).
Congress chose to treat candidates and
their parties quite differently under the Act, for example,
by regulating contributions from one to the other.
See
§441a(a)(2)(B).
See also 11 CFR §§110.2, 110.3(b) (1995).
And we are not certain whether a metaphysical identity
would help the Government, for in that case one might argue
that the absolute identity of views and interests eliminates
any potential for corruption, as would seem to be the case
in the relationship between candidates and their campaign
committees.
Cf. Buckley, supra, at 54–59 (Congress may
not limit expenditures by candidate/campaign committee);
First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 790
(1978) (where there is no risk of “corruption” of a candidate,
the Government may not limit even contributions).
IV
The Colorado Party and supporting amici have argued a
broader question than we have decided, for they have
claimed that, in the special case of political parties, the First
Amendment forbids congressional efforts to limit coordi-
nated expenditures as well as independent expenditures.
Because the expenditure before us is an independent expend-
iture we have not reached this broader question in deciding
the Party’s “as applied” challenge.
We recognize that the Party ﬁled a counterclaim in which
it sought to raise a facial challenge to the Party Expenditure
Provision as a whole.
But that counterclaim did not focus
speciﬁcally upon coordinated expenditures.
See App. 68–69.
Nor did its summary judgment afﬁdavits speciﬁcally allege
that the Party intended to make coordinated expenditures
exceeding the statute’s limits.
See id., at 159, ¶4.
While
this lack of focus does not deprive this Court of jurisdiction
to consider a facial challenge to the Party Expenditure Pro-
vision as overbroad or as unconstitutional in all applications,
it does provide a prudential reason for this Court not to


PAGE 624
624
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Breyer, J.
decide the broader question, especially since it may not be
necessary to resolve the entire current dispute.
If, in fact,
the Party wants to make only independent expenditures
like those before us, its counterclaim is mooted by our resolu-
tion of its “as applied” challenge.
Cf. Renne v. Geary, 501
U. S. 312, 323–324 (1991) (facial challenge should generally
not be entertained when an “as-applied” challenge could re-
solve the case); Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S.
491, 503–504 (1985).
More importantly, the opinions of the lower courts, and the
parties’ briefs in this case, did not squarely isolate, and ad-
dress, party expenditures that in fact are coordinated, nor
did they examine, in that context, relevant similarities or
differences with similar expenditures made by individuals or
other political groups.
Indeed, to our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst case in the 20-year history of the Party Expenditure
Provision to suggest that in-fact coordinated expenditures
by political parties are protected from congressional reg-
ulation by the First Amendment, even though this Court’s
prior cases have permitted regulation of similarly coordi-
nated expenditures by individuals and other political groups.
See Buckley, 424 U. S., at 46–47.
This issue is complex.
As
Justice Kennedy points out, post, at 629–630, party coordi-
nated expenditures do share some of the constitutionally rel-
evant features of independent expenditures.
But many such
expenditures are also virtually indistinguishable from simple
contributions (compare, for example, a donation of money
with direct payment of a candidate’s media bills, see Buckley,
supra, at 46).
Moreover, political parties also share relevant
features with many PAC’s, both having an interest in, and
devoting resources to, the goal of electing candidates who
will “work to further” a particular “political agenda,” which
activity would beneﬁt from coordination with those candi-
dates.
Post, at 630.
See, e. g., NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 490 (de-
scribing the purpose and activities of the National Conserva-
tive PAC); id., at 492 (coordinated expenditures by PAC’s are


PAGE 625
625
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Breyer, J.
subject to FECA contribution limitations).
Thus, a holding
on in-fact coordinated party expenditures necessarily impli-
cates a broader range of issues than may ﬁrst appear, includ-
ing the constitutionality of party contribution limits.
But the focus of this litigation, and of the lower court opin-
ions, has not been on such issues, but rather on whether the
Government may conclusively deem independent party ex-
penditures to be coordinated.
This lack of focus may reﬂect,
in part, the litigation strategy of the parties.
The Govern-
ment has denied that any distinction can be made between a
party’s independent and its coordinated expenditures.
The
Colorado Party, for its part, did not challenge a different pro-
vision of the statute—a provision that imposes a $5,000 limit
on any contribution by a “multicandidate political commit-
tee” (including a coordinated expenditure) and which would
apply to party coordinated expenditures if the entire Party
Expenditure Provision were struck from the statute as un-
constitutional.
See §§441a(a)(2), (4), (7)(B)(i).
Rather than
challenging the constitutionality of this provision as well,
thereby making clear that it was challenging Congress’ au-
thority to regulate in-fact coordinated party expenditures,
the Party has made an obscure severability argument that
would leave party coordinated expenditures exempt from
that provision.
See Reply Brief for Petitioners 11, n. 9.
While these strategies do not deprive the parties of a right
to adjudicate the counterclaim, they do provide a reason for
this Court to defer consideration of the broader issues until
the lower courts have reconsidered the question in light of
our current opinion.
Finally, we note that neither the parties nor the lower
courts have considered whether or not Congress would have
wanted the Party Expenditure Provision’s limitations to stand
were they to apply only to coordinated, and not to independ-
ent, expenditures.
See Buckley, supra, at 108; NCPAC,
supra, at 498.
This nonconstitutional ground for exempt-
ing party coordinated expenditures from FECA limitations


PAGE 626
626
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
should be briefed and considered before addressing the
constitutionality of such regulation.
See United States v.
Locke, 471 U. S. 84, 92, and n. 9 (1985).
Justice Thomas disagrees and would reach the broader
constitutional question notwithstanding the above prudential
considerations.
In fact, he would reach a great number of
issues neither addressed below, nor presented by the facts of
this case, nor raised by the parties, for he believes it appro-
priate here to overrule sua sponte this Court’s entire cam-
paign ﬁnance jurisprudence, developed in numerous cases
over the last 20 years.
See post, at 635–644.
Doing so
seems inconsistent with this Court’s view that it is ordinarily
“inappropriate for us to reexamine” prior precedent “with-
out the beneﬁt of the parties’ brieﬁng,” since the “principles
that animate our policy of stare decisis caution against over-
ruling a longstanding precedent on a theory not argued by
the parties.”
United States v. International Business Ma-
chines Corp., 517 U. S. 843, 855, 856 (1996).
In our view,
given the important competing interests involved in cam-
paign ﬁnance issues, we should proceed cautiously, consistent
with this precedent, and remand for further proceedings.
For these reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeals
is vacated, and the case is remanded for further proceedings.
It is so ordered.
Justice Kennedy, with whom The Chief Justice and
Justice Scalia join, concurring in the judgment and dis-
senting in part.
In agreement with Justice Thomas, post, at 631–634, I
would hold that the Colorado Republican Party (Party), in
its pleadings in the District Court and throughout this litiga-
tion, has preserved its claim that the constraints imposed by
the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), both on
its face and as interpreted by the Federal Elections Commis-
sion (FEC), violate the First Amendment.


PAGE 627
627
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
In the principal opinion’s view, the FEC’s conclusive pre-
sumption that all political party spending relating to identi-
ﬁed candidates is “coordinated” cannot be squared with the
First Amendment.
Ante, at 619–623.
The principal opin-
ion ﬁnds the presumption invalid, and I agree with much of
the reasoning behind that conclusion.
The quarrel over the
FEC’s presumption is beside the point, however, for under
the statute it is both burdensome and quite unrealistic for
a political party to attempt the expenditure of funds on a
candidate’s behalf (or against other candidates) without run-
ning afoul of FECA’s spending limitations.
Indeed, the principal opinion’s reasoning with respect to
the presumption illuminates the deﬁciencies in the statutory
provision as a whole as it constrains the speech and political
activities of political parties.
The presumption is a logical,
though invalid, implementation of the statute, which re-
stricts as a “contribution” a political party’s spending “in
cooperation, consultation, or concert, with, or at the request
or suggestion of, a candidate, his authorized political commit-
tees, or their agents.”
2 U. S. C. §441a(a)(7)(B)(i).
While
the statutory provision applies to any “person,” its obvious
purpose and effect when applied to political parties, as the
FEC’s presumption reﬂects, is to restrict any party’s spend-
ing in a speciﬁc campaign for or against a candidate and so
to burden a party in expending its own money for its own
speech.
The central holding in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976)
(per curiam), is that spending money on one’s own speech
must be permitted, id., at 44–58, and this is what political
parties do when they make the expenditures FECA re-
stricts.
FECA calls spending of this nature a “contribu-
tion,” §441a(a)(7)(B)(i), and it is true that contributions can
be restricted consistent with Buckley, supra, at 23–38.
As
the principal opinion acknowledges, however, and as our
cases hold, we cannot allow the Government’s suggested
labels to control our First Amendment analysis.
Ante, at


PAGE 628
628
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
621–622.
See also, e. g., Landmark Communications, Inc.
v. Virginia, 435 U. S. 829, 843 (1978) (“Deference to a legisla-
tive ﬁnding cannot limit judicial inquiry when First Amend-
ment rights are at stake”).
In Buckley, we concluded that
contribution limitations imposed only “marginal restric-
tion[s]” on the contributor’s First Amendment rights, 424
U. S., at 20, because certain attributes of contributions make
them less like “speech” for First Amendment purposes:
“A contribution serves as a general expression of sup-
port for the candidate and his views, but does not com-
municate the underlying basis for the support.
The
quantity of communication by the contributor does not
increase perceptibly with the size of his contribution,
since the expression rests solely on the undifferentiated,
symbolic act of contributing.
At most, the size of the
contribution provides a very rough index of the intensity
of the contributor’s support for the candidate.
A limita-
tion on the amount of money a person may give to a
candidate or campaign organization thus involves little
direct restraint on his political communication, for it per-
mits the symbolic expression of support evidenced by a
contribution but does not in any way infringe the con-
tributor’s freedom to discuss candidates and issues.
While contributions may result in political expression if
spent by a candidate or an association to present views
to the voters, the transformation of contributions into
political debate involves speech by someone other than
the contributor.”
Id., at 21 (footnote omitted).
We had no occasion in Buckley to consider possible First
Amendment objections to limitations on spending by parties.
Id., at 58, n. 66.
While our cases uphold contribution limita-
tions on individuals and associations, see id., at 23–38; Cali-
fornia Medical Assn. v. Federal Election Comm’n, 453 U. S.
182, 193–199 (1981) (plurality opinion), political party spend-
ing “in cooperation, consultation, or concert with” a candi-


PAGE 629
629
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
date does not ﬁt within our description of “contributions” in
Buckley.
In my view, we should not transplant the reason-
ing of cases upholding ordinary contribution limitations to
a case involving FECA’s restrictions on political party
spending.
The First Amendment embodies a “profound national com-
mitment to the principle that debate on public issues should
be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open.”
New York Times
Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 270 (1964).
Political parties
have a unique role in serving this principle; they exist to
advance their members’ shared political beliefs.
See, e. g.,
Eu v. San Francisco County Democratic Central Comm.,
489 U. S. 214 (1989); Sweezy v. New Hampshire, 354 U. S. 234,
250 (1957).
Cf. Morse v. Republican Party of Va., 517 U. S.
186, 250–251 (1996) (Kennedy, J., dissenting).
A party per-
forms this function, in part, by “identify[ing] the people who
constitute the association, and . . . limit[ing] the association
to those people only.”
Democratic Party of United States
v. Wisconsin ex rel. La Follette, 450 U. S. 107, 122 (1981).
Having identiﬁed its members, however, a party can give
effect to their views only by selecting and supporting candi-
dates.
A political party has its own traditions and principles
that transcend the interests of individual candidates and
campaigns; but in the context of particular elections, candi-
dates are necessary to make the party’s message known and
effective, and vice versa.
It makes no sense, therefore, to ask, as FECA does, whether
a party’s spending is made “in cooperation, consultation, or
concert with” its candidate.
The answer in most cases will be
yes, but that provides more, not less, justiﬁcation for holding
unconstitutional the statute’s attempt to control this type of
party spending, which bears little resemblance to the contri-
butions discussed in Buckley.
Supra, at 627–628 and this
page.
Party spending “in cooperation, consultation, or con-
cert with” its candidates of necessity “communicate[s] the un-
derlying basis for the support,” 424 U. S., at 21, i. e., the hope


PAGE 630
630
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Kennedy, J.
that he or she will be elected and will work to further the
party’s political agenda.
The problem is not just the absence of a basis in our First
Amendment cases for treating the party’s spending as contri-
butions.
The greater difﬁculty posed by the statute is its
stiﬂing effect on the ability of the party to do what it exists
to do.
It is fanciful to suppose that limiting party spending
of the type at issue here “does not in any way infringe the
contributor’s freedom to discuss candidates and issues,”
ibid., since it would be impractical and imprudent, to say the
least, for a party to support its own candidates without some
form of “cooperation” or “consultation.”
The party’s speech,
legitimate on its own behalf, cannot be separated from
speech on the candidate’s behalf without constraining the
party in advocating its most essential positions and pursuing
its most basic goals.
The party’s form of organization and
the fact that its fate in an election is inextricably intertwined
with that of its candidates cannot provide a basis for the
restrictions imposed here.
See Federal Election Comm’n
v. National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S.
480, 494–495 (1985).
We have a constitutional tradition of political parties and
their candidates engaging in joint First Amendment activity;
we also have a practical identity of interests between the two
entities during an election.
Party spending “in cooperation,
consultation, or concert with” a candidate therefore is indis-
tinguishable in substance from expenditures by the candi-
date or his campaign committee.
We held in Buckley that
the First Amendment does not permit regulation of the lat-
ter, see 424 U. S., at 54–59, and it should not permit this
regulation of the former.
Congress may have authority,
consistent with the First Amendment, to restrict undifferen-
tiated political party contributions which satisfy the constitu-
tional criteria we discussed in Buckley, but that type of reg-
ulation is not at issue here.


PAGE 631
631
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
I would resolve the Party’s First Amendment claim in
accord with these principles rather than remit the Party to
further protracted proceedings.
Because the principal opin-
ion would do otherwise, I concur only in the judgment.
Justice Thomas, with whom The Chief Justice and
Justice Scalia join as to Parts I and III, concurring in the
judgment and dissenting in part.
I agree that petitioners’ rights under the First Amend-
ment have been violated, but I think we should reach the
facial challenge in this case in order to make clear the cir-
cumstances under which political parties may engage in po-
litical speech without running afoul of 2 U. S. C. §441a(d)(3).
In resolving that challenge, I would reject the framework
established by Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976) (per cu-
riam), for analyzing the constitutionality of campaign ﬁ-
nance laws and hold that §441a(d)(3)’s limits on independent
and coordinated expenditures fail strict scrutiny.
But even
under Buckley, §441a(d)(3) cannot stand, because the anti-
corruption rationale that we have relied upon in sustaining
other campaign ﬁnance laws is inapplicable where political
parties are the subject of such regulation.
I
As an initial matter, I write to make clear that we should
decide the Colorado Republican Party’s (Party’s) facial chal-
lenge to §441a(d)(3) and thus address the constitutionality of
limits on coordinated expenditures by political parties.
Jus-
tice Breyer’s reasons for not reaching the facial consti-
tutionality of the statute are unpersuasive.
In addition, con-
cerns for the chilling of First Amendment expression counsel
in favor of resolving that question.
After the Federal Election Commission (FEC) brought
this action against the Party, the Party counterclaimed that
“the limits on its expenditures in connection with the general


PAGE 632
632
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
election campaign for the Ofﬁce of United States Senator
from the State of Colorado imposed by 2 U. S. C. §441a(d)
are unconstitutional, both facially and as applied.”
App. 68.
Though Justice Breyer faults the Party for not “focus[ing]
speciﬁcally upon coordinated expenditures,” ante, at 623,
the term “expenditures” certainly includes both coordinated
as
well
as
independent
expenditures.1
See
2
U. S. C.
§431(9)(A) (“The term ‘expenditure’ includes . . . any pur-
chase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift
of money or anything of value, made by any person for the
purpose of inﬂuencing any election for Federal ofﬁce” (em-
phasis added)).
Moreover, at the time the Party ﬁled its
counterclaim, all party expenditures were treated by law as
coordinated, see Federal Election Comm’n v. Democratic
Senatorial Campaign Comm., 454 U. S. 27, 28–29, n. 1
(1981), so a reference to expenditures by a party was tan-
tamount to a reference to coordinated expenditures.
Given the liberal nature of the rules governing civil plead-
ing, see Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 8, the Party’s straightforward
allegation of the unconstitutionality of §441a(d)(3)’s expen-
diture limits clearly sufﬁces to raise the claim that neither
independent nor coordinated expenditures may be regulated
consistently with the First Amendment.
Indeed, that is
precisely how the Court of Appeals appears to have read the
counterclaim.
The court expressly said that it was “analyz-
ing the constitutionality of limits on coordinated expendi-
tures by political committees,” 59 F. 3d 1015, 1024 (CA10
1995), under §441a(d)(3).
For the same reasons, the fact that the Party’s summary
judgment afﬁdavits did not “speciﬁcally allege,” ante, at 623,
that the Party intended to make coordinated expenditures
is also immaterial.
The afﬁdavits made clear that, but for
1 Justice Breyer acknowledges as much when he asserts earlier in
his opinion that “the unmodiﬁed term ‘expenditure’ ” reﬂects a congres-
sional intent “to limit all party expenditures.”
Ante, at 621 (emphasis
in original).


PAGE 633
633
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
§441a(d)(3), the Party would spend in excess of the limits
imposed by that statute, see App. 159 (“[T]he State Party
intends to pay for communications within the spending limits
of [§441]. . . . However, the State Party would also like to
pay for communications which costs [sic] exceed the spend-
ing limits of [§441a(d)], but will not do so due to the deter-
rent and chilling effect of the statute”), as did the Party’s
brief in this Court, see Brief for Petitioners 23–24 (“The Col-
orado Party is ready, willing and able to make expenditures
expressly advocating the election or defeat of candidates for
federal ofﬁce that would exceed the limits imposed by
§441a(d), but it has been deterred from doing so by the obvi-
ous and credible threat of FEC enforcement actions”).
Finally, though Justice Breyer notes that this is the ﬁrst
Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA) case to raise
the constitutional validity of limits on coordinated expendi-
tures, see ante, at 624, that is, at best, an argument against
granting certiorari.
It is too late for arguments like that
now.
The case is here, and we needlessly protract this liti-
gation by remanding this important issue to the Court of
Appeals.
Nor is the fact that the “issue is complex,” ibid.,
a good reason for avoiding it.
We do not sit to decide only
easy cases.
And while it may be true that no court has ever
asked whether expenditures that are “in fact” coordinated
may be regulated under the First Amendment, see ibid., I
do not see how the existence of an “in fact” coordinated
expenditure would change our analysis of the facial consti-
tutionality of §441a(d)(3), since courts in facial challenges
under the First Amendment routinely consider applica-
tions of the relevant statute other than the application before
the court.
See Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U. S. 601, 612
(1973).
Whether or not there are facts in the record to sup-
port the ﬁnding that this particular expenditure was actually
coordinated with a candidate, we are not, contrary to the
suggestion of Justice Breyer, incapable of considering
the Government’s interest in regulating such expenditures


PAGE 634
634
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
and testing the ﬁt between that end and the means used to
achieve it.2
The validity of §441a(d)(3)’s controls on coordinated ex-
penditures is an open question that, if left unanswered, will
inhibit the exercise of legitimate First Amendment activity
nationwide.
All Justice Breyer resolves is that when a
political party spends money in support of a candidate (or
against his opponent) and the Government cannot thereafter
prove any coordination between the party and the candidate,
the party cannot be punished by the Government for that
spending.
This settles little, if anything.
Parties are left
to wonder whether their speech is protected by the First
Amendment when the Government can show—presumably
with circumstantial evidence—a link between the party and
the candidate with respect to the speech in question.
And
of course, one of the main purposes of a political party is to
support its candidates in elections.
The constitutionality of limits on coordinated expenditures
by political parties is squarely before us.
We should address
this important question now, instead of leaving political par-
ties in a state of uncertainty about the types of First Amend-
ment expression in which they are free to engage.
2 Justice Breyer’s remaining arguments for avoiding the facial chal-
lenge are straw men.
See ante, at 625 (if §441a(d)(3) were invalidated in
its entirety, other FECA provisions that the Party has not challenged
might apply to coordinated party expenditures); ibid. (if §441a(d)(3) were
upheld as to coordinated expenditures but invalidated as to independent
expenditures, issues of severability would be raised).
That resolution of
the primary question in this case (the constitutionality of §441a(d)(3) with
respect to all expenditures) might generate issues not previously consid-
ered (such as severability) is no reason for not deciding the question itself.
Without suggesting that remand is the only appropriate way to deal with
possible corollary matters in this case or that these arguments have merit,
I point out that we can, of course, decide the central question without
ruling on the issues that concern Justice Breyer.


PAGE 635
635
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
II
A
Critical to Justice Breyer’s reasoning is the distinction
between contributions 3 and independent expenditures that
we ﬁrst drew in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976) (per
curiam).
Though we said in Buckley that controls on
spending and giving “operate in an area of the most funda-
mental First Amendment activities,” id., at 14, we invali-
dated the expenditure limits of FECA and upheld the Act’s
contribution limits.
The justiﬁcation we gave for the differ-
ing results was this: “The expenditure limitations . . . repre-
sent substantial rather than merely theoretical restraints on
the quantity and diversity of political speech,” id., at 19,
whereas “limitation[s] upon the amount that any one person
or group may contribute to a candidate or political committee
entai[l] only a marginal restriction upon the contributor’s
ability to engage in free communication,” id., at 20–21.
This
conclusion was supported mainly by two assertions about the
nature of contributions: First, though contributions may re-
sult in speech, that speech is by the candidate and not by the
contributor; and second, contributions express only general
support for the candidate but do not communicate the rea-
sons for that support.
Id., at 21.
Since Buckley, our cam-
paign ﬁnance jurisprudence has been based in large part on
this distinction between contributions and expenditures.
See, e. g., Federal Election Comm’n v. Massachusetts Citi-
zens for Life, Inc. (MCFL), 479 U. S. 238, 259–260, 261–262
(1986); Federal Election Comm’n v. National Conservative
Political Action Comm. (NCPAC), 470 U. S. 480, 497 (1985);
3 Coordinated expenditures are by statute categorized as contributions.
See 2 U. S. C. §441a(a)(7)(B)(i) (“[E]xpenditures made by any person in
cooperation, consultation, or concert, with, or at the request or suggestion
of, a candidate, his authorized political committees, or their agents, shall
be considered to be a contribution to such candidate”).


PAGE 636
636
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
California Medical Assn. v. Federal Election Comm’n, 453
U. S. 182, 196 (1981) (plurality opinion).
In my view, the distinction lacks constitutional signiﬁ-
cance, and I would not adhere to it.
As Chief Justice Burger
put it: “[C]ontributions and expenditures are two sides of the
same First Amendment coin.”
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S.,
at 241 (concurring in part and dissenting in part).4
Contri-
butions and expenditures both involve core First Amend-
ment expression because they further the “[d]iscussion of
public issues and debate on the qualiﬁcations of candidates
. . . integral to the operation of the system of government
established by our Constitution.”
Id., at 14.
When an indi-
vidual donates money to a candidate or to a partisan organi-
zation, he enhances the donee’s ability to communicate a mes-
sage and thereby adds to political debate, just as when that
individual communicates the message himself.
Indeed, the
individual may add more to political discourse by giving
rather than spending, if the donee is able to put the funds to
more productive use than can the individual.
The contribu-
tion of funds to a candidate or to a political group thus fosters
the “free discussion of governmental affairs,” Mills v. Ala-
bama, 384 U. S. 214, 218 (1966), just as an expenditure does.5
4 Three Members of the Buckley Court thought the distinction untenable
at the time, see 424 U. S., at 241 (Burger, C. J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part); id., at 261 (White, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part); id., at 290 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part), and another Member disavowed it subsequently, see Federal Elec-
tion Comm’n v. NCPAC, 470 U. S. 480, 518–521 (1985) (Marshall, J., dis-
senting).
Cf. Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U. S. 652,
678 (1990) (Stevens, J., concurring) (stating that distinction “should have
little, if any, weight in reviewing corporate participation in candidate
elections”).
5 See H. Alexander, Money in Politics 234 (1972): “The constitutional
arguments against limiting campaign spending also apply against limiting
contributions; speciﬁcally, it is the right of an individual to spend his
money to support a congenial viewpoint . . . .
Some views are heard only
if interested individuals are willing to support ﬁnancially the candidate or
committee voicing the position.
To be widely heard, mass communica-


PAGE 637
637
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
Giving and spending in the electoral process also involve
basic associational rights under the First Amendment.
See
BeVier, Money and Politics: A Perspective on the First
Amendment and Campaign Finance Reform, 73 Calif. L. Rev.
1045, 1064 (1985) (hereinafter BeVier).
As we acknowl-
edged in Buckley, “ ‘[e]ffective advocacy of both public and
private points of view, particularly controversial ones, is un-
deniably enhanced by group association.’ ”
424 U. S., at 15
(quoting NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S.
449, 460 (1958)).
Political associations allow citizens to pool
their resources and make their advocacy more effective, and
such efforts are fully protected by the First Amendment.
Federal Election Comm’n v. NCPAC, supra, at 494.
If an
individual is limited in the amount of resources he can con-
tribute to the pool, he is most certainly limited in his ability
to associate for purposes of effective advocacy.
See Citizens
Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Housing v. Berke-
ley, 454 U. S. 290, 296 (1981) (“To place a . . . limit . . . on
individuals wishing to band together to advance their views
. . . is clearly a restraint on the right of association”).
And
if an individual cannot be subject to such limits, neither can
political associations be limited in their ability to give as a
means of furthering their members’ viewpoints.
As we
have said, “[a]ny interference with the freedom of a party is
simultaneously an interference with the freedom of its adher-
ents.”
Sweezy v. New Hampshire, 354 U. S. 234, 250 (1957)
(plurality opinion).6
tions may be necessary, and they are costly.
By extension, then, the con-
tribution of money is a contribution to freedom of political debate.”
6 To illustrate the point that giving and spending in the political process
implicate the same First Amendment values, I note that virtually every-
thing Justice Breyer says about the importance of free independent
expenditures applies with equal force to coordinated expenditures and con-
tributions.
For instance, Justice Breyer states that “[a] political par-
ty’s independent expression not only reﬂects its members’ views about the
philosophical and governmental matters that bind them together, it also
seeks to convince others to join those members in a practical democratic


PAGE 638
638
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
Turning from similarities to differences, I can discern
only one potentially meaningful distinction between contri-
butions and expenditures.
In the former case, the funds
pass through an intermediary—some individual or entity re-
sponsible for organizing and facilitating the dissemination of
the message—whereas in the latter case they may not neces-
sarily do so.
But the practical judgment by a citizen that
another person or an organization can more effectively de-
ploy funds for the good of a common cause than he can ought
not deprive that citizen of his First Amendment rights.
Whether an individual donates money to a candidate or
group who will use it to promote the candidate or whether
the individual spends the money to promote the candidate
himself, the individual seeks to engage in political expression
and to associate with like-minded persons.
A contribution
is simply an indirect expenditure; though contributions and
expenditures may thus differ in form, they do not differ in
substance.
As one commentator cautioned, “let us not lose
sight of the speech.”
Powe, Mass Speech and the Newer
First Amendment, 1982 S. Ct. Rev. 243, 258.
Echoing the suggestion in Buckley that contributions have
less First Amendment value than expenditures because they
do not involve speech by the donor, see 424 U. S., at 21, the
Court has sometimes rationalized limitations on contribu-
tions by referring to contributions as “speech by proxy.”
See, e. g., California Medical Assn. v. Federal Election
Comm’n, 453 U. S., at 196 (Marshall, J.) (plurality opinion).
The “speech by proxy” label is, however, an ineffective tool
for distinguishing contributions from expenditures.
Even in
the case of a direct expenditure, there is usually some go-
task, the task of creating a government that voters can instruct and hold
responsible for subsequent success or failure.”
Ante, at 615–616.
“Coor-
dinated” expression by political parties, of course, shares those precise
attributes.
The fact that an expenditure is prearranged with the candi-
date—presumably to make it more effective in the election—does not take
away from its fundamental democratic purposes.


PAGE 639
639
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
between that facilitates the dissemination of the spender’s
message—for instance, an advertising agency or a television
station.
See Powe, supra, at 258–259.
To call a contribu-
tion “speech by proxy” thus does little to differentiate it from
an expenditure.
See Buckley v. Valeo, supra, at 243–244,
and n. 7 (Burger, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part).
The only possible difference is that contributions
involve an extra step in the proxy chain.
But again, that is
a difference in form, not substance.
Moreover, we have recently recognized that where the
“proxy” speech is endorsed by those who give, that speech
is a fully protected exercise of the donors’ associational
rights.
In Federal Election Comm’n v. NCPAC, we
explained:
“[T]he ‘proxy speech’ approach is not useful . . . [where]
the contributors obviously like the message they are
hearing from [the] organizatio[n] and want to add their
voices to that message; otherwise they would not part
with their money.
To say that their collective action
in pooling their resources to amplify their voices is not
entitled to full First Amendment protection would sub-
ordinate the voices of those of modest means as opposed
to those sufﬁciently wealthy to be able to buy expensive
media ads with their own resources.”
470 U. S., at 495.
The other justiﬁcation in Buckley for the proposition that
contribution caps only marginally restrict speech—that is,
that a contribution signals only general support for the can-
didate but indicates nothing about the reasons for that sup-
port—is similarly unsatisfying.
Assuming the assertion is
descriptively accurate (which is certainly questionable), it
still cannot mean that giving is less important than spending
in terms of the First Amendment.
A campaign poster that
reads simply “We support candidate Smith” does not seem
to me any less deserving of constitutional protection than
one that reads “We support candidate Smith because we like


PAGE 640
640
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
his position on agriculture subsidies.”
Both express a politi-
cal opinion.
Even a pure message of support, unadorned
with reasons, is valuable to the democratic process.
In sum, unlike the Buckley Court, I believe that contribu-
tion limits infringe as directly and as seriously upon freedom
of political expression and association as do expenditure lim-
its.
The protections of the First Amendment do not depend
upon so ﬁne a line as that between spending money to sup-
port a candidate or group and giving money to the candidate
or group to spend for the same purpose.
In principle, people
and groups give money to candidates and other groups for
the same reason that they spend money in support of those
candidates and groups: because they share social, economic,
and political beliefs and seek to have those beliefs affect gov-
ernmental policy.
I think that the Buckley framework for
analyzing the constitutionality of campaign ﬁnance laws is
deeply ﬂawed.
Accordingly, I would not employ it, as Jus-
tice Breyer and Justice Kennedy do.
B
Instead, I begin with the premise that there is no consti-
tutionally signiﬁcant difference between campaign contri-
butions and expenditures: Both forms of speech are central
to the First Amendment.
Curbs on protected speech, we
have repeatedly said, must be strictly scrutinized.
See Fed-
eral Election Comm’n v. NCPAC, supra, at 501; Citizens
Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Housing v. Berke-
ley, 454 U. S., at 294; First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti,
435 U. S. 765, 786 (1978).7
I am convinced that under tradi-
7 In Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976), the Court purported to scruti-
nize strictly the contribution provisions as well as the expenditure rules.
See id., at 23 (FECA’s contribution and expenditures limits “both impli-
cate fundamental First Amendment interests”); id., at 25 (contribution lim-
its, like expenditure limits, are “ ‘subject to the closest scrutiny’ ” (citation
omitted)).
It has not gone unnoticed, however, that we seemed more for-
giving in our review of the contribution provisions than of the expenditure
rules.
See, e. g., California Medical Assn. v. Federal Election Comm’n,


PAGE 641
641
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
tional strict scrutiny, broad prophylactic caps on both spend-
ing and giving in the political process, like §441a(d)(3), are
unconstitutional.
The formula for strict scrutiny is, of course, well estab-
lished.
It requires both a compelling governmental interest
and legislative means narrowly tailored to serve that inter-
est.
In the context of campaign ﬁnance reform, the only
governmental interest that we have accepted as compelling
is the prevention of corruption or the appearance of corrup-
tion, see Federal Election Comm’n v. NCPAC, 470 U. S., at
496–497, and we have narrowly deﬁned “corruption” as a
“ﬁnancial quid pro quo: dollars for political favors,” id., at
497.8
As for the means-ends ﬁt under strict scrutiny, we
have speciﬁed that “[w]here at all possible, government must
curtail speech only to the degree necessary to meet the par-
ticular problem at hand, and must avoid infringing on speech
that does not pose the danger that has prompted regulation.”
Federal Election Comm’n v. MCFL, 479 U. S., at 265.
In Buckley, we expressly stated that the means adopted
must be “closely drawn to avoid unnecessary abridgment” of
First Amendment rights.
424 U. S., at 25.
But the Buck-
ley Court summarily rejected the argument that, because
less restrictive means of preventing corruption existed—for
instance, bribery laws and disclosure requirements—FECA’s
contribution provisions were invalid.
Bribery laws, the
Court said, “deal with only the most blatant and speciﬁc
attempts of those with money to inﬂuence governmental
action,” id., at 28, suggesting that those means were inade-
453 U. S. 182, 196 (1981) (plurality opinion) (contributions are “not the sort
of political advocacy that this Court in Buckley found entitled to full First
Amendment protection”).
But see id., at 201–202 (Blackmun, J., concur-
ring in part and concurring in judgment) (under Buckley, there is no lesser
standard of review for contributions as opposed to expenditures).
8 As I explain in Part III, infra, the interest in preventing corruption is
inapplicable when the subject of the regulation is a political party.
My
analysis here is more general, however, and applies to all individuals and
entities subject to campaign ﬁnance limits.


PAGE 642
642
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
quate to serve the governmental interest.
With respect to
disclosure rules, the Court admitted that they serve “many
salutary purposes” but said that Congress was “entitled
to conclude that disclosure was only a partial measure, and
that contribution ceilings were a necessary legislative con-
comitant.”
Ibid.
Finally, the Court noted that contribu-
tion caps leave people free to engage in independent political
speech, to volunteer their services, and to contribute money
to a “limited but nonetheless substantial extent.”
Ibid.
In my opinion, FECA’s monetary caps fail the narrow
tailoring test.
Addressing the constitutionality of FECA’s
contribution caps, the Buckley appellants argued:
“If a small minority of political contributions are given
to secure appointments for the donors or some other
quid pro quo, that cannot serve to justify prohibiting all
large contributions, the vast majority of which are given
not for any such purpose but to further the expression
of political views which the candidate and donor share.
Where First Amendment rights are involved, a blunder-
buss approach which prohibits mostly innocent speech
cannot be held a means narrowly and precisely directed
to the governmental interest in the small minority of
contributions that are not innocent.”
Brief for Appel-
lants in Buckley v. Valeo, O. T. 1975, Nos. 75–436 and
75–437, pp. 117–118.
The Buckley appellants were, to my mind, correct.
Broad
prophylactic bans on campaign expenditures and contribu-
tions are not designed with the precision required by the
First Amendment because they sweep protected speech
within their prohibitions.
Section 441a(d)(3), in particular, suffers from this inﬁrmity.
It ﬂatly bans all expenditures by all national and state party
committees in excess of certain dollar limits, without any
evidence that covered committees who exceed those limits
are in fact engaging, or likely to engage, in bribery or any-


PAGE 643
643
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
thing resembling it.
See Austin v. Michigan Chamber of
Commerce, 494 U. S. 652, 689 (1990) (Scalia, J., dissenting)
(where statute “extends to speech that has the mere poten-
tial for producing social harm” it should not be held to satisfy
the narrow tailoring requirement (emphasis in original)).
Thus, the statute indiscriminately covers the many conceiv-
able instances in which a party committee could exceed the
spending limits without any intent to extract an unlawful
commitment from a candidate.
Cf. Schaumburg v. Citizens
for a Better Environment, 444 U. S. 620, 637 (1980) (State
may not, in effort to stop fraud in charitable solicitations,
“lump” truly charitable organizations “with those that in fact
are using the charitable label as a cloak for proﬁtmaking and
refuse to employ more precise measures to separate one kind
from the other”).
As one commentator has observed: “[I]t
must not be forgotten that a large number of contributions
are made without any hope of speciﬁc gain: for the promotion
of a program, because of enthusiasm for a candidate, or to
promote what the giver vaguely conceives to be the national
interest.”
L. Overacker, Money in Elections 192 (1974).
In contrast, federal bribery laws are designed to punish
and deter the corrupt conduct the Government seeks to pre-
vent under FECA, and disclosure laws work to make donors
and donees accountable to the public for any questionable
ﬁnancial dealings in which they may engage.
Cf. Schaum-
burg v. Citizens for a Better Environment, supra, at 637–638
(explaining that “less intrusive” means of preventing fraud
in charitable solicitation are “the penal laws [that can be]
used to punish such conduct directly” and “disclosure of the
ﬁnances of charitable organizations”).
In light of these
alternatives, wholesale limitations that cover contributions
having nothing to do with bribery—but with speech central
to the First Amendment—are not narrowly tailored.
Buckley’s rationale for the contrary conclusion, see supra,
at 641–642, is faulty.
That bribery laws are not completely
effective in stamping out corruption is no justiﬁcation for the


PAGE 644
644
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
conclusion that prophylactic controls on funding activity are
narrowly tailored.
The First Amendment limits Congress
to legislative measures that do not abridge the Amendment’s
guaranteed freedoms, thereby constraining Congress’ ability
to accomplish certain goals.
Similarly, that other modes of
expression remain open to regulated individuals or groups
does not mean that a statute is the least restrictive means
of addressing a particular social problem.
A statute could,
of course, be more restrictive than necessary while still leav-
ing open some avenues for speech.9
III
Were I convinced that the Buckley framework rested on a
principled distinction between contributions and expendi-
tures, which I am not, I would nevertheless conclude that
§441a(d)(3)’s limits on political parties violate the First
Amendment.
Under Buckley and its progeny, a substantial
threat of corruption must exist before a law purportedly
9 Justice Stevens submits that we should “accord special deference to
[Congress’] judgment on questions related to the extent and nature of
limits on campaign spending,” post, at 650, a stance that the Court of
Appeals also adopted, see 59 F. 3d 1015, 1024 (CA10 1995).
This position
poses great risk to the First Amendment, in that it amounts to letting the
fox stand watch over the henhouse.
There is good reason to think that
campaign reform is an especially inappropriate area for judicial deference
to legislative judgment.
See generally BeVier 1074–1081.
What the ar-
gument for deference fails to acknowledge is the potential for legislators
to set the rules of the electoral game so as to keep themselves in power
and to keep potential challengers out of it.
See id., at 1075 (“ ‘Courts
must police inhibitions on . . . political activity because we cannot trust
elected ofﬁcials to do so’ ” (emphasis deleted)) (quoting J. Ely, Democracy
and Distrust 106 (1980)).
See also R. Winter, Political Financing and the
Constitution, 486 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 34, 40, 48 (1986).
In-
deed, history demonstrates that the most signiﬁcant effect of election re-
form has been not to purify public service, but to protect incumbents and
increase the inﬂuence of special interest groups.
See BeVier 1078–1080.
When Congress seeks to ration political expression in the electoral proc-
ess, we ought not simply acquiesce in its judgment.


PAGE 645
645
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
aimed at the prevention of corruption will be sustained
against First Amendment attack.10
Just as some of the
monetary limits in the Buckley line of cases were held to
be invalid because the Government interest in stemming cor-
ruption was inadequate under the circumstances to justify
the restrictions on speech, so too is §441a(d)(3) invalid.11
The Government asserts that the purpose of §441a(d)(3) is
to prevent the corruption of candidates and elected repre-
sentatives by party ofﬁcials.
The Government does not ex-
plain precisely what it means by “corruption,” however; 12 the
closest thing to an explanation the Government offers is that
“corruption” is “ ‘the real or imagined coercive inﬂuence of
large ﬁnancial contributions on candidates’ positions and on
their actions if elected to ofﬁce.’ ”
Brief for Respondent 35
(quoting Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S., at 25).
We so deﬁned
10 See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S., at 45–47 (striking down limits on inde-
pendent expenditures because the “advocacy restricted by the provision
does not presently appear to pose dangers of real or apparent corruption”);
Federal Election Comm’n v. MCFL, 479 U. S. 238, 263 (1986) (invalidating
caps on campaign expenditures by incorporated political associations be-
cause spending by such groups “does not pose [any] threat” of corruption);
Federal Election Comm’n v. NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 498 (striking down lim-
its on independent expenditures by political action committees because “a
quid pro quo for improper commitments” in that context was a “hypotheti-
cal possibility”); Citizens Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Hous-
ing v. Berkeley, 454 U. S. 290, 297 (1981) (stating that “Buckley does not
support limitations on contributions to committees formed to favor or op-
pose ballot measures” because anticorruption rationale is inapplicable);
First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 790 (1978) (concluding
that limits on referendum speech by corporations violate First Amend-
ment because “[t]he risk of corruption . . . simply is not present”).
11 While Justice Breyer chides me for taking the position that I
would not adhere to Buckley, see ante, at 626, and suggests that my
approach to this case is thus insufﬁciently “cautiou[s],” ibid., he ignores
this Part of my opinion, in which I explain why limits on coordinated
expenditures
are
unconstitutional
even
under
the
Buckley
line
of
precedent.
12 Nor, for that matter, does Justice Breyer explain what sorts of quid
pro quos a party could extract from a candidate.
Cf. ante, at 615.


PAGE 646
646
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of Thomas, J.
corruption in Buckley for purposes of reviewing ceilings on
giving or spending by individuals, groups, political commit-
tees, and candidates.
See id., at 23, 35, 39.
But we did not
in that case consider the First Amendment status of FECA’s
provisions dealing with political parties.
See id., at 58,
n. 66, 59, n. 67.
As applied in the speciﬁc context of campaign funding by
political parties, the anticorruption rationale loses its force.
See Nahra, Political Parties and the Campaign Finance
Laws: Dilemmas, Concerns and Opportunities, 56 Ford. L.
Rev. 53, 105–106 (1987).
What could it mean for a party to
“corrupt” its candidate or to exercise “coercive” inﬂuence
over him?
The very aim of a political party is to inﬂuence
its candidate’s stance on issues and, if the candidate takes
ofﬁce or is reelected, his votes.
When political parties
achieve that aim, that achievement does not, in my view, con-
stitute “a subversion of the political process.”
Federal Elec-
tion Comm’n v. NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 497.
For instance, if
the Democratic Party spends large sums of money in support
of a candidate who wins, takes ofﬁce, and then implements
the Party’s platform, that is not corruption; that is successful
advocacy of ideas in the political marketplace and repre-
sentative government in a party system.
To borrow a
phrase from Federal Election Comm’n v. NCPAC: “The fact
that candidates and elected ofﬁcials may alter or reafﬁrm
their own positions on issues in response to political mes-
sages paid for by [political groups] can hardly be called cor-
ruption, for one of the essential features of democracy is the
presentation to the electorate of varying points of view.”
Id., at 498.
Cf. Federal Election Comm’n v. MCFL, 479
U. S., at 263 (suggesting that “[v]oluntary political associa-
tions do not . . . present the specter of corruption”).
The structure of political parties is such that the theoreti-
cal danger of those groups actually engaging in quid pro
quos with candidates is signiﬁcantly less than the threat of
individuals or other groups doing so.
See Nahra, supra, at


PAGE 647
647
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Opinion of Thomas, J.
97–98 (citing F. Sorauf, Party Politics in America 15–18 (5th
ed. 1984)).
American political parties, generally speaking,
have numerous members with a wide variety of interests,
Nahra, supra, at 98, features necessary for success in major-
itarian elections.
Consequently, the inﬂuence of any one
person or the importance of any single issue within a political
party is signiﬁcantly diffused.
For this reason, as the Par-
ty’s amici argue, see Brief for Committee for Party Renewal
et al. as Amicus Curiae 16, campaign funds donated by par-
ties are considered to be some of “the cleanest money in poli-
tics.”
J. Bibby, Campaign Finance Reform, 6 Commonsense
1, 10 (Dec. 1983).
And, as long as the Court continues to
permit Congress to subject individuals to limits on the
amount they can give to parties, and those limits are uniform
as to all donors, see 2 U. S. C. §441a(a)(1), there is little risk
that an individual donor could use a party as a conduit for
bribing candidates.
In any event, the Government, which bears the burden of
“demonstrat[ing] that the recited harms are real, not merely
conjectural,” Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512
U. S. 622, 664 (1994), has identiﬁed no more proof of the cor-
rupting dangers of coordinated expenditures than it has of
independent expenditures.
Cf. ante, at 618 (“The Govern-
ment does not point to record evidence or legislative ﬁndings
suggesting any special corruption problem in respect to inde-
pendent party expenditures”).
And insofar as it appears
that Congress did not actually enact §441a(d)(3) in order to
stop corruption by political parties “but rather for the consti-
tutionally insufﬁcient purpose of reducing what it saw as
wasteful and excessive campaign spending,” ibid. (citing
Buckley v. Valeo, supra, at 57), the statute’s ceilings on co-
ordinated expenditures are as unwarranted as the caps on
independent expenditures.
In sum, there is only a minimal threat of “corruption,” as
we have understood that term, when a political party spends
to support its candidate or to oppose his competitor, whether


PAGE 648
648
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Stevens, J., dissenting
or not that expenditure is made in concert with the candi-
date.
Parties and candidates have traditionally worked to-
gether to achieve their common goals, and when they engage
in that work, there is no risk to the Republic.
To the con-
trary, the danger to the Republic lies in Government sup-
pression of such activity.
Under Buckley and our subse-
quent cases, §441a(d)(3)’s heavy burden on First Amendment
rights is not justiﬁed by the threat of corruption at which it
is assertedly aimed.
*
*
*
To conclude, I would ﬁnd §441a(d)(3) unconstitutional not
just as applied to petitioners, but also on its face.
Accord-
ingly, I concur only in the Court’s judgment.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins,
dissenting.
In my opinion, all money spent by a political party to se-
cure the election of its candidate for the ofﬁce of United
States Senator should be considered a “contribution” to his
or her campaign.
I therefore disagree with the conclusion
reached in Part III of the principal opinion.
I am persuaded that three interests provide a constitution-
ally sufﬁcient predicate for federal limits on spending by po-
litical parties.
First, such limits serve the interest in avoid-
ing both the appearance and the reality of a corrupt political
process.
A party shares a unique relationship with the can-
didate it sponsors because their political fates are inextrica-
bly linked.
That interdependency creates a special danger
that the party—or the persons who control the party—will
abuse the inﬂuence it has over the candidate by virtue of its
power to spend.
The provisions at issue are appropriately
aimed at reducing that threat.
The fact that the party in
this case had not yet chosen its nominee at the time it broad-
cast the challenged advertisements is immaterial to the anal-
ysis.
Although the Democratic and Republican nominees


PAGE 649
649
Cite as: 518 U. S. 604 (1996)
Stevens, J., dissenting
for the 1996 Presidential race will not be selected until this
summer, current advertising expenditures by the two na-
tional parties are no less contributions to the campaigns of
the respective frontrunners than those that will be made in
the fall.
Second, these restrictions supplement other spending limi-
tations embodied in the Federal Election Campaign Act of
1971, which are likewise designed to prevent corruption.
Individuals and certain organizations are permitted to con-
tribute up to $1,000 to a candidate.
2 U. S. C. §441a(a)(1)(A).
Since the same donors can give up to $5,000 to party com-
mittees, §441a(a)(1)(C), if there were no limits on party
spending, their contributions could be spent to beneﬁt the
candidate and thereby circumvent the $1,000 cap.
We have
recognized the legitimate interest in blocking similar at-
tempts to undermine the policies of the Act.
See California
Medical Assn. v. Federal Election Comm’n, 453 U. S. 182,
197–199 (1981) (plurality opinion) (approving ceiling on con-
tributions to political action committees to prevent circum-
vention of limitations on individual contributions to candi-
dates); id., at 203 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 38
(1976) (per curiam) (approving limitation on total contribu-
tions by an individual in connection with an election on
same rationale).
Finally, I believe the Government has an important inter-
est in leveling the electoral playing ﬁeld by constraining the
cost of federal campaigns.
As Justice White pointed out in
his opinion in Buckley, “money is not always equivalent to
or used for speech, even in the context of political cam-
paigns.”
Id., at 263 (opinion concurring in part and dissent-
ing in part).
It is quite wrong to assume that the net effect
of limits on contributions and expenditures—which tend to
protect equal access to the political arena, to free candidates
and their staffs from the interminable burden of fundraising,


PAGE 650
650
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
COMM. v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Stevens, J., dissenting
and to diminish the importance of repetitive 30-second com-
mercials—will be adverse to the interest in informed debate
protected by the First Amendment.
See id., at 262–266.
Congress surely has both wisdom and experience in these
matters that is far superior to ours.
I would therefore ac-
cord special deference to its judgment on questions related
to the extent and nature of limits on campaign spending.*
Accordingly, I would afﬁrm the judgment of the Court of
Appeals.
*One irony of the case is that both the Democratic National Party and
the Republican National Party have sided with petitioners in challenging
a law that Congress has the obvious power to change.
See Brief for Dem-
ocratic National Committee as Amicus Curiae; Brief for Republican Na-
tional Committee as Amicus Curiae.
