apron Court, 4 
BILrnp 


>) JUN 15 1995 
No. 94-967 2 
MPR OF THE CLERK 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


+ 
WILLIAM FIELD AND NORINNE FIELD, 
Petitioners, 
VS. 
PHILIP W. MANS, 
Respondent. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 


+ 
JOINT APPENDIX 
+ 
CHRISTOPHER J. SEUFERT W.E. Wuittincton, IV 
(Counsel of Record) Brooks, McNALty, 
WituraM J. SCHULTZ WHITTINGTON, PLato & 
SEUFERT PROFESSIONAL Virt, P.C. 
ASSOCIATION Beaver Meadow Road 
59 Central Street P.O. Box 200 
Franklin, New Hampshire Norwich, Vermont 05055 
03235 (802) 649-1200 


(603) 934-9837 


Counsel for Petitioners 


Counsel for Respondent 


Petition For Certiorari Filed November 22, 1994, 
Certiorari Granted May 1, 1995 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


— BEST AVAILABLE COPY Suman 


_~—- 


** 
si 
> 
E 
‘ 
I 
= 
4 
- 


s —~ .- 
73 + , oF as 
Le Ae ae ee 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Docket Entries below 


Judgment 8/29/94 United States Court of Appeals 
for the First Circuit 


Order 8/29/94 United States Court of Appeals for 
the First Circuit 


Order 3/22/94 United States District Court for the 
District of New Hampshire 

Judgment 1/27/94 United States District Court for 
the District of New Hampshire 


Order 12/7/93 United States District Court for the 
District of New Hampshire 


Judgment 5/11/93 United States Bankruptcy 
Court District of New Hampshire 


Transcript Excerpt, United States Bankruptcy 
Court District of New Hampshire, 5/11/93 


Transcript Excerpt (order of the court) United 
States Bankruptcy Court District of New Hamp- 
shire, 5/11/93 


U.S. District Court 
U. S. District Court of New Hampshire (Concord) 


CIVIL DOCKET FOR CASE #: 93-CV-401 


In re: Mans Filed: 07/23/93 
Assigned to: Senior Judge Martin F. Loughlin 
Demand: $0,000 Nature of Suit: 422 
Lead Docket: None Jurisdiction: 
Dkt # in USBC-NH : Federal Question 
is 91-1194 
Dkt # in USBC-NH : 
is 90-12385 
Cause: 28:1334 Bankruptcy Appeal 
WILLIAM FIELD David H. Ferber, Esq. 
appellant [term 08/17/93] 
[COR LD NTC] 
Laboe & Beasley 
PO Box 463 
Concord, NH 03302-0463 
225-5010 
Christopher J. Seufert, Esq. 
[COR LD NTC] 
Seufert Professional 
Association 


59 Central Street 
Franklin, NH 03235-1423 


934-9837 
NORINNE FIELD David H. Ferber, Esq. 
appellant [term 08/17/93] 
(See above) 


[COR LD NTC] 


Christopher J. Seufert, Esq. 
(See above) 
{COR LD NTC] 


V. 


PHILIP W. MANS 


appellee 
7/23/93 1 
7/26/93 2 
8/9/93 3 
8/10/93 4 
8/13/93 5 
8/17/93 - 


Steve J. Bonnette, Esq. 
[term 08/06/93] 

[COR LD NTC] 

Feeney & Kraeger 

PO Box 389 

Newport, NH 03773 

863-1252 


Philip W. Mans 

[COR LD NTC] [PRO SE] 
29 Slayton Hill Road 
Lebanon, NH 03766 


BANKRUPTCY RECORD on appeal 
received (bc) [Entry date 07/26/93] 


NOTICE of docketing and briefing 
deadline; Bankruptcy briefing order 
deadline 9/14/93 (signed by Clerk 
James R. Starr) (bc) 


ORDER, deft shall cause counsel to file 
and appearance by 9/7/93 or notify this 
court that he wishes to proceed pro se 
setting Notice of Compliance deadline 
to 9/7/93 (signed by Magistrate Judge 
William H. Barry Jr) (kats) 


Appellant’s BRIEF by William Field, 
Norinne Field. (kats) [Entry date 
08/11/93] 


MOTION by William Field, Norinne 
Field for David H. Ferber, Esq. to With- 
draw as Attorney (plitfs represented by 
C. Seufert) (prk) [Entry date 08/16/93] 


ENDORSED ORDER granting [5-1] 
motion for David H. Ferber, Esq. to 


10/28/93 


10/29/93 
11/29/93 


12/7/93 


1/12/94 


6 


9 


Withdraw as Attorney (Terminated 
attorney David H. Ferber for Norinne 
Field, attorney David H. Ferber for Wil- 
liam Field (signed by Senior Judge Mar- 
tin F. Loughlin) (kats) 


ORDER, deft/appellee, Mans has failed 
to file an appearance or responsive 
pleading, per this court’s order, by 
9/7/93; Accordingly this case is ready 
for the presiding judge to rule on the 
appeal on the basis of the record before 
the court (signed by Magistrate Judge 
William H. Barry Jr.) (kap) [Entry date 
10/29/93] [Edit date 11/30/93] 


file to MFL for ruling (kap) 


MOTION by Philip W. Mans for Recon- 
sideration of [6-1] order with memoran- 
dum; Objection to Motion Deadline 
12/20/93 (kap) [Entry date 11/30/93] 


ORDER denying [1-1] bankruptcy 
appeal; the bankruptcy court's ruling is 
affirmed because reasonable reliance is 
a required element to find non- 
dischargeable debt pursuant to 11 USC 
523 (a)(2)(A) and because the record 
supports the finding that the appellants’ 
reliance on the appellee’s misrepresen- 
tations was not reasonable. (signed by 
Senior Judge Martin F. Loughlin) (kap) 
[Entry date 12/09/93] 


ORDER the court hereby considers Phi- 
lip W. Mans’ letter of 8/26/93 as a pro 
se appearance and the order of 
10/28/93 is abrogated (signed by Senior 


1/27/94 


1/27/94 
2/7/94 


2/15/94 


3/22/94 


4/13/94 


4/13/94 


4/13/94 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


Judge Martin F. Loughlin) (kap) [Entry 
date 01/13/94] 


JUDGMENT is hereby entered in accor- 
dance with Senior Judge Martin F. 
Loughlin’s order dated December 7, 
1993. (Signed by Clerk James R. Starr) 


(kap) 
Case closed (kap) 


MOTION by William Field, Norinne 
Field for Reconsideration of [10-1] judg- 
ment order with memorandum; Objec- 
tion to Motion Deadline 2/28/94 (kap) 
[Entry date 02/08/94] 


OBJECTION by Philip W. Mans to [11-1] 
motion for Reconsideration of [10-1] 
judgment order (kap) [Entry date 
02/16/94] 


ORDER denying [11-1] motion for 
Reconsideration of [10-1] judgment 
order (signed by Senior Judge Martin F. 
Loughlin) (kap) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL by William Field, 
Norinne Field. Fee Status: -$0- Appeal 
Record Transmittal Due 4/19/94 File 
stamped copies to all parties with 
Appeal Information Sheet; certified 
copy of docket, entire original case file, 
appeal information sheet to CCA. (jeb) 
[Entry date 04/15/94] 


Addendum by appellant William Field, 
appellant Norinne Field to [14-1] appeal 
(jeb) [Entry date 04/15/94] 


DESIGNATION by William Field, Nor- 
inne Field of record on appeal RE: [14-1] 


4/15/94 


4/15/94 


4/20/94 


4/26/94 


8/31/94 


9/22/94 


9/23/94 


5/16/95 


165 


17 


appeal by Norinne Field, William Field. 
Entire original record to be forwarded 
on appeal. (jeb) [Entry date 04/15/94] 


Appeal record sent to CCA with Clerk’s 
certificate on [14-1] appeal by Norinne 
Field, William Field — transmitting doc- 
uments: 1-16 (jeb) 


Called Attorney Suefert’s Office - no 
filing fee included with notice of 
appeal. They said it would be mailed 
out this date to USDC-NH. (jeb) 


Filing Fee Paid; FILING FEE of $105.00 
re PLAINTIFF’S NOTICE OF APPEAL - 
RECEIPT # 005952. Called CCA on 
4/21/94 and advised them. Send Ear- 
line at CCA a copy of the receipt. (jeb) 
[Entry date 04/21/94] 


USCA Case Number Re: [14-1] appeal 
by Norinne Field, William Field USCA 
NUMBER: 94-1391 (kap) 


OPINION of CCA Re: [14-1] appeal by 
Norinne Field, William Field (kap) 
[Entry date 10/05/94] 


MANDATE OF CCA Re: [14-1] appeal 
by Norinne Field, William Field. Upon 
consideration whereof, it is now here 
ordered, adjudged and decreed as fol- 
lows: The judgment of the district court 
is affirmed. (jeb) 


Record on appeal returned from U.S. 
Court of Appeals: [14-1] appeal by Nor- 
inne Field, William Field (jeb) 


Certiorari was granted on May 1, 1995. 
U.S. Supreme Court has requested 


6 


immediate transmittal of entire district 
court record to their court. Pursuant to 
their request, document nos. 1-17 for- 
warded to Sandy Nelsen, Assistant 
Clerk-Merits, U.S. Supreme Court, this 
date. (jeb) [Edit date 05/16/95] 


The Judgment, dated 8/29/94 of the United States Court 
of Appeals for the First Circuit is reproduced at pg. 14 of 
the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of Certiorari. 


The Order, dated 8/29/94, of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit is reproduced at pgs. 15 
through 16 of the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of Cer- 
tiorari. 


The Order, dated 3/22/94, of the United States District 
Court for the District of New Hampshire is reproduced at 
pgs. 17 through 21 of the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari. 


10 


The Judgment, dated 1/27/94 of the United States Dis- 
trict Court for the District of New Hampshire is repro- 
duced at pg. 22 of the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari. 


11 


The Order, dated 12/7/93 of the United States District 
Court for the District of New Hampshire is reproduced at 
pgs. 23 through 31 of the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari. 


12 


Final Judgment, dated 5/11/93 of the United States Bank- 
ruptcy Court for the District of New Hampshire is repro- 
duced at pg. 32 of the Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari. 


13 


[p. 12] WILLIAM FIELD - Cross/Mans 


* + » 


A. In the original agreements? Not that I know of. 


Q. Did I agree to do all of the other things that you 
asked: pay your attorney’s fees, pay the interest, and 
make my payments directly to the bank? 


A. In the letter, you agreed to pay my attorney fees 
for the transaction, but you disagreed that you would 
give me any excess money. 


Q. I- 


A. - and I assumed the issue was dead when you 
didn’t meet the terms. 


Q. I did not agree to give you the $10,000 fee? 
A. Say that again, Phil. 


Q. I did not agree to pay you a $10,000 additional 
fee, is that correct? 


A. No, you did not; although, I would have 
incurred additional costs to research your new buyer and 
everything. 


Q. Was that information transmitted to you by my 
attorney by letter of October 27th? 


A. That you would not go forward with the transac- 
tion, yes. 


Q. Did you have a conversation with a business 
associate of yours by the name of Sal? 


A. Sal Lucido. 


14 


Q. Yes. 
A. Yes. He was my boss. 


Q. Did you say - did he tell you that he was on 
your [p. 13] property and he met Mr. De Felice there? 


A. Yes, he did. 


Q. Did he tell you that Mr. De Felice told you that 
he owned the property? He was the owner of the prop- 


erty. 
A. Yes, he did. 
Q. What was the time period of that, Mr. Field? 


A. Mr. Lucido is my boss. He said he was up on the 
property with a new person he was training and he met 
someone there and they said that they were the new 
owner, this Mr. De Felice. I said that is crazy, he couldn’t 
sell it without my permission, and I left it go at that. I 
think I spoke with you, if you want me to volunteer any 
other things. Maybe a month later or so when you were 
late on a payment and you said, “Don’t worry about it. 
It’s just something we’re doing, and he’s helping me on 
the property.” 


Q. Was this time period - 
A. And I left it go at that. 
Q. —- in 19- late 1987, early 1988? 


A. I’mnot sure of the date of that conversation with 
Sal. It would have been ! think in ‘88 sometime when he 
was training one of the new men up in that territory that 
I moved out of. 


15 


Q. So you did in 1988 know that the property had 
been transferred? 


A. Absolutely not. As I'll repeat to you, my answer. 
My [p. 14] boss told me that someone said he was the 
owner. I didn’t believe it was possible because I had 
paper from you, Phil, and I called and asked you and you 
said, “No, don’t worry about it. I’m just handling it some 
other way.” And I left it go that you got so many busi- 
nesses, Phil, I don’t who - partners you're taking for 
what - 


Q. Did I - 
A. - or what involvement DeFelice might have in it. 


THE COURT: Excuse me a moment. Excuse me 
a moment. It was changed, was it? 


THE CLERK: It was changed on the notice and 
Dory never changed it. 


THE COURT: All right. We will interrupt this a 
moment. There was a scheduling mix up. The cash collat- 
eral that was scheduled at four o’clock was actually 
rescheduled to the 9:30. The people want to continue that. 
Is that correct? 

(Off the record. Back on the record) 


BY MR. MANS: 


Q. Mr. Field, didn’t the letter of October 9th, 1987, 
to your lawyer - 


THE COURT: Just a moment. 
MR. MANS: I’m sorry, Your Honor. (Pause). 


16 


THE COURT: Okay. Back on Mans. Back on 
that. 


MR. MANS: Thank you, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Proceed. 


* * * 


[p. 20] know that they had done something different, then 
it would keep me pacified not looking further. 


Q. Yes. But that’s totally irrelevant to me because 
when make them. 


A. I appreciated that, sir, every month. 


Q. What other reasons they might have is pure 
speculation. 


A. That’s exactly true, sir. 
THE COURT: Proceed. 
BY MR. MANS: 


Q. Mr. Field, did you not state in your deposition 
that you spoke with Mr. Bennett at Mascoma Savings 
Bank on at least two occasions in 1987 and 1988? 


A. I spoke with Mr. Bennett after we tried to get 
some kind of an agreement with you in reference to a 
direct transfer so that we wouldn’t be calling for late 
payments, and I spoke with Mr. Bennett after Mr. Lucido 
mentioned this other person that said they were the 
owner, and he comforted me. 


THE CLERK: How are you spelling Lucido. 
THE WITNESS: L-U-C-I-D-O. 
THE CLERK: Thank you. 


17 


BY THE WITNESS: 


A. And I asked him if he knew of anything because 
we're out of the area, and he said he knew absolutely of 
no changes whatsoever, so I again let it go down the 
drain. I just [p. 21] figured it was rumor. 


Q. Wasn't this, in fact, after —- wasn’t this, in fact 
after the transfer and you discussed Mr. De Felice and 
Crescent Beach Development with Mr. Bennett at the 
bank? 


A. After what transfer? 


Q. After the transfer that you alleged that you did 
not know of. 


A. I didn’t know of any transfer, sir. It was after Mr. 
Lucido told me that there was someone there that said he 
was an owner. It was after that I asked, yes. 


Q. Didn't you also say in your deposition that you 
had talked to Mr. De Felice and his attorney during this 
period of time? 


A. No, sir. Not whatsoever. None whatsoever. 
None. 


Q. After I had filed bankruptcy in December of 1990 
personally — 


A. Okay. 


Q. - and this - the corporation that held the stock 
that you sold me for the Crescent Beach property was 
anticipating filing bankruptcy, did I not tell you that I 
would try to work with Mr. De Felice to try and get him 


18 


to buy out my interest so that you would — so you would 
get some money from him? 


A. Yes. 


Q. Okay. Did —- in fact, you said in your deposition, 
“I had a conversation with Mr. Mans in 1991 or 1992 on 
how I [p. 22] could get cleaned out and De Felice could 
still hold onto the property.” Does that sound correct to 
you? 


A. That they were going to pay me off, yes. 


Q. And you said that Mans was trying to get me 
some money out of De Felice? 


A. Nance said he was working with you. I don’t 
know what arrangement you two fellows had, but to my 
knowledge, Phil, you were working with him to pay me 
off. 


Q. At the same time that you were discussing the 
same sort of payoff with him? 


A. Yes. I was accepting — going to accept money at 
that point. This in ‘91. 


Q. Did he not, in fact, offer you $125,000 for your 
interest of the note that was worth approximately 
$145,000 at that point? 


A. Yes, sir. He offered a hundred and twenty-five 
and then he called from his attorney's office and said the 
attorney decided not to do it. 


Q. Is it fair to say that the reason that he did not 
finally go through with it is he started at 110 - $100,000, 
and 110, and he just felt it would never stop and - 


19 


MR. SEUFERT: Objection. I’m not sure that my 
client knows what some other third party might have said 
or thought. 


MR. MANS: Your Honor, he had — he was mean 
with [p. 23] him on an ongoing basis. 


THE COURT: You can’t refer to what the - 
somebody else may say they did or didn’t do. You can 
ask this fellow whether he was offered different amounts 
and whether it was negotiated. 


BY MR. MANS: 


Q. Were you offered different amounts? Were you 
offered $100,000? $110,000? $125,000 from Mr. De Felice 
in an ongoing negotiation process? 


A. On the phone, yes. 
Q. Okay. 
BY THE COURT: 
Q. Did you accept the 125,000? 


A. Yes sir. I had agreed to accept and release the 
interest I had in that at that time, yes, sir, at 125,000, and 
then the next morning, Mr. De Felice backed off of it and 
said his lawyer told him not to do it, that he was involved 
with Mr. Mans on other things. I don’t know what hap- 
pened, but it fell through, sir. 


BY MR. MANS: 
Q. Did I not encourage you to take his offers? 


A. Yes, Phil. But again he backed off from making 
that offer. 


20 


Q. Be backed off from the $125,000 offer? 


A. He made no counter offer after that agreement. 
His 


* * * 


W. FIELD - Direct Testimony To The Court 


[p. 26] Q. It wasn’t being developed or it was being 
developed? 


A. It was being destroyed, but I thought it was in its 
process of being developed, and it would never get there. 
At one or two times, I would speak to Mr. Mans. He said 
he was being held up by different processes, but his 
intentions were going forward. 


Q. Did you ever see Mr. De Felice at the property 
when you went there? 


A. No, sir. 
Q. Was there anybody there when you went there? 


A. No, sir. We could just see it from the outside and 
we never went inside the building, sir. I didn’t think that 
was my prerogative. 


Q. Did you ever talk to Mr. Mans about what's 
going on, is anything happening? 


A. Yes. He showed me some beautiful pictures on 
blueprints and designs. This was, oh, two years into this, 
I would say, that he had planned to put a boardwalk 
down and make it a Victorian hotel and do all of the 
things that we had dreamed all the years we owned it 
and we didn’t have the money to do it, so though it was 
in a mess, I thought that was getting worse before it gets 


21 


better. I had no idea of the other things that were happen- 
ing at that time. 


Q. Now sometime in 1988, your boss told you that 
he had seen Mr. De Felice there? 


[p. 27] A. Yes. 
Q. And that De Felice said he was the new owner? 


A. De Felice was on our beach and there was trucks 
or so there. 


Q. Did De Felice refer to himself as the new owner? 


A. Yes. “I’m one of the new owners,” or so he said. 
But, Your Honor, he has a number of businesses, and one 
of the times is I took in partners and I didn’t know that 
he would physically sell my property. I thought it — he 
had two or three properties all around there that he had 
purchased, and if he had taken on somebody for more 
money to add more area for the community or what have 
you, I wouldn’t know what he was doing. But when I 
spoke with Mr. Mans, I had no indication from him that 
he had sold my property and transferred that. Whether 
he took on another partner with Sequoia (phonetic) or 
some other outfit was not concern. If he’s getting money 
from trailer parks or what was not - whoever his partners 
were. I never dreamed that he had taken the property 
that he legally couldn’t transfer and transfer it. It just 
didn’t occur to me he would do that, sir. 


MR. MANS: Your Honor, would you like to see 
some of the drawings I showed Mr. Field? 


THE COURT: No thanks. 


22 


* * * 


PHILIP W. MANS - Direct/Seufert 
[p. 30] Yes. 


Q. As part of the purchase price, you gave him back 
a promissory note in the amount of $187,500? 


A. Yes. I gave him $275,000 in cash and a prom- 
issory note of $187,000. 


Q. The promissory note was secured by a second 
mortgage on the property? 


A. Yes. 


Q. You are aware that those Mortgages had a clause 
in there that any transfer or retransfer of that property 
needed the written consent of Mr. Field? 


A. Yes. 
Q. You’re familiar with that clause? 
A. Yes. 

THE COURT: Is that in evidence? 


MR. SEUFERT: Yes, it is, Your Honor. You will 
look at Exhibits N and O. 


BY THE WITNESS: 


A. Your Honor, may I step down and get a copy of 
that from my desk? 


THE COURT: Yes. You can have your own 
copies. What paragraph? 


MR. SEUFERT: It will be the last paragraph, | 
believe, on both exhibits, Your Honor. 


23 


THE COURT: This is a typical due-on-sale 
clause. 


[p. 31] It doesn’t prevent transfer. It simply provides that 
if you transfer it without the consent, the debt becomes 
due. 


MR. SEUFERT: That’s correct, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: But there’s nothing to prevent the 
party from transferring it. 


MR. SEUFERT: That’s correct, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: All right. Go ahead. 
BY MR. SEUFERT: 


Q. Now when you consummated this transaction in 
June of 1987, you also gave the Fieldses a personal finan- 
cial statement, did you not? 


A. Yes. 


Q. Okay. Sir, do you have a copy of that financial 
statement that you gave to Mr. Field at the transaction? 


A. No, I don’t. 


MR. SEUFERT: Okay. Your Honor, could we 
move to — all those exhibits into evidence so that we don’t 
have to go back. 


THE COURT: These were premarked and 
agreed beforehand by both sides. 


MR. SEUFERT: Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Both set? All right. They'll all be 
marked into evidence. Mark them all off. 


24 


THE CLERK: Plaintiff's Exhibits 1 through 16 
entered as evidence. 


* * * 


W. FIELD - Direct Testimony To The Court 
[p. 49] A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Do you understand that? 
A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Now it’s curious to me that with the letters in 
October, you did absolutely nothing to check the state of 
the title to see if maybe it was transferred. When your 
boss tells you that Mr. De Felice is going around claiming 
to be the owner, it would take about a half hour to check 
the title to see what — whether it was transferred. 


A. But I did not believe that it was transferred. 


Q. And you didn’t believe that because of these 
letters? 


A. I thought that he refused to do it, and I thought 
that number one, this was, oh, six months or more later 
that this De Felice thing even came into that picture, and I 
thought that maybe he had got involved in the project 
and bought some other property or put money in to be 
involved with Mans. I didn’t think that he really would 
transfer the property after being — asking and telling no. 
Your Honor, I took his money and bought my annuity 
from the Knights of Columbus myself. I would have 
taken any surplus money and put it — because I didn’t 
need the money while I was still working with Knight 
that he was paying me each month. I would take that and 
invest it, so that when I retired I'd have money. You see 


25 


what I’m saying. So had I known that he had broken that 
contract — not broken the contract, sold the place - I now 
[p. 50] have the option of getting that money in bulk by 
foreclosing or something like that, calling the note or 
whatever they say. I had no knowledge that he had done 
that. I never suspected he could do it without being 
notified. I thought I had a registered mortgage and if 
anything had happened, they’d have to notify me that the 
property was transferred. 


Q. Well, you had an attorney, right? The attorney 
responded to Mr. Man’s letter or his attorney’s letter? 


A. Yes, sir. 


Q. Did you ever discuss with your attorney what 
could be done? 


A. I don’t recall discussing it after the letter came 
back that said he wasn’t going to do the deal and meet 
our agreements. I thought the issue was dead then. 


Q. He said he would do the deal. He would meet 
your — all your requirements except the $10,000 item? 


A. Yeah. That he would just pay my lawyer’s fee or 
something. 


Q. You did not respond to that letter? 


A. No, sir. He wouldn’t pay it. I thought it was 
dead. 


Q. That was a counter offer. You made no response 
to his counter offer? 


A. Not to my knowledge, sir, except that we 
thought that it was - 


26 


Q. He said he would do everything you requested. 
He 


* * * 


WILLIAM FIELD - Redirect /Seufert 


[p. 53] money in equal — in a lump, as you say with that 
capital. I would have gotten it over the period and prefer- 
ably that way because it would have lasted the rest of my 
life as a retirement money rather than just this ten-year 
block. 


Q. Okay. 
THE COURT: I have no other questions. 
REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. SEUFERT: 


Q. I have one last question, Mr. Field. In ‘88 when 
your boss had told you that there was some other gentle- 
man on the property, you testified earlier that you con- 
fronted Mr. Mans about that and he denied it? 


A. Idon’t remember that confrontation. If I had said 
it occurred then it must have. I spoke with Mr. Mans in 
reference to late payments. 


Q. Okay. 


A. I spoke with Mr. Mans in reference to the way 
the building was being completely destroyed type of a 
thing. He showed me plans that he had of what was 
being done, so I left it go at that. I don’t recall the 
question again was what? 


Q. Did you ask him if, in fact, he had sold the 
property? 


27 


A. No. I don’t believe I ever confronted because 
first, | never really thought that that could happen with- 
out my mortgage being released. Perhaps, I was stupid in 
that - 


Q. Okay. 


* * * 


[p. 67] THE COURT: You sent the letter on 
October 19th saying that you’d agree to their terms 
except for the ten thousand? 


MR. MANS: Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: And then the 19th was the day 
the deed was actually recorded? 


MR. MANS: Yes. We said that we would do that 
— we'd meet three of the terms, but we wouldn’t meet 
that fee that we didn’t feel was reasonable and fair. And 
we felt that the due on sale clause was at best a breach of 
contract that he had the option to call the note if he 
wanted to and he didn’t. I continued to make payments 
for three years after that on time and — 


THE COURT: Let’s take these one by one. The 
first element is misrepresentation, and I don’t see how 
you get out of misrepresentation. Those letters would 
imply to a lawyer, let alone a layman, that you hadn’t yet 
transferred it and you’re asking his consent. 


MR. MANS: All I can say, Your Honor, is I 
didn’t feel that when I signed the deed - I’ve signed a lot 
of deeds ahead of time in a lawyer’s office and we put 
them in a folder and then gone to the closing two or three 
days later because of time schedules, not being able to get 


28 


together, and that the closing actually took place on the 
12th and the recording was on the 19th, so I considered 
that in my mind that the [p. 68] closing actually took 
place when the deed was recorded on the 19th. 


THE COURT: Well, that doesn’t get you off the 
hook anyway because the second letter went out on the 
19th. 


MR. MANS: Yeah. On the 19th, again, conversa- 
tions orally saying - 


THE COURT: Saying that if you would agree to 
everything except the ten thousand to get your consent to 
a conveyance. 


MR. MANS: We wouldn’t agree to the convey- 
ance, so we were going ahead without their consent on 
the 19th. 


THE COURT: All right. I’m going to find that 
there was a misrepresentation by you and your attorney 
in sending letters to Mr. Field that clearly implied that it 
had not yet been transferred, which I don’t see how you 
could read the letters any other way - I think that a 
minimum full disclosure would have said, “We have a 
deal with De Felice. He wants to put some money in this 
thing; would you consent”? Had you done that, Mr. - 
well, you did tell him that - 


MR. MANS: The letter does say that, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: That’s right. It says that you 
would — you have some investor that wanted to put some 
money in the property, and - 


= ”- 


29 


MR. MANS: It said we had a deal with Crescent 
Beach development. 


[p. 69] THE COURT: I don’t know that you 
mentioned De Felice, but you mentioned an investor. 


MR. MANS: It says, 


“Phil has brought in another substantial investor and 
formed a development partnership called Crescent Beach 
development. They will be investing a huge sum of 
money into the development of the property and thereby 
further enhance the security for the second mortgage 
held by Mr. and Mrs. Field.” So we - 


THE COURT: Well - 
MR. MANS: - did tell them. 


THE COURT: You may have thought that you 
wouldn’t have any trouble getting the consent, but the 
fact remains that the letter does not disclose a material 
fact that was in place at the time and that was that you 
had already drawn a deed to this fellow. 


MR. MANS: I couldn’t imagine, Your Honor, 
that - 


THE COURT: And you didn’t disclose that 
because you didn’t wanted to trigger the due on sale 
clause. 


MR. MANS: I couldn't imagine that bringing in 
an investor who was going to invest over $625,000, take 
half of the responsibility for the $350,000 note and give 
me $447,500 in cash to develop the property of which we 
each put in another $50,000 immediately for development 


30 


cost, wouldn’t [p. 70] enhance the value of the property 
and improve the Fields’ position. The fact that the real 


estate went down later - 


THE COURT: Of course, it would, but if you 
had disclosed those numbers, the obvious result would 
be that they would say, aha, you got a lot of cash, we'd 
rather get cashed out. Why don’t you cash us out? 


MR. MANS: Because Mr. Field told me all along 
that wasn’t what he wanted. He kept telling me that this 
was part of a retirement. The fact that the - there was a 
clause in the agreement saying that it could not be pre- 
paid and that if I prepaid it, 1 would have to pay all of the 
prepaid interest and the fact that he told me that he did 
not want the tax ramifications, he had discussed it with 
his accountant. 


THE COURT: That’s not evidence. I’m just deal- 
ing with — you did say something to that effect, but he - 
from the balance of testimony here, I would find that 
there was no real reason why he’d not want to have the 
money put into an annuity. That testimony just - you 
didn’t bring that out with him in any detail that I can 
make findings of. The fact that - anyway on misrepresen- 
tation, I will find that that element was established. That 
is, of course, not the entire case. The rest is whether they 
relied and whether they relied to their detriment and 
whether their reliance was reasonable. As far as whether 
Mr. Field relied, there’s no question he did rely. He sim- 
ply didn’t check the title. Whether that was [p. 71] rea- 
sonable or not is probably the key issue here. The 
detriment seems established also unless you have some 
comment on that. If - 


31 


MR. MANS: I would comment - 


THE COURT: - if you had told them that it’s 
transferred, at that point he could have cashed himself 
out. You had the liquid money to do so? 


MR. MANS: Not at the time that I filed bank- 
ruptcy, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: No. I’m talking about October of 
‘87. 


MR. MANS: Yes, I did. But he didn’t want — 


THE COURT: The market was better and the 
cash was there. 


MR. MANS: I did, but he didn’t want that. That 
~ I wanted to do a straight deal where I paid the whole 
thing in cash because I didn’t want Mr. Field to be hold- 
ing a second mortgage. You know, in the protracted nego- 
tiations I had with him, I knew that he would be around 
as he was constantly, be looking in - over my shoulder, 
and a lot of the things that he said that he wanted done 
with the property that I - that he imputed to me, when I 
looked at the property, the property was not of any value 
as far as the building. We brought architects and engi- 
neers in, and they said the building has to be torn down. 


MR. SEUFERT: Objection. Your Honor, is this 
[p. 72] evidence or is this closing because these are facts 
not in evidence, Your Honor? 


THE COURT: Mr. Mans is not a lawyer, and 
he’s in effect testifying. I will exclude from my consider- 
ation any additional facts. I know what was testified to, 
and I'll only rely on that. But in terms of whether Mr. 


32 


Field relied, not whether it’s reasonable, he - it seems to 
me there’s no contrary evidence here that he relied on 
these letters as implying that, well, if we didn’t agree on 
the deal, you hadn’t transferred the property. And in 
terms of whether it was reliance to his detriment, again, it 
seems to me that it clearly was to his detriment because 
he could have either foreclosed at that point and got it 
out of a good market or he could have in effect forced 
you to pay it up out of some monies that came out of the 


transaction. 


MR. MANS: As far as detriment, Your Honor, 
when I filed bankruptcy in 1990, I met with him and I met 
with De Felice to try and put together a deal because De 
Felice wanted the property. I raised that testimony here 
today, Your Honor, and De Felice would have paid him a 
hundred or $110,000, but he balked at the $125,000. 


THE COURT: Well, that’s less than what he was 
owed, so that’s detriment. There’s no — this record is 
crystal clear that he could have been cashed out in Octo- 


ber of ‘87. 
MR. MANS: Yes, sir. 
[p. 73] THE COURT: That's a dead issue. 
MR. MANS: Yes, sir. 


THE COURT: The only issue left is whether this 
reliance was reasonable in the circumstances, and I think 
that’s probably going to decide this case. He says that 
because of the letters he didn’t do what he could have 
done which was simply check the record, and that you in 
effect deflected him from doing that by the letters 
because after the letters, he figured, well, we didn’t agree 


33 


on anything so you weren’t transferring it. What's your 
response? 


MR. MANS: My response was that all of the 
things that were going on indicated - the letter was very 
clear. The initial letter that we sent on October 9th, we 
had an agreement with a partner coming in. We had put 
together a contract for a development company. He was 
bringing in a lot of money and that we wanted their 
doing — their permission under the due on sale clause, 
but if they didn’t — if we didn’t get their permission, there 
were other ways to go, and we were negotiating those 
other ways, and it was clear to me that we would have 
agreed to all the items except the $10,000 fee which I 
thought was unreasonable and unfair, and I had no - 
absolutely no thought that Mr. Field would not agree to 
the transfer given all of the benefits that surrounded the 
property, particularly at that time of the year and the 
economy when things were booming and that was a 
valuable piece [p. 74] of property. Even at the foreclosure 
sale in 1991, the bank got the full amount of their first 
mortgage in a heartbeat. At that time he could have come 
in and bid and the buyer probably would have gone a lot 
higher because the bank got covered first bid. 


THE COURT: Well, he could have done that if 
he could have got financing for a bid at that time. How 
do you get any real estate financing - when, in 1991? 
When was this foreclosure sale? 


MR. MANS: 1991, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Yeah. Unless you happened to 
have some ready cash, not too many people were buying 


34 


at foreclosure sales except for the FDIC with paper 
because you couldn’t get a loan from the bank. 


MR. MANS: The Mascoma Bank was very sol- 
vent, and I had - I don’t know Mr. Field’s personal 
financial situation, but I know that they were very — very 
positive on the property, and they gave the buyer who 
came to auction financing for it, so I would assume that 
they would have given it to Mr. Field, too. They had also 


offered it to Mr. De Felice. 
THE COURT: All right. Any other comments? 


MR. MANS: No, sir. 
THE COURT: No response? 
MR. SEUFERT: None. 


[p. 75] THE COURT: Let's see the rest of those 
exhibits. I don’t - 


THE CLERK: Do you want them all? 
THE COURT: Pardon me? 
THE CLERK: Do you want them all? 


THE COURT: Yes, all of them. Okay. We’ll take 
a recess until twelve and then we'll announce the ruling, 
about 15 minutes. (Off the record at 11:47. Session 
resumed at 12:08) 


THE COURT: The Court has before it for trial 
the matter of Field v. Mans, in In re: Mans, case number 
90-2385, adversary 91-194. This matter has been tried this 
morning with testimony and documents with regard to a 
523(a)(2)(a) charge that the debt owing to the plaintiffs is 


35 


nondischargeable as having been obtained by fraud and 
false pretenses. Actually, the way the evidence has come 
down is in terms of obtaining an extension of that credit 
by fraud or false pretenses at a time when the plaintiffs’ 
allege that they were misled into not pursuing their rights 
under a due on sale clause by misrepresentations given 
the —- given to them by the defendant implying at least 
that no transfer had occurred. 


To back up a moment, the transaction in question was 
commenced by an agreement for sale of Mascoma Lodge 
property on Mascoma Lake near Enfield, New Hamp- 
shire, in 1986 which was consummated by a closing and 
documentation in June of 1997, [p. 76] whereby a prom- 
issory note and second mortgage was granted by the 
buyer to the seller, the plaintiffs here, for a balance of 
approximately $187,000 of the purchase price. They were 
paid $275,000 in cash at that time. The mortgage deed - 
actually there were two deeds, but it’s immaterial that 
there were, in fact, two for - one from Sequoia and one 
then from Mascoma Lodge Enterprises, Inc., both con- 
trolled by Mr. Mans. Each of these documents has a - 
what is commonly referred to as a due on sale clause 
which provides that the mortgagor, that is the defendant 
here, covenants and agrees that it will not convey an 
interest in or title to the property mortgage without prior 
written consent of the mortgagee, and if they should so 
conve, without consent of the mortgagee, quote: 


“The whole of the unpaid balance of the indebt- 
edness on this mortgage and the promissory 
note secured here by me at the option of the 
holder of this mortgage become immediately 


36 


due and payable withovt further notice,” 
unquote. 


The record establishes that on October 8th, 1987, the 
defendant here caused Mascoma Lake Lodge Enterprises, 
the then title holder, to transfer the property to Crescent 
Beach Development, a New Hampshire general partner- 
ship. The deed was executed on that date, but was not 
recorded until October 19, 1987. 


On October 9, 1987, the defendant through his [p. 77] 
attorney corresponded with the attorney for the Fields 
indicating that the defendant was proceeding with the 
development of the Mascoma Lake property and that the 
debtor had brought in a substantial investor and formed 
a development partnership called Crescent Beach Devel- 
opment whereby the investor would be investing, quote, 
“A huge amount of money in the development of the 
property,” unquote, which would further enhance the 
security for the second mortgage held by Mr. and Mrs. 
Field. 


The October 9th letter states that obviously the 
defendant here did not want to trigger the due on sale 
clause by reason of the transfer into the development 
partnership and asked that Mr. and Mrs. Field, as holders 
of the second mortgage, consent in writing to the transfer 
of the property to Crescent Beach Development. As indi- 
cated above, the deed to Crescent Beach had already been 
executed on October 8th but had not yet been recorded. 


The letter refers to the fact that the defendant could 
have avoided the due on sale clause by putting the stock 


37 


of the corporation into the partnership rather than con- 
veying title to the underlying real property but for var- 
ious reasons it was preferable to convey the property. As 
the evidence has established, that was preferable because 
the new investor, a Mr. De Felice, required that the prop- 
erty be conveyed into the new partnership. He did not 
want to take the corporate stock [p. 78] of the title holder 
with the possibility of exposure for unpaid debts by that 
corporation. 


The October 9th letter was answered by a letter dated 
October 19, 1997 — 1987 from the attorney for the Fields. It 
indicated the Fields would consent to the transfer upon 
receiving payment of $250 in lost interest due from the 
previous closing of this transaction; on condition that 
Philip Mans make all future mortgage payments by direct 
bank transfer; on condition that the Mans pay the Fields 
attorney’s fees of approximately $250 to negotiate this 
consent; and quote, “A one time fee payable upon trans- 
fer of $10,000,” unquote. The evidence before me indi- 
cates that there was no basis for the demand for the 
$10,000 other than as a condition that the Fields felt they 
could impose with some economic leverage since Mans 
was in a process of bringing a new investor in, in which 
he would have some additional funds into the project and 
apparently the Fields believed that they could extract 
another $10,000 even though the purchase price of the 
property had been negotiated previously in the prior June 
of the same year. Mr. Field testified that that money was 
necessary to investigate the new buyer, but I don’t find 
that evidence has any weight since it’s apparent to me 
that had the Fields been given their $10,000, they would 


38 


have consented to this transfer without any further inves- 


tigation. 


As indicated above, the deed was actually recorded 
[p. 79] on October 19, 1987, the date of this letter back 


from the Fields. 


On October 27, 1987, the defendant through his attor- 
ney responded to the October 19th letter and indicated 
that the defendant would be willing to make all the 
payments requested in the October 19th letter and would 
be agreeable to having the mortgage payments made by 
direct transfer, but, quote, “However, the fee of $10,000 is 


out of the question,” unquote. 


There is no further correspondence between these 
parties in this record until February 6th of 1991 which 
was after the bankruptcy filing of - (Pause). Filing date of 
December 10, 1990. On that date - 


On February 6th, 1991, the Fields’ attorney wrote to 
them indicating that he did some research in the Grafton 
County Registry of Deeds and found various things 
including the fact that the Mans did - quote, “Mans did 
convey the property to Crescent Beach Development. 
This would trigger the first and second mortgages to the 
point that the entire amount can be called forward at 
present,” closed quote. 


The testimony before this Court establishes in my 
judgment that the letters from the defendant to the plain- 
tiff in October of 1987 did contain an implicit misrepre- 
sentation, i.e., that the property had not yet been 
transferred and that it would be transferred upon the 
consent of the Fields in [p. 80] accordance with the 


39 


request of the - Mr. Mans. The letters, in my judgment, 
do imply that no transfer had yet occurred and that 
would be the normal reaction of any party receiving that 
letter, whether an attorney or otherwise. The letters do no 
[sic] imply or that the debtor would not transfer without 
the consent if he wished to face the due on sale trigger 
clause. I don’t find that the misrepresentation — that it 
was represented impliedly, that if they couldn’t [sic] a 
deal for the consent that Mans would not - nevertheless, 
transfer the property and face the due on sale trigger if 
the Fields agreed — elected to assert that. In other words, 
the representation that’s implicit in those letters is that 
we haven’t yet transferred the property and we need 
your — want your consent to do so. When the request for 
consent fell through by - because of the $10,000 demand 
by the Fields, it’s an open question as to whether there 
was any continuing representation by the debtor that he 
would not transfer the property. 


The evidence clearly establishes that the Fields relied 
on the implicit representation in these letters that the 
property had not yet been transferred. It’s also estab- 
lished that they relied on this representation and their 
belief that it had not been transferred and would not be 
transferred to their detriment in that - at the time of 
October 1987, the real estate market was still booming in 
this state and they could have extracted their balance of 
187,000, [p. 81] approximately, out of either a foreclosure 
or forcing Mans to pay out of the funds that he was 
getting invested in the property or otherwise. As it 
turned out, the real estate market in the late ‘80s went 
into a profound slump and the market values that existed 


40 


then were dissipated to the point where when the prop- 
erty was finally foreclosed in 1991, the first mortgagee, in 
effect, wiped the Fields’ position. But to the extent that 
the reliance and detriment elements are required here, it’s 
obvious to me that they in their own minds did rely on 
these representations subjectively and didn’t do anything 
further and that in effect they extended the credit to Mr. 
Mans for another few years, whereby — whereas they 
could have called the due on sale clause as of October 
1987 at the latest when the deed was recorded. 


The issue then boils down to the question of reason- 
able reliance. It is not sufficient in this -— under this 
statute in the Bankruptcy Code to show a misrepresenta- 
tion and reliance to detriment, but the reliance must be 
shown to be reasonable in the circumstances. 


In that regard, the evidence is that in 1988 — or first 
that the Fields — at least Mr. Fields visited the property on 
numerous occasions to see whether - and what kind of 
development Mr. Mans was doing, and that on one occa- 
sion his boss told him that he - the boss had been on the 
property and had seen a Mr. De Felice who had stated 
that, quote, “I am [p. 82] the new owner,” unquote. The 
evidence also indicates that Mr. Field discussed this with 
the banker that held the first mortgage on the property 
and didn’t get any information but demonstrates that he 
knew that De Felice was claiming to be the owner on the 
property. Mr. Field apparently in his own mind believed 
that the property could not have been transferred without 
his consent which of course as a matter of law is not true. 
It clearly could be transferred without his consent, but 
the only result would be to trigger the due on sale clause. 
There is some conflicting testimony in this record that Mr. 


41 


Field did not want prepayment because he was looking 
for these payments to be part of his retirement. However, 
there’s also testimony that he could have solved that 
problem by simply putting them into an annuity fund 
that he had if [sic] had called the loan and got the cash. 
On balance, I don’t believe that it’s been established that 
Mr. Field did not want prepayment in relevant time con- 
text of October 1987. 


The evidence before me is uncontroverted that Mr. 
Field was around quite a bit looking at the drawings and 
the project and talking with Mans as to the progress in 
developing the property and was accepting mortgage 
payments for some forty-two months which were paid on 
currently throughout this transaction until a month or so 
before Mr. Mans filed his - the month before he filed his 
bankruptcy case in December 1990. There is also evidence 
that following the bankruptcy [p. 83] Mr. Field was nego- 
tiating with De Felice for a payoff of the second mortgage 
and had negotiated the number up to $125,000 when the 
mortgage debt was approximately 150,000, and in fact 
had accepted that amount from De Felice, but then De 
Felice backed out of that offer to pay it — obtain that debt 
at a discounted amount. 


Considering all of the foregoing facts, what appears 
to me most relevant on the reasonable reliance require- 
ment is that the — there’s no statement in the letters that 
could be read as saying we will never transfer the prop- 
erty without your consent. What there was in those let- 
ters was a request to transfer — a request to get consent to 
transfer the property to avoid the due on sale clause. That 


- Series of letters and correspondence broke down basically 


42 


because of the $10,000 demand by the Fields as a condi- 
tion for their consent. That left the situation unstructured. 
In effect, as I said, above — I don’t think those letters can 
be read to imply that Mans would not elect to transfer 
without the consent and face the due on sale clause if the 
Fields elected to assert it. Mans in his own mind appar- 
ently believed they wouldn’t assert it because they 
wanted a stream of a payments. Whether he was correct 
or not, he had that option and could have run that risk. 
Likewise, the Fields, when the situation broke down, had 
an easy way to determine what Mans was or wasn’t 
doing by simply doing one of two things. They could 
have number one, [p. 84] asked him what the deal was De 
Felice who was there, obviously, on the premises acting 
like an owner. Field never did that over three-and-a-half 
years of accepting mortgage payments and looking at 
drawings and discussing the project with Mans. Number 
two, they could have simply checked the title in the 
Grafton town — the County Registry of Deeds which Mr. 
Field has demonstrated he knows very well is up in 
North Haverhill. That wasn’t done either. My judgment is 
that what really happened here was that the deal as 
requested broke down because of the demand for the 
10,000 and that the market was strong and Mans was 
paying and it’s to some extent hindsight to now say, well, 
if we’d know [sic] then we would have called the loan. 
Nobody knew in October 1987 that the market was going 
to take a nose-dive. And the conduct of the Fields in not 
taking easily available steps to find out whether the - 
after the requested consent broke down to see what 
Mans, in fact, was doing with De Felice out there is 
explainable either in terms of their not thinking about - 


43 


or not understanding what Mans’ options were or simply 
the fact that they weren’t that concerned about triggering 
the due on sale clause even if [sic] were transferred. | 
know that it probably appears now that they would have 
done it. We all think in hindsight. When I think of all 
those properties I should have bought, when I think of all 
those classic automobiles that I should have bought back 
twenty or thirty years ago, and I remember [p. 85] now 
that I would have done it, but back in 1957 when I could 
have bought a Chevrolet Impala convertible for $2,700, 
which is now worth $35,000, and instead bought a DKW 
which is now worth zero and was within a few years 
worth zero, what I don’t remember is that I didn’t have 
the extra $400 to buy that convertible, but I know from 
human nature that when I think about it, I forget those 
facts. 


In this case, I think there is a lot [sic] hindsight here 
as to how serious this appeared to the Fields at the time 
and whether they would have triggered the due on sale 
clause. That to me is the only explanation for their failure 
to take those easily available steps of simply asking either 
De Felice or Mans, what's the deal here? Who owns this 
thing? Has there been a transfer, or checking the title in 
North Haverhill? | 


Even if I accept Mr. Field’s testimony that he wasn’t 
sophisticated in these affairs and that he assumed that 
Mr. Mans couldn’t transfer the property without his con- 
sent, I would find that that is not reasonable reliance. A 
party is not entitled to, you know, be in good faith and 
just not objectively reasonable. It’s not just the subjective 
test. It’s — the case law establishes an objective test, and 
that is what would be reasonable for a prudent man to do 


44 


under those circumstances. At a minimum, a prudent 
man, I think, would have asked his attorney, could he 
transfer it without my [p. 86] consent? And the answer 
would have to be yes, and then the next question would 
be, well, let’s see if he’s done it? And those questions 
simply were not asked, and I don’t think on balance that 
was reasonable reliance. 


For all these reason [sic], with regard to these find- 
ings I will rule that the plaintiff has failed to establish one 
of the requisite elements for a nondischargeability under 
Section 523(a)(2)(A) and that the judgment therefore must 
be in favor of the defendant. The debt in question is 
nondischargeable. 


I realize from the Fields’ standpoint, they have suf- 
fered a substantial loss, and it must be a very hard to take 
that loss when they had the options at various stages 
looked at with hindsight of taking cash in October of ‘87. 
If they had triggered the due on sale clause, made the 
necessary inquiry and triggered it, and/or taken a hun- 
dred and twenty thousand or so in ‘91 when De Felice 
was apparently willing to pay a number around that 
amount, whereas now they end up with nothing, and if 
this property — if this debt is dischargeable, they in effect 
have suffered a severe loss. However, in bankruptcy by 
definition most of the creditors suffer a loss because of 
breach of contract or various nonperformances by the 
debtor, and it’s only those breaches or debts that are 
obtained under conditions that make them nondischarge- 
able that survive the bankruptcy and remain an obliga- 
tion by the debtor. In making that determination, this 
Court cannot look with [p. 87] hindsight as to what 
happened after the transaction in question. I have to look 


45 


at it as it existed in October of ‘87, and as I say, in 
reviewing all these facts, it’s my judgment that in October 
of ‘87 there was not reasonable reliance on any represen- 
tations by Mr. Mans once the deal contemplated by those 
series of letters had fallen through. It is my opinion that 
the Fields had an obligation at that point to make one of 
several easily available inquires to ascertain the status of 
that title and decide whether they wanted to trigger the 
due on sale clause. So ordered. I thank you for your 
attention and appropriate judgment will be entered incor- 


porating by reference my findings and conclusions. So 
ordered. 


(Court was then adjourned at 12:44 p.m.) 


* -_ * 


46 


EXHIBIT B 
BROWNELL & MOESER 
A Professional Corporation 


Attorneys and Counsellors at Law 
[Letterhead Omitted For Printing] 
October 9, 1987 


Christopher Seufert, Esq. 
Five Summer Street 
Concord, NH 03301 


RE: William Field/Phil Mans 
Dear Chris: 


As | indicated to you on the telephone, we are proceeding 
with the development of the Mascoma Lake Property, 
including the two parcels owned by Mascoma Lake 
Lodge Enterprises, Inc., the stock of which is wholly 
owned by Sequoia Security Investment Corp., Phil Mans 
Corporation. As you know, there is a second mortgage to 
Mr. & Mrs. Field secured by this property which contains 
a “due on sale” clause. 


Phil has brought in another substantial investor and 
formed a development partnership called Crescent Beach 
Development. They will be investing a huge amount of 
money in the development of the property and thereby 
further enhance the security for the second mortgage 
held by Mr. & Mrs. Field. 


Obviously we do not want to trigger the “due on sale” 
clause by reason of the transfer of the property into the 
development partnership. We ask that Mr. & Mrs. Field, 


47 


as the holders of the second Mortgage, consent in writing 
to the transfer of the property from Mascoma Lake Lodge 
Enterprises, Inc. to Crescent Beach Development. 


We would appreciate your earliest response to this. We 
could avoid the issue entirely by simply putting the stock 
of Mascoma Lake Lodge Enterprises, Inc. into the part- 
nership instead of conveying title to the underlying real 
property, but for a variety of reasons it is preferable to 
convey the property. 


Thank you for your assistance 
Sincerely, 
BROWNELL & MOESER 
By: /s/ Gary 

Gary T. Brooks 
GTB/ks 


ey 


48 


EXHIBIT C 
Seufert & Thompson, P.C. 
Attorneys-at-Law 
5 Summer Street 
Concord, NH 03301 
(603) 224-8672 
[Letterhead Omitted In Printing] 
October 19, 1987 


Gary T. Brooks, Esquire 
Brownell & Moeser 
P.O. Box 200 

Norwich, VT 05055 


RE: William Field/Phil Mans 
Dear Gary: 


The Fields will consent to the proposed transfer upon the 
following conditions: 


1. Payment of $250.00 in lost interest due from the pre- 
vious closing. 


2. Phil Mans to make all future mortgage payments by 
direct bank transfer. 


3. Payment of their attorney’s fees of approximately 
$250.00 to negotiate this matter. 


4. One time fee, payable upon transfer, of $10,000.00. 


Very truly yours, 


/s/ Christopher J. Seufert 
Christopher J. Seufert, Esquire 


JS:cmd 


49 


EXHIBIT D 
BROWNELL & MOESER 
A Professional Corporation 


Attorneys and Counsellors at Law 
[Letterhead Omitted For Printing] 
October 27, 1987 


Christopher J. Seufert, Esq. 
Seufert & Thompson, P.C. 
5 Summer Street 

Concord, NH 03301 


RE: William Field/Phil Mans 
Dear Chris: 


This is in response to your letter of October 19, 1987, with 
the benefit of consultation with my client who has just 
returned from several trips. 


My client would be willing to make the payments 
referred to in paragraph 1 and paragraph 3 of your letter, 
and would be agreeable to having future mortgage pay- 
ments made by direct bank transfer. However, the fee of 
$10,000.00 is out of the question. 


Sincerely, 
BROWNELL & MOESER 


By: /s/ Gary 
Gary T. Brooks 


GTB/ks 
ce: Philip W. Mans 


50 


EXHIBIT M 
PROMISSORY NOTE 


U.S. $187,500.00 LEBANON, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
JUNE 23, 1987 


FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned promises 
to pay William D. Field, and Norrine T. Field of Enfield, 
New Hampshire, or Order, the principal sum of One 
Hundred Eighty-Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars 
($187,500.00) with interest on the unpaid principal bal- 
ance from the date of this Note, until paid, at the rate of 
Ten Percent per Annum (10%). The principal and interest 
shall be payable to the Holder by payment to Enfield, 
New Hampshire, or such other place as the Holders of 
this Note may designate in writing. The principal and 
interest shall be payable in one hundred twenty equal 
monthly installments of Two Thousand Four Hundred 
Seventy-Seven and 84/100 ($2,477.84) Dollars each of 
principal, plus accrued interest on the unpaid balance, on 
the 23rd of the month. 


The undersigned shall pay to the Holder hereof a late 
charge of five percent (5%) of any, installment not 
received by the Holder hereof within ten (10) days after 
the installment is due. 


If any installment under this Note is not paid when 
due and remains unpaid for thirty days, the entire princi- 
pal amount outstanding under this Note and interest 
thereon shall at once become due and payable at the 
option of the Holder of this Note; failure to exercise this 


51 


option shall not constitute a waiver of the right to exer- 
cise this option if the undersigned is in default under this 
Note. 


The principal sum secured by this Note shall also 
become due and payable at the option of the Holder of 
this Note on the happening of any default or event by 
which, under the terms of the mortgage securing this 
Note, the principal sum may or shall become due and 
payable, and all covenants, conditions, and agreements 
contained in the mortgage securing this Note are, by this 
reference, made a part of this Note. 


The undersigned shall not have the right to prepay, 
in whole or in part, the principal amount outstanding 
under this Note. 


In the event of any default in the payment of this 
Note, and if suit is brought on this Note, the Holder of 
this Note shall be entitled to collect in such proceeding all 
reasonable costs and expenses of suit, including, but not 
limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees. In addition thereto, 
the Holder shall be entitled to assess and collect upon 
foreclosure all interest that would have been paid 
through the full ten (10) year term of this Note. 


The undersigned at its sole option, may elect at any 
time during the term of this Note to substitute a fully 
paid annuity in exchange for the satisfaction and can- 
cellation of this Note, provided that said annuity uncon- 
ditionally guarantees payment to the Holder of the same 
amounts as would otherwise be due under this Note. 


Presentment, notice of dishonor, and protect are 
hereby waived by all makers, sureties, guarantors, and 


52 


endorsers of this Note. This Note shall be binding on the 
maker and his heirs, personal representatives, successors 
and assigns. 


The indebtedness evidenced by this Note is secured 
by a second mortgage on real property in the Town of 
Enfield, New Hampshire, subject only to a first mortgage 
to Mascoma Savings Bank or any subsequent “rollover” 
of such first mortgage (but only to said bank) in a princi- 
pal amount never to exceed to a total of $350,000.00. 


SEQUOIA SECURITY INVESTMENT CORP. 


/s/ Christopher J. Seufert By: /s/ Philip W. Mans LS. 
Witness President and 
duly authorized 


PERSONAL GUARANTY 


The undersigned hereby unconditionally guarantees 
the payment and performance of Sequoia Security Invest- 
ment Corp. of the foregoing Promissory Note, including 
without limitation payment over ten (10) years of princi- 
pal and interest. 


/s/ Christopher J. Seufert /s/ Philip W. Mans 
Witness Philip W. Mans, 
individually 


53 


EXHIBIT N 
SECOND MORTGAGE DEED 
With Power of Sale 


Mascoma Lake Lodge Enterprises Inc., a/k/a MLL 
ENTERPRISES, INC. a duly established corporation 
under the laws of New Hampshire having a principal 
place of business at Mascoma Lake, Fuller Road, Enfield, 
County of Grafton, State of New Hampshire, for consid- 
eration paid, grants to William D. Field and Norrine T. 
Field, Mortgagee, as JOINT TENANTS with RIGHTS OF 
SURVIVORSHIP, whose mailing address is Pembroke 
Street, Pembroke, County of Murrimack, State of New 
Hampshire, with MORTGAGE COVENANTS, to secure 
the payment of One Hundred Eighty-Seven Thousand 
Five Hundred Dollars ($187,500.00). In accordance with 
the terms of a note of even or nearly even date herewith 
and payable to the said Mortgagee, or order, or any 
renewals or partial renewals thereof, according to the 
tenor and effect thereof, the following described prop- 


erty: 


All and the same land and premises as con- 
veyed to the Mortgagor herein by Warranty 
Deed of even date from the Mortgagee herein, to 
be recorded in the Grafton County Registry of 
Deeds prior to the recording of this Mortgage, 
and being further described as follows: 


Two certain tracts or parcels of land on both 
sides of Fuller Road in Enfield, County of 
Grafton and State of New Hampshire, being all 
and the same lands and premises as conveyed to 
the Mortgagor herein by Warranty Deed of even 


54 


or nearly even dated herewith to be recorded 
just prior to the recording of this Mortgage. 


Being all and the same land and premises as 
conveyed to William D. Field by Warranty Deed 
dated June 15, 1971, from Marcel R. Renault and 
Helen C. Renault and R. Lawlor Cooper and 
Marcel R. Renault and R. Lawlor Cooper d/b/a 
Crescent Beach Motor Inn, recorded in the 
Grafton County Registry of Deeds at Book 1143, 
Page 256. 


This is a Second Mortgage and is subject only to a 
First Mortgage of even date herewith from the Mortgagor 
to Mascoma Savings Bank for $350,000.00, such first 
mortgage to be recorded in the Grafton County Registry 
of Deeds just prior to the recording of this Second Mort- 
gage. The first mortgage may be rolled over with Mas- 
coma Savings Bank beyond the original ninety (90) day 
period without violating the terms of this paragraph. 


This mortgage is upon the STATUTORY CONDI- 
TIONS, for any breach of which the Mortgagee shall have 
the STATUTORY POWER OF SALE. 


Advertising of any foreclosure notice shall be in 
some newspaper of general circulation of Enfield, New 
Hampshire. The proceeds of any such sale shall be 
charged with the expenses thereof, including reasonable 
attorney’s fees. 


Mortgagor, in accordance with RSA 477:29 II shall not 
commit or suffer any strip or waste on the mortgaged 
premises. If mortgagor wishes to alter the existing build- 
ings on said mortgaged properties he shall first cause an 
appraisal to be completed which established the value of 
the mortgaged property. If said appraisal established that 


55 


the value of the property less the buildings as exists is 
less than the combined outstanding balance of principal 
and interest on the first mortgage, if still existing, and the 
second mortgage secured by this instrument, then prior 
to commencement of any alterations mortgagor must pro- 
vide a performance bond payable to mortgagee for any 
present outstanding balance of principal and interest on 
this second mortgage. Such performance bond must con- 
tinue until the value of the mortgaged property again 
meets or exceeds the combined outstanding balances on 
the first and second mortgages. 


The Mortgagor covenants and agrees that it will not 
convey an interest in or title to the premises hereby 
mortgaged or assign this instrument without prior writ- 
ten consent of the Mortgagee. It is further agreed, as a 
condition of this mortgage in the event that an interest in 
or title to this property is transferred or this instrument is 
assigned without the consent of the mortgagee first 
obtained in writing, the whole of the unpaid balance of 
the indebtedness on this mortgage and the promissory 
note and/or any renewal or renewals thereof and/or any 
optional readvances and interest thereon, secured hereby, 
may, at the option of the Holder of this mortgage, become 
immediately due and payable without further notice. 
Failure of the Mortgagee to institute collection pro- 
cedures immediately upon knowledge of a breach of this 
condition shall not constitute a waiver of the Mortgagee’s 
right to subsequent collection action. 


<8 NTE ee 


56 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and 
seal this 6th day of July 1987. 


MASCOMA LAKE LODGE ENTERPRISES INC. 
(a/k/a MLL ENTERPRISES, INC.) 


/s/ Gary T. Brooks By: /s/ Philip W. Mans LS. 
Witness President and duly 
authorized 


STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE 
GRAFTON COUNTY, SS. 


At Lebanon this 6th day of June, 1987. Philip W. 
Mans personally appeared and he acknowledged this 
instrument, by him sealed and subscribed to be his free 


act and deed and the free act and deed of Mascoma Lake 
Lodge Enterprises Inc. (a/k/a MLL ENTERPRISES, INC.) 


Before me: 


/s/ Nancy A. Conrad 
Notary Public/Justice of Peace 
My Commission expires 9-25-96 
(Seal) 


Received and recorded: July 8, 1987 12:30 P.M. 
/s/ Carol A. Elliott, Register 


