1 Supreme Court, 
FILE 


7 E 
No. 94-6615 | OFFICE OF THE 


us. | 
1 


CLERK 


( 
In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


CaRL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner, 
v. 


PATRICK KEOHANE, Warden 
Bruce M. BoTELHO, Attorney General, 
State of Alaska, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


JOINT APPENDIX 


CYNTHIA M. HORA JULIE R. O’SULLIVAN * 
Assistant Attorney General (Appointed by this Court) 
Office of Special Prosecutions Associate Professor of Law 


and Appeals GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY LAW 
Alaska Department of Law CENTER 
310 K Street, Suite 308 600 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 Washington, D.C. 20009 
(907) 269-6250 (202) 662-9394 
Counsel for Respondent * Counsel of Record for 
Petitioner 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED OCTOBER 31, 1994 
CERTIORARI GRANTED JANUARY 23, 1995 


W 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Docket Sheet 


Memorandum Decision of the Superior Court of the 
State of Alaska (March 17, 1987) 


Opinion of the Court of Appeals of the State of Alaska 
(January 20, 1989) 


Order of the Supreme Court of the State of Alaska 
(May 4, 1989) 


Initial Report and Recommendation of U.S. Magis- 
trate Judge, United States District Court for the 
District of Alaska (December 29, 1992) 


Minute Order from Chambers of U.S. Magistrate Judge, 
United States District Court for the District of 
Alaska (September 28, 1993) 


Order of the United States District Court for the Dis- 
trict of Alaska (February 18, 1993) 


Order from Chambers of the United States District 
Court for the District of Alaska (December 7, 1993) 


Judgment of the United States District Court for the 
District of Alaska (December 8, 1993) 


Minutes of the United States District Court for the 
District of Alaska (January 11, 1994) 


Memorandum Decision of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (August 11, 1994) 

Excerpts from Transcript of September 15, 1986 State- 
ment of Carl Thompson 

Order of Supreme Court of the United States granting 
certiorari and leave to proceed in forma pauperis, 
January 23, 1995 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


Date Proceedings 
1991 
Apr 23 pet for writ of habeas corpus. 
26 Motion referring case to Mag Judge Branson per 
rule 4/5/11. 
May 24 ORDER directing deft to show cause why writ 
shidnt be grnted. 
June 13 ORDER that deft have til 3/1/91 to file rspnse to 
petition for writ of 
Aug 1 defts response to pet for writ of hab corp. 
Sept 03 reply brief. 
1992 
Feb 08 Fid MAG B MO dtd 2/3 that pitf ensl have 15 
days to file information required by L.R.3 or show 
cause why they shid be exerupt. 
1993 
Feb 18 petition DISMISSED. 
June 17 notice of appeal. 
23 certificate of prob. 
23 PFld Deft’s Opp. to late filed not. of appeal and mot. 
for prob. cause. 
25 pltf aff of D. Dyer. 
25 pltt aff of M. Friedman. 
28 # Fid pitf motion to vacate judg for reconsideration 
& time to file objs to initial R&R petition for habeas 
corpus w/att aff. 
30 ~=6 Fld defs opp to pitf mtn to vacate jmt, mtn for 


recnsdratn & mtn for addit time to file objs to 
initial R&R. 


2 


Date Proceedings 
1998 


July 19 Fid ORDER re pitf mtn to vacate jmt & allow new 
10 day period to file objs to MJ R&R GRANTED; 
mtn for cert of probable cause DENIED as not 
ripe. ce cnsl, MJ Branson. 


29 PFid pitf obj to initial R&R re dsms! of petition. 


Sept 28 Fid MO re petitioners object to initial R/R re- 
ferred to MJ B for a final R/R. Cy ensl. 


Fid MJ MO that MJ declines to modify int R&R & 
that this matter is now forwarded to trial judge. 
ce ensl Judge Sedwick 


Dec 8 Fid ORDER DENYING piltf’s petition at #1. cc 
cnsl, MJ Branson. 


09 FLD JMT dismissing petition. cy cnsl. 

27 PFid Plitt's notice of appear to dkt #28. cc: cnsl, 
27 

27 


Judge Sedwick, 9CCA. 
Fld Pitf’s request for certificate of probable cause. 


Fld Pitf’s request to proceed in forma pauperis. 


1994 
Jan 11 Fid MO petitioner request for certificate of proba- 
ble cause is GRANTED. 
11 FId order GRANTING pittf's motion to proceed 
in F/P. 


27 Fd ey 9CCA time schedule order. 94-35052. 


3 


IN THE SUPERIOR COURT 
FOR THE STATE OF ALASKA 
FOURTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT 


No. 4FA-S86-02644 Cr. 


STATE OF ALASKA, 
Plaintiff, 
V. 


CARL K. THOMPSON, 
Defendant. 


MEMORANDUM DECISION 
Defendant, Carl K. Thompson, has filed three motions. 


1. Motion to Dismiss Count II, tampering with physi- 
cal evidence (AS 11.56.610) 


2. Motion to Suppress Evidence seized from residence 
3. Motion to Suppress Statement taken Sept. 15, 1986 


4 


To assist in identifying the body, a press release was 
issued describing the body and requesting assistance in 
identifying it. 

On the day of the press release, Thompson contacted 
the Alaska State Troopers and reported that his ex-wife 
Dixie had been missing since August 11, 1986, and she 
fit the description of the body that had been found. 


The defendant gave a tape-recorded statement on Sep- 
tember 11, 1986, at which time he appeared cooperative 
and expressed concern for the victim’s well-being. On 
September 12, 1986, the defendant Thompson gave an- 
other statement expressing his desire to cooperate with 
the police in solving the murder. 

Investigator Stockard of the Alaska State Troopers con 
tacted Thompson on September 15, 1986, by telephone 
requesting that he come to trooper headquarters to iden- 
tify property that the police believed belonged to Dixie. 
Thompson came to Alaska State Trooper headquarters 
and was interviewed by Investigator Stockard and Investi- 
gator Hard. Thompson identified the property that had 
been recovered as belonging to Dixie and continued to 
talk to the troopers concerning the deceased. 


During the course of the interview, Thompson con- 
fessed to killing Dixie. 


Motion to Dismiss Count I Tampering with 
Physical Evidence 


Defendant claims that since, at the time the body was 
thrown in the gravel pit and the knife in the dumpster 
there was no investigation pending, he can not be con- 
victed of tampering with physical evidence. 


AS 11.56.610 provides in pertinent part: 
A person commits the crime of tampering with physi- 
cal evidence if the person (1) destroys, mutilates, 


5 
alters, suppresses, conceals, or removes physical evi- 
dence with intent to impair its verity or availability 
in an official proceeding or a criminal investigation: 


. . « » (4) does any act described by (1), (2), or 
(3) of this subsection with intent to prevent the in- 
stitution of an official proceeding. 


There is no requirement under subparagraph (4) that an 
official proceeding be in progress. The intent required 
is to prevent the institution of an official proceeding. 
Williamson v. State, 692 P.2d 965, 974 (Alaska App. 
1984). 


Therefore, defendant's Motion to Dismiss Count II, 
Tampering with Physical Evidence is DENIED. 


Motion to Suppress Evidence Seized from Residence 


Defendant has filed a motion to suppress evidence 
seized from his residence at 15.1 Mile Chena Hot Springs 
Road pursuant to search warrant numbered SW-237. 


According to court documents, search warrant num- 
bered SW-237 was never executed. Instead, a new search 
warrant numbered SW-239 was issued. SW-239 was is- 
sued based on the affidavit for SW-237 as well as addi- 
tional testimony of Investigator Christopher Stockard. 
That search warrant was served on September 15, 1986. 

Since SW-237 was never executed, defendant’s Motion 
to Suppress Evidence Seized from Residence pursuant to 
SW-237 is DENIED. 


Motion to Suppress Statement 


Defendant has moved to suppress the statement which 
was taken on September 15, 1986. In the statement he 
admits to stabbing Dixie and disposing of her body. 
Thompson claims that the statement should be suppressed 
because he was not given a Miranda warning prior to the 
interrogation. He further claims that the interrogation 
was overbearing and the statement was a product of 
psychological coercion, and therefore not voluntary. 


6 


At the time of the interrogation by Investigator Stock- 
ard and Investigator Hard on September 15, 1986, 
Thompson had become the focus of the investigation and 
in fact Investigators Stockard and Hard believed he had 
killed Dixie and disposed of her body. A search warrant 
had been issued for Thompson's residence and truck prior 
to his interview on the 15th. In fact, the search of 
Thompson’s residence pursuant to the search warrant had 
commenced prior to Investigator Stockard requesting him 
to come to police headquarters and was still in progres® 
during the course of the interview. 


After the body was identified, the police briefly ques- 
tioned Thompson on two occasions prior to September 
15. On the 15th he was asked to come to the Alaska 
State Troopers’ headquarters on Peger Road to identify 
certain items believed to belong to the deceased. The 
telephone call requesting him to come to the policy sta- 
tion was recorded. Thompson went to the police station 
in his own vehicle. On arrival, he was told he was free 
to leave at any time. 


The entire interrogation, which lasted approximately 
two (2) hours was tape-recorded and was conducted by 
Investigators Stockard and Hard who were dressed in 
plain clothes with no weapons visible. On several occa- 
sions throughout the interrogation, Thompson was as- 
sured that he was not in custody, not under arrest and 
could leave at any time. During the interview Thompson 
asked questions to reassure himself that this was in fact 
the case and in fact at the conclusion of the interroga- 
tion, even after admitting to stabbing Dixie, he was per- 
mitted to leave. His truck was seized at the conclusion 
of the interview in order to be searched for evidence. 
After the interview was over, a trooper drove him to his 
residence. He was arrested approximately two hours later 
pursuant to an arrest warrant which was requested by 
Investigator Stockard based on the affidavits for the 
search warrant for his residence and vehicle and the 
statement made on the 1 Sth. 


7 


At the time of the interrogation on September 15, 
1986, Investigator Stockard knew Thompson was await- 
ing sentencing on a felony theft case. In the theft case 
he was represented by retained counsel and had entered 
a plea of no contest to the charge. Investigator Stockard 
assumed Thompson knew he had a right to remain silent 
and not talk to the officers. 


During the interview, Thompson was advised that any- 
thing Thompson told them favorable to his case would be 
brought to the attention of the District Attorney as well 
as the grand jury and they would investigate any leads 
favorable to Thompson. 


The information supplied by Thompson, namely, that 
it was self-defense or heat of passion was furnished to 
the District Attorney as well as the grand jury. 


Alaska has adopted an objective, reasonable person 
perspective as a standard for determining whether an in- 
terviewed person is in custody. Hunter v. State, 590 
F.2d 388, 395 (Alaska 1970). The test must be applied 
on a case-by-case basis. Short of an actual arrest, a 
person will be deemed “in custody” when “a reas able 
person would feel he was not free to leave and break off 
police questioning.” (/bid. at 895) There are a number 
of factors to be considered in making this “in custody” 
determination. When and where it occurred, how long 
it lasted, how many police officers conducted the inter- 
rogation, what was said and done, whether or not there 
were actual physical restraints or indicia of physical re- 
straints, and whether the defendant was being questioned 
as a suspect or witness. The court must also consider 
how the defendant got to the police station, whether it 
was on his own, in response to a police request or 
escorted by the police and whether or not he was per- 
mitted to leave after the statement. 


In this case, the defendant appeared in response to a 
request by the troopers to identify certain personal items 


of his ex-wife. The interrogation was conducted by two 
plain-clothed police officers without any signs of weapons. 
Thompson was assured that he was free to go at any 
time and in fact at the conclusion of the interrogation 
was not arrested and was driven home by Investigator 
Hard. 


During the course of the interview, the defendant by 
his questioning, reaffirmed the fact that the police would 
permit him to leave. 


In applying the Hunter test to the facts of this case, 
the court concludes that the defendant was not in cus- 
tody and Miranda warnings were not required. 


This does not end the inquiry since the defendant has 
also asserted that his statement was not voluntary based 
on the type of questioning and the mental coercion in- 
volved. The court must apply a totality of circumstances 
test in making a decision on the voluntary nature of the 
statement. The state must show by a preponderance of 
the evidence that confession was voluntary. Sprague v. 
State, 590 P.2d 410, 413 (Alaska 1979). 


From an examination of the overall circumstances of 
the interrogation in this case, the state has met its burden 
and the statement was in fact voluntary. Therefore, de- 
fendant’s Motion to Suppress the statement taken on Sep- 
tember 15, 1986, is DENIED. 


The court has examined the statement of September 
15, 1986, made by Thompson as viewed by an objective 
reasonable person at the time the statement was made 
that is, whether or not he as a reasonable person would 
believe he was free to leave. The court has concluded 
that Thompson as a reasonable person would feel he 
could leave. However, in viewing the conduct of the 
police after the statement, that is, arresting the defendant 
by means of a warrant within two hours of the statement, 
appears to be a devious police tactic. It would appear 
that the police felt they could obtain a statement implicat- 


9 


ing the defendant by doing so, letting him return home 
and arrest him immediately. 

Under the total circumstances of this case, that fact 
2 does not made the confession inadmissible, although 
makes the question very close. 

DATED at Fairbanks, Alaska this 17 day of March, 


1987. 
/s/ Jay Hodges 
Jay HODGES 
Superior Court Judge 


10 
COURT OF APPEALS OF ALASKA 


No. A-2183 
CaRL THOMPSON, 
Appellant, 
v. 
STATE OF ALASKA, 
Appellee. 


Jan. 20, 1989 


Before BRYNER, C.J., and COATS and SINGLETON, 
JJ. 


OPINION 
COATS, Judge. 


Carl Thompson was convicted, following a jury trial, 
of one count of first-degree murder, AS 11.41.100, an 
unclassified felony, and of one count of tampering with 
physical evidence, AS 11.56.610, a class C felony. Judge 
Jay Hodges sentenced Thompson to ninety-nine years on 
the first-degree murder conviction and to a consecutive 
five years on the tampering with physical evidence con- 
viction. Thompson appeals his conviction and sentence. 


We affirm Thompson’s conviction, but reverse his sen- 
tence. 


On September 10, 1986, two moose hunters found the 
body of a dead woman floating in a gravel pit lake off 
the Elliott Highway. The hunters notified the Alaska 
State Troopers. The troopers discovered that the woman 


11 


been stabbed twenty-nine times. The body had been 
2 
in chains, a bedspread, and a tent fly. The troopers 
advertised for information concerning the identity of the 
body, and directed the public’s attention to a unique 
tattoo on the body. At the urging of his girlfriend, Carl 
called the troopers and reported that his 
former wife fit the description of the body which they 
had found and told the troopers that she had been miss- 
ing since mid-August. Thompson told the troopers that 
he had taken his former wife to the airport in mid-August 
and that he had not seen her again. Through a dental 
examination, the body was conclusively identified as 
Thompson’s former wife, Dixie Thompson. 


On September 15, 1986, the trooper investigation had 
focused upon Carl Thompson as the person who had 
killed Dixie Thompson. Trooper Cris Stockard contacted 
Thompson and asked him to come to the trooper office 
to identify some property belonging to Dixie Thompson. 
However, Trooper Stockard’s primary reason for contact- 
ing Thompson was to question him. Thompson went to 
the police station and was questioned extensively by 
Trooper Stockard. During the questioning, Trooper 
Stockard consistently assured Thompson that he was not 
under arrest and that he was free to go at any time. 
Thompson ultimately confessed to killing his former wife. 
Following his statement to the troopers, Thompson was 
allowed to leave the trooper headquarters. However, he 
was arrested approximately two hours later and was 
charged with murder in the first degree. 


While Trooper Stockard was interviewing —.— 
at the trooper headquarters, other troopers were 
ing a search warrant at Thompson's residence on Chena 
Hot Springs Road. The troopers seized a handgun during 
the search. Additionally, Luminol testing was done to 
check for the presence of blood in the residence. The test 
revealed a large concentration of blood in the kitchen 


12 


area of the residence. The troopers also seized Thomp- 
son’s truck. The tires of Thompson’s truck were of sim- 
ilar size and tread design to the tire impressions that the 


troopers had found near where Dixie Thompson’s body 
had been discovered. 


At trial, Thompson defended on the ground that he 
initially stabbed Dixie Thompson in self-defense. Thomp- 
son claims that he then lost control and killed Dixie in 
the heat of passion. Thompson asked the jury to convict 
him of the lesser-included offense of manslaughter. The 
jury ultimatey convicted Thompson of murder in the first 
degree. 


During deliberations, the jury sent a note to Judge 


Hodges asking for clarification of Jury Instruction No. 
14.“ The note stated: 


Jury Instruction No. 14 stated: 


It is a defense to Murder in the First Degree, and Murder 
in the Second Degree involving intent to cause serious physical 
injury OR knowing conduct, if the defendant acted in a heat 
of passion at the time he killed Dixie Gutman Thompson 
before there had been a reasonable opportunity for the passion 
to cool, when the heat of passion resulted from a serious 
provocation by the intended victim. 


“Heat of passion” as the term is used in our law means 
such passion as naturally would be aroused in the mind of an 
ordinarily reasonable person in the same or similar circum- 
stances as those in question, and such as would cause him to 
act rashly, without reflection and deliberation, and from 
passion rather than judgment. “Passion” or “heat of passion” 
is a term which encompasses a broad range of intense emo- 
tions including, but not limited to, fear, fright, terror, anger, 
rage or wild desperation. 


“Serious provocation” as used in these instructions means 
conduct which is sufficient to excite an intense passion in a 
reasonable person in the defendant’s situation, other than a 
person who is intoxicated, under the circumstances as he rea- 
sonably believed them to be. Insulting words, or hearsay 
reports of conduct engaged in by the intended victim, do not 
alone or in combination with each other, constitute serious 
provocation. 


13 


We need a legal interpretation of Page 14 refer- 
ring to “serious provocation” [sic] Can an introxi- 
cated [sic] person use serious provocation and/or 
Heat of Passion as a means of Defense.” 


The judge instructed the jury as follows: 


An intoxicated defendant can avail himself of the 
heat of passion and serious provocation defense but 
his conduct must be judged by how a reasonable 
sober person in the defendant's situation would 
react. 


Defense counsel stipulated to that answer being given in 
response to the jury’s question. Defense counsel, how- 
ever, went on to argue that an additional instruction 
should be given on diminished capacity based on intoxi- 
cation. After hearing argument from the defense and the 
prosecution, Judge Hodges declined giving any further 
instruction on intoxication. 

Thompson argues that it was reversible error for the 
trial court ds refuse to instruct the jury on a defense of 
diminished capacity based on intoxication. He suggests 
that the instruction was mandatory and requires reversal 
if it is “possible that [this] omission contributed to the 
jury’s verdict[.J” Stork v. State, 559 P.2d 99, 101 
(Alaska 1977). 


At trial, Thompson’s defense was that he was guilty 
only of the lesser-included offense of manslaughter be- 
cause he acted in the heat of passion. Thompson also 
defended on the ground that he had diminished capacity 
to form an intent to kill based upon a mental disease or 
defect. However, it is clear that Thompson did not as- 
sert, prior to jury deliberation, the defense of diminished 
capacity based upon intoxication. He argues, however, 
that because the state contended that he was intoxicated 
when he committed the offenses and suggested that he 
was a mean angry drunk, such an instruction should 


have been given. 


14 


Both Thompson and the state cite Des Jardins v. State, 
551 P.2d 181 (Alaska 1976). In Des Jardins, the su- 
preme court stated: 


When a jury asks a judge about a matter on which 
it has received adequate instruction, the judge may 
in his or her discretion refuse to answer, or may 
refer the jury to the earlier instruction. When, how- 
ever, the jury appears to be confused about a legal 
issue, and the resolution of the question is not ap- 
parent from an earlier instuction, the trial judge has 
a “responsibility to give the jury the required guid- 
ance by a lucid statement of the relevant legal cri- 
teria. When a jury makes explicit its difficulties, a 
trial judge should clear them away with concrete 
accuracy.” 


Id. at 190 (footnote omitted). 


In addition, Thompson cites to III Standards for Crim- 
inal Justice § 154.3 (2d ed. 1986). However, the Com- 
mentary to Standard 15-4.3(b) provides in part: “It is 
generally agreed that, when giving instructions in re- 
sponse to a jury request, the judge may confine himself 
or herself to the particular questions asked by the jury 
and need not give additional instructions, even though 


requested to do so by the defendant.” Jd. (footnote 
omitted ). 


We conclude that Judge Hodges did not abuse his 
discretion in refusing to instruct the jury on the defense 
of diminished capacity due to intoxication. Thompson's 
main defense was that he acted in the heat of passion 
and was therefore guilty of manslaughter, rather than 
first-degree murder. The jury question focused on this 
defense and asked the judge whether a person who was 
intoxicated could avail himself of heat of passion as a 
defense. Judge Hodges’ instruction directly answered the 
jury’s question. Thompson never argued that he was in- 
capable of forming an intent to kill based on diminished 


15 


i ication. Although there was evi- 
ae: 4. —— — had been intoxicated 
during the events which ultimately led to Dixie Thomp- 
son's death, neither the state nor Thompson had sug- 
gested that Thompson was incapable of forming a spe- 
cific intent to kill. There is no reason to believe that the 
jury independently was focusing on this issue. Rather, 
the jury seems to have focused on the major defense 
which Thompson raised. We find no abuse of discretion. 


ior to trial, Thom argued that the statement 
which he made to — Stockard on September 15, 
1985, should be suppressed. Thompson argued in the 
trial court that the troopers were required to give him 
Miranda warnings before he talked to them and con- 
tended that his statement was not voluntary. Judge 
found that the troopers were not required to give 
Thompson Miranda warnings because Thompson was not 
in custody at the time that he made the statement. He 
also found that Thompson's statements to the troopers 
were voluntary. 


In Hunter v. State, 590 P.2d 888 ge a tg the 
supreme court held that the police were required to give 
a person Miranda warnings where he was subject to cus- 
todial interrogation. The court adopted an objective rea- 
sonable person test for determining whether a suspect 
was in custody. /d. at 895. The court asked: 


At least three groups of facts would be relevant 
to this determination. The first are those facts in- 
trinsic to the interrogation: when and —— it oc- 

how it lasted, how many police were 
—— 2 officers and defendants said and 
did, the presence of actual physical restraint on the 
defendant or things equivalent to actual restraint 
such as drawn weapons or a guard stationed at the 
door, and whether che defendant was being ques- 
tioned as a suspect or as a witness. Facts pertain- 
ing to events before the interrogation are also rele- 


16 


vant, especially how the defendant got to the place 
of questioning—whether he came completely on his 
own, in response to a police request, or escorted by 
police officers. Finally, what happened after the in- 
terrogation—wheth:r the defendant left freely, was 
detained or arrested—may assist the court in de- 
termining whether the defendant, as a reasonable 
person, would have felt free to break off the ques- 
tioning. 

Id. at 895 (footnotes omitted). See also Quick v. State, 


599 P.2d 712 (Alaska 1979); Lowry v. State, 707 P 
280 (Alaska App. 1985). * 


In arguing that Judge Hodges erred in finding that the 

e were not required to give Thompson Miranda 
warnings, Thompson does not really argue that he was in 
custody when the interview occurred. He concedes that 
Ihe] may or may not have been in a custodial setting 
at the time he was interrogated.” Instead, Thompson 
argues that the police intentionally interrogated him in 


such a way as to circumvent the requirements of 


that Judge Hodges applied the correct test under Hunter. 
As we have pointed out earlier, Thompson does not really 


7 
i 
. 
e 
: 
. 
f. 


ard warned Thompson that if he did not say anything. 
the district attorney might conclude that Thompson had 
committed murder in the first degree. Trooper Stockard 


lesser charge, such as negligent homicide, and would be 
facing a minimal sentence such as two to five years. 


In his brief, Thompson sets out the correct legal stand- 
ard for reviewing the voluntariness of confessions: The 
Supreme Court has consistently made clear that the test 
of voluntariness is whether an examination of all the 
circumstances discloses that the conduct of law enforce- 
ment was such as to overbear [the defendant's] will to 
resist and bring about confessions not freely self deter- 


18 


mined.” Stobaugh v. State, 614, P.2d 767, 772 (Alaska 
1980) (quoting United States v. Ferrara, 377 F.2d 16, 
17 (2nd Cir.1967) ). 


In Sprague v. State, 590 P.2d 410 (Alaska 1979), 
the Alaska Supreme Court articulated a test for deter- 
mining whether a confession was voluntary or involun- 
tary. The court held that “[{iJn determining whether a 
confession is voluntary or is the ‘product of a mind over- 
borne by coercion,’ this court has previously stated that it 
will consider the ‘totality of circumstances surrounding 
the confession’ and conduct an independent review of the 
record.” Jd. at 413 (footnote omitted). In considering 
the totality of the circumstances, the following are rele- 
vant criteria: (1) age, mentality, and prior criminal ex- 
perience; (2) length, intensity, and frequency of interro- 
gation; (3) the existence of physical deprivation or mis- 
r (4) the existence of threat or inducement. 

At . 


In Harris v. State, 678 P.2d 397 (Alaska App.1984), 
rev'd on other grounds, Stephen v. State, 711 P.2d 1156 
„ court dealt with the issue of induce- 
ment. police told Harris that if he cooperated with 
them by telling the truth, his cooperation would be 
brought to the attention of the prosecutor. This court 
concluded that such “inducement is not improper as long 
as, under the totality of the circumstances, the defend- 
ant's confession is voluntary.” Id. at 405-06. See also 
Plant v. State, 724 P.2d 536, 541 (Alaska App. 1986) 
(defendant’s confession voluntary and will not over- 
borne even though defendant was told by police that he 
was in a lot of trouble and that he might benefit from 
cooperation) 

Thompson was twenty-nine years old at the time he 
made the confession. Thompson argues that he dropped 
out of high school and that he was “borderline retarded.” 
However, Dr. Feldman, the psychologist and defense 
witness who testified about Thompson’s retardation, 
actually testified that he believed that Thompson was of 


19 


low average intelligence. Dr. Feldman testified that 

s scores on the intelligence tests were inac- 
curate on the low side because of the circumstances under 
which the tests were given. 

Thompson has had “prior criminal experience.” He 
was convicted of minor in possession in 1975; receiving 
or concealing stolen property in 1976; disorderly conduct 
in May 1986; and second-degree theft in October 1986. 
Thompson was dealing with the police on the theft of- 
fense prior to his interrogation. 

went voluntarily to the police station at the 
request of the troopers. He was not advised of his 
Miranda rights. He was, however, advised several times 
that he was free to leave during the interview, prior to 
his confessing. The interview lasted about two hours. 
He was interviewed by two troopers in a small interview 
room. Neither trooper was in uniform, nor were guns 
displayed. 

The statements which the police made to Thompson 
to encourage him to talk to them appear to be similar 
to the inducements which we concluded were not im- 
proper in Harris and in Plant. We conclude that the 
inducements which the police made to Thompson were 
not “such as to overbear [the defendant's] will to resist 
and bring about confessions not freely self-determined.” 
We conclude that Thompson’s confession was voluntary. 


During the trial, the state played the portion of 
Thompson’s statement where he admitted killing his 
former wife. Thompson asked to have the entire state- 
ment played to the jury. Judge Hodges concluded that 
the portion of the statement that was played was a fair 
assessment of what occurred and ruled against playing 
the first portion of the tape. Thompson points to Alaska 
Evidence Rule 106, which states: 


20 


Remainder of, or Related Writings or Recorded 
Statements. 


When a writing or recorded statement or part 
thereof is introduced by a party, an adverse party 
may require him at that time to introduce any other 
part or any other writing or recorded statement 
which ought in fairness to be considered contem- 
poraneously with it. 

The decision whether to admit or to exclude evidence 
under A.R.E. 106 is reviewed under an abuse of discre- 
tion standard. Stumpf v. State, 749 P.2d 880, 899 
(Alaska App.1988). In Stumpf, we held that: 


[W]hen the state . . presents one part of a conver- 
sation or statement . . . , the defendant may be en- 
titled to offer or require the state to offer, the rest 
of the statement or conversation in order to set the 
context for statements already in evidence. None- 
theless, the admitted portions of the statements need 
not be admitted if they are not relevant to explain 
or clarify the previously admitted statement. 


Id. (citation omitted ). 


The statement which Thompson wished to admit in its 
entirety was an approximate two-hour interview. Much 
of that interview consisted of Trooper Stockard talking 
to Thompson. Under these circumstances, we conclude 
that Judge Hodges did not abuse his discretion in deter- 
mining that, on direct examination, the state could intro- 
duce only the part of the statement where Thompson 
admitted killing his former wife. Judge Hodges indicated 
that he might or might not permit certain portions of the 
statement to be played to the jury during cross- 
examination. Thompson has not pointed out to us spe- 
cific portions of the tape which he was not permitted to 
play to the jury either for purposes of cross-examination 
or as evidence during his case-in-chief. We conclude that 
Judge Hodges did not err in limiting the portion of the 


21 


tape which was played to the jury during the state’s case- 


next contends that his sentence was exces- 
* was convicted of murder in the first 
degree, which is an unclassified felony with a — ＋ 
penalty of ninety-nine years and a minimum penalty — 
twenty years. He was also convicted of tampering wit! 
physical evidence, which is a class C felony with a maxi. 
mum penalty of five years. Judge Hodges sentenced 
to the maximum sentence on both convictions, 
and imposed those sentences consecutive to each other. 
Thus, Thompson has a composite sentence of one hun- 
dred and four years. 


At the time of sentencing, Thompson was thirty years 
old. Thompson had previously been convicted of four 
minor misdemeanor offenses. Thompson was not sen- 
tenced to imprisonment on any of the misdemeanor of- 
fenses. At the time that he committed the present of- 
fense, Thompson was charged with theft in the second 
degree, a class C felony, AS 11.46.130(a) (1). Thomp- 
son was ultimately sentenced to three years with two and 
one-half years suspended on the theft offense. In sen- 
tencing Thompson, Judge Hodges concluded that Thomp- 
son might not be a worst offender because he did not 
have a long history of criminal involvement. However, 
he classified the murder itself as a worst offense. He 
emphasized the explosive relationship that existed be- 
tween Carl and Dixie Thompson throughout the course 
of their relationship. 

Hodges indicated that there was evidence that 
4 a at least involved with the use of drugs 
for his personal use and that a possible motive for the 
killing may have been that Thompson was concerned 
that Dixie Thompson might inform on him. Judge 
Hodges indicated that he had difficulty Lelieving Thomp- 
son’s version that he acted either in self-defense or in 
the heat of passion because Thompson’s version of the 


22 


offense did not match the physical evidence. In con- 
cluding that this was a particularly aggravated murder 
offense, Judge Hodges pointed out that Thompson had 
Stabbed his former wife twenty-nine times. Thompson 
then disposed of the body by taking it to a gravel pit 


in an isolated area and wrapping the body with canvas 
and chains. 


We conclude that Judge Hodges was not Clearly mis- 
taken in imposing the maximum sentence of ninety-nine 
years for murder in the first degree. In Riley v. State, 
720 P.2d 951, 952 (Alaska App.1986), we pointed out 
that we were not aware of any decision of this court or 
the Alaska Supreme Court which held that a maximum 
sentence for murder in the first degree was excessive. In 
Riley, we pointed out that under the present first-degree 
murder statute, many cases which would have been 
second-degree murder under the former statutes were now 
included as murder in the first degree. We stated that 
lim such cases, sentence appeals dealing with second- 
degree murder convictions under prior law may well pro- 
vide an appropriate point of reference.” Id. at 952 n. 1. 
In the instant case, however, we believe that the reasons 
which Judge Hodges gave were sufficient to justify im- 
position of the maximum sentence. 


We do not believe, however, that the record supports 
imposing the sentence for tampering with evidence con- 
secutively to the ninety-nine-year murder sentence. In 
order to justify imposing a sentence consecutive to the 
ninety-nine-year murder sentence, the trial court would 
have to find that confinement of the defendant for the 
aggregate period of the consecutive sentence was neces- 
sary to protect the public. Mutschler v. State, 560 P.2d 
377 (Alaska 1977).? We do not believe that a sentence 


In State v. Andrews, 707 P.2d 900, 908, 910 (Alaska App.1985), 
aff'd per curiam, 728 P.2d 85 (Alaska 1986), we concluded that AS 
12.55.025(e) established a legislative preference for consecutive 
sentences. In Jones v. State, 744 P.2d 410, 411 (Alaska App.1987), 


23 


of ninety-nine years can be justified except 
ee Os trial — finds that in order to protect the 
public the defendant must — - — 3 4 

without an ity . 0. 
Nukapigak v. 2 663 P. 2d 943 (Alasaka 1983); 
Hasting v. State, 736 P. 2d 1157 (Alaska App. 1987). 
Where the record did not support this finding, we have 
previously not approved sentences in excess of the ninety- 
nine-year maximum term for murder. Ridgley v. State, 
739 P.2d 1299 (Alaska App.1987); Page v. State, 657 
P.2d 850 (Alaska App.1983). 


es did not find that it was necessary to 
aa — to spend the rest of his life in prison 
without any possibility of parole to adequately protect 
the public. We do not believe that the record in this 
case would support such à finding. We do not believe 
that the record supports the conclusion that Thompson 
must be incarcerated for the remainder of his life with- 
out any possibility of parole. We accordingly conclude 
that the trial court should not have imposed the sentence 
for tampering with physical evidence consecutively to the 
ninety-nine-year sentence for murder. We therefore find 
Thompson’s sentence to be clearly mistaken. We order 
the trial court to impose Thompson’s sentence for tam- 
pering with evidence concurrent to his sentence for 
murder. 


The conviction is AFFIRMED. The sentence is VA- 
CATED and the case is REMANDED for resentencing 
consistent with this opinion. 


we indicated that the legislative preference for consecutive sen- 
tences must be interpreted to expand the situations where the 
court may impose consecutive sentences. In Jones, we upheld * 
trial judge’s conclusion that Jones’ offenses were so serious * 
consecutive sentence was necessary to reflect the seriousness of the 
crime. Jones, 744 P. 2d at 412. However, we do not believe that 
the record in this case establishes any substantial reason for 
imposing a sentence greater than the ninety-nine year maximum 
sentence for first-degree murder. 


Supreme Court No. $-3200 


CaRL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner, 


V. 


STATE OF ALASKA, 
Respondent. 


Court of Appeals No. A-2183 
Trial Court No. 4FA 86-2644 Cr. 


Before: Matthews, Chief Justice, Rabinowitz, Burke 
and Compton, Justices. [Moore, Justice, not 


participating. | 
ORDER 
On consideration of the petition for hearing, filed on 
March 6, 1989, and the response to the petition, lodged 


on March 28, 1989 and filed pursuant to the order of 
March 31, 1989, 


IT IS ORDERED: 
The petition for hearing is denied. 
Entered by direction of the court at Anchorage, Alaska 
on May 4, 1989. 
/s/ David A. Lampen 


Davip A. LAMPEN 
Clerk of the Supreme Court 


25 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case No. A91-171 Civil 


CARL THOMPSON, 


0 Petitioner, 


JOSEPH CLASS, et al., 
Defendants. 


INITIAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION 
RE: PETITION FOR HABEAS CORPUS 


Carl Thompson, presently serving a life sentence for 
first degree murder following a conviction in an Alaska 
state court, has filed a habeas corpus petition under 28 
U.S.C. § 2254 in which he claims his Constitutional rights 
to due process and against self-incrimination were violated 
when his involuntary confession was admitted at trial 
during the prosecution’s case-in-chief. This Court, having 
reviewed the petition, the memorandum in support thereof, 
and exhibits attached thereto, including a transcript of 
petitioner’s statements to the police, the state’s response 
thereto and petitioner’s reply, and having heard argument 
thereon, now makes its Report and Recommendation. 


FINDINGS OF FACT 


1. In 1987, in the Alaska Superior Court in Fair- 
banks, Alaska, petitioner was convicted by a jury on one 
count of first-degree murder and one count of tampering 
with physical evidence. He was subsequently sentenced 
to ninety-nine years on the first-degree murder conviction 
and an additional five years on the tampering charge to 
be served consecutively. The Alaska Court of Appeals 
affirmed the convictions, found the consecutive five year 


26 


sentence for tampering to be excessive and remanded for 
resentencing. On remand, the trial court resentenced peti- 
tioner to a term of 99 years. 


2. Petitioner moved to suppress the tape recorded con- 
fession he made to two Alaska State Troopers before trial 
on the grounds that the interrogation violated his fifth 
amendment Miranda rights; and that his resulting confes- 
sion was involuntary. The motion was denied. At trial, 
during the prosecution’s case-in-chief, a portion of the 
tape recorded confession in which he admitted stabbing 
his ex-wife was played to the jury. 

3. Petitioner has exhausted his available state court 
remedies. 


4. On September 10, 1986, the body of a woman was 
found floating in a lake off the Elliott Highway by two 
moose hunters. The woman had been severely beaten and 
stabbed a total of twenty-nine times. She was clad only 
in a T shirt and wrapped in chains, a bedspread and tent 
fly. There was a heart-shaped tatoo with the name Carl“ 
over her left chest. After the Alaska State Troopers 
advertised for information concerning the identity of the 
body, Carl Thompson telephoned the troopers and re- 
ported that the description fit his former wife who had 
been missing since that August. A subsequent dental 
examination conclusively identified the body as Thomp- 


son’s former wife, Dixie 


5. On September 15, 1986, after questioning Thomp- 
son’s brother-in-law and another witness, the Alaska State 
Troopers’ investigation focused on Thompson as the most 
likely person to have killed Dixie Thompson. 


6. Intending to question Thompson about the murder, 
Trooper Stockard contacted him and asked him to come 
in to the trooper headquarters on the pretext of identify- 
ing a coat, some jewelry boxes and jewelry that might 
have belonged to his former wife. Once Thompson ar- 
rived at the office, Stockard and another trooper interro- 
gated Thompson for approximately one hour and 16 min- 


27 


utes. During the questioning, Stockard repeatedly in- 
formed Thompson that he was not under arrest, that he 
was free to leave at any time, and that he would he would 
be able to leave when the questioning ended. 


7. During the interrogation, the troopers told Thomp- 
son that they believed he had killed his former wife and 
urged him to help them get at the truth. Stockard told 
Thompson to tell his side of the story so that they could 
present that version to the District Attorney. Otherwise, 
he warned Thompson that the prosecutor might conclude 
that killing of Dixie Thompson was first-degree murder. 
Stockard suggested that if Thompson explained his part 
in the slaying, it was possible that he might only be guilty 
of a lesser charge such as manslaughter or negligent 
homicide; and would be facing a minimal sentence such 
as two to five years, as opposed to a ninety-nine year sen- 
tence for first-degree murder. 


8. After several lengthy statements by the troopers in 
which they informed Thompson that they didn’t think the 
killing was first-degree murder, and guaranteed him that 
they weren’t going to arrest him in the office and that he 
would be permitted to leave, Thompson abandoned his 
original story and admitted killing his ex-wife. In so 
doing, he asserted that he initially stabbed her in self 
defense and then lost control and continued to stab her 
in the heat of passion. 


9. Once the interrogation was concluded, Thompson 
was permitted to leave the trooper headquarters, as prom- 
ised. He was arrested approximately two hours later and 
charged with first degree murder. 


10. At no time during the interrogation did the troop- 
ers advise Johnson of his Miranda rights. 


DISCUSSION 


This petition raises two questions. First, was Thomp- 
son’s confession obtained in violation of his 5th Amend- 
ment right against self-incrimination? Second, were his 


28 


statements involuntary? For the reasons given herein, the 
answer to both questions should be in the negative. 


Thompson was neither in custody nor deprived of his 
rights in any significant way during the interrogation. He 
was repeatedly told that he was not under arrest and that 
he could leave anytime. Trooper Stockard even guaran- 
teed that he would be free to leave at the end of the 
questioning. In fact, when the questioning was finished 
and he had admitted killing his wife, he was allowed 
to go. 


The trial judge found that Thompson was not in cus- 
tody for Miranda purposes. The Alaska Court of Appeals 
affirmed his decision. (Thompson v. State, 768 P.2d at 
130-31). This finding is presumptively correct. See 28 
U.S.C. § 2254(d). 


The United States Supreme Court has held that a per- 
son who is a suspect is not in custody for Miranda pur- 
poses unless there has been some actual indication of 
custody that would make a reasonable, innocent person 
feel that he was not free to break off the questioning and 
leave. See Minnesota v. Murphy, 465 U.S. 420, 431, 104 
S.C. 1136, 1144, 79 L.Ed.2d 409 (1984); California v. 
Beheler, 463 U.1S. 1121, 1124, 103 S.Ct. 3517, 3519-20, 
77 L.1Ed.2d 1275 (1983). The Supreme Court has 
adopted an objective, “reasonable man” test for deciding 
whether a person is in custody or otherwise subject to 
restraints comparable to those associated with formal 
arrest. See Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 441, 
442, 104 S.Ct. 3138, 3150, 3151, 82 L.Ed.2d 317 
(1984). 


In determining whether someone is in custody, the trial 
court must consider the totality of the circumstances and 
then decide whether a reasonable person would have 
believed that he or she was not free to leave. United 
States v. Pinion, 800 F.2d 976, 978-79 (9th Cir. 1986), 
cert. denied, 480 U.S. 936, 107 S.t. 1580, 94 L.Ed.2d 
770 (1987). Relevant factors to be considered are: (1) 


with evidence of his guilt; (3) the physical surroundings 
of the interview; (4) its duration; and, (5) the degree of 
pressure applied to detain the individual. United States 
v. Wauneka, 770 F.2d 1434, 1438 (9th Cir. 1985). 


Here, there is no indication language was used by 
trooper Stockard that would imply to Thompson that he 
should expect to be arrested when he came into the office. 
During the interrogation, he was confronted with some 
evidence implying his involvement in his ex-wife's killing 
(e.g. tire tracks at the scene where the body was found 
similar if not identical to the tire patterns on his vehicle). 
although this information did not appear to be sufficient 
by itself to encourage him to change his story. 


The interview took place On September 15, 1986 in 
the troopers’ offices. It began at 10:58 a.m. and ended at 
12:14 p.m. Thompson was not physically restrained in 


leave. He was per- 
lowing the interrogation. The location, 


them a scenario in which he appeared to be innocent 

his ex-wife’s death. Tis Gennes Bnd — 
the Principal suspect in her killing, although this, by itself, 
is insufficient to require Miranda warnings. Minnesota v. 
Murphy, 465 U.S. 420, 431, 104 S.Ct. 1136, 1144, 79 


30 


L.Ed.2d 409 . They obviously wanted him to 
implicate himself; and, employed — interrogation 


that he was free to leave at any time he wanted. 


Both the trial judge and the state appellate court care- 
fully considered the totality of circumstances surrounding 
this issue. They applied an objective, reasonable person 
test, finding that Thompson was not in custody at the 
time of his interrogation and, therefore, the troopers were 
not required to give him his Miranda warnings. The rec- 
ord amply supports this finding. 

Thompson alleges that his confession was coerced by 


the troopers’ promise to bring his version of the facts to 
the attention of the district attorney, and their statements 


implying to him that they believed he might be charged 


will and bring about a confession that was not voluntary. 
Thompson v. State, 768 P.2d at 131-32. The record sup- 
ports this finding. 


31 


RECOMMENDATION 


Based upon the foregoing, it is hereby recommended 
that this petition be DENIED. 


DATED this 29th of December, 1992. 


/s/ Harry Branson 
HARRY BRANSON 


U.S. Magistrate Judge 


32 


MINUTES OF THE 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case No. A91-171 CIV. 
CARL THOMPSON 
V. 


JosePH CLASS, et al. 


THE HONORABLE Harry Branson, U.S. Magistrate 
Deputy Clerk/Recorder: Ellaine Wheeler 


MINUTE ORDER FROM CHAMBERS 


33 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case No. A91-171-CIVIL 


CARL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner, 
V. 


Jos pH CLASS, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER 


Petitioner, who was convicted of first degree murder 
and tampering with physical evidence, seeks a writ of 
habeas corpus challenging his conviction. Petitioner raises 
two issues: that certain incriminating statements were 
obtained in violation of his Miranda rights; and that the 
statements were involuntary. Parties dispute whether the 
petitioner was actually in custody when he made the 
statements. Petitioner has exhausted his state remedies as 
to these issues. Petitioner is represented by counsel, who 
has briefed and argued the matter before Magistrate 
Judge Branson. Magistrate Judge Branson has made 
findings of facts, conclusions of law, and recommends 
that the petition be denied. Neither party objected to 
Magistrate Judge Branson’s recommendations. After a 
thorough and independent review of the record, I agree 
with Magistrate Judge Branson’s finding of facts, con- 
clusions of law, and recommendation. See United States 
v. Remsing, 874 F.2d 614 (9th Cir. 1989). 


IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED THAT: 


For the reasons stated in the report and recommenda- 
tion, this petition is DISMISSED. 


DATED the 18th day of February, 1992, at Anchor- 


age, Alaska. 


34 


/s/ John W. Sedwick 
JohN W. SEDWICK 
United States District Judge 


35 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case No. A91-171-CIV (JWS) 


CARL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner, 
V. 


JosEPH CLASS, et al., 
Defendants. 


ORDER FROM CHAMBERS 


BACKGROUND 


On December 29, 1992, Magistrate Judge Branson 
recommended that Carl Thompson’s petition for a writ 
of habeas corpus be denied. Thereafter, following an 
independent review, this court concluded that the recom- 
mendation was correct and denied the petition on Febru- 
ary 18, 1993. Petitioner then filed a motion to vacate 
judgment and to allow a new ten-day period in order to 
file objections to Magistrate Judge Branson’s report and 
recommendation. This court granted the motion on July 
19, 1993. Petitioner then filed timely objections. Follow- 
ing a review of the those objections, Magistrate Judge 
Branson certified his initial report and recommendation 
as final." The matter is now referred back to this court 
for consideration. 


Magistrate Judge Branson’s only revision involved a typing 
error. In the initial report and recommendation, petitioner Thomp- 
son was referred to in one instance as “Johnson.” 


36 


Petitioner Carl Thompson was convicted of first degree 
murder and tampering with physical evidence. He raises 
two issues in his petition: that certain incriminating 
Statements were obtained in violation of his Miranda 
rights; and that the statements were involuntary. Peti- 
tioner argues that he was actually in custody when he 
made the statements. Petitioner has exhausted his state 
remedies as to these issues. 


In his initial and final report and recommendation, 
Magistrate Judge Branson has made findings of facts, 
conclusions of law, and recommends that the petition be 
denied. After a thorough and independent review of the 
record, with two exceptions to the findings of fact, the 
court agrees with the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation. 
See United States v. Remsing, 874 F.2d 614, 618 (9th 
Cir. 1989). 

DISCUSSION 


I. Was Mr. Thompson In Custody For Miranda Pur- 
poses? 


Petitioner objects to the Magistrate Judge’s finding of 
fact thet Mr. Thompson’s questioning lasted approxi- 
mately one hour and sixteen minutes. The transcript of 
Mr. Thompson’s questioning reveals that it lasted from 
10:58 a.m. until 12:54 p.m. See Docket no. 1, Exhibit 
F. Therefore, as petitioner contends, the questioning 
lasted for at least one hour and fifty-six minutes. 


Petiitoner also objects to the Magistrate Judge’s im- 
plicit finding of fact that Mr. Thompson’s keys were only 
taken from him after he made his confession. In the 
evidence before the court, it cannot be conclusively deter- 
mined when, precisely, Mr. Thompson’s keys were taken 
from him. Nevertheless, the evidence shows that Mr. 
Thompson was repeatedly informed that he was free to 
leave at any time. See Docket no. 1, Exhibit F, at 27, 
49-50, 81, 84-86. Moreover, the Alaska Court of Appeals 
also found that, at numerous times, Mr. Thompson told 
he was free to leave. See Docket no. 1, Exhibit A, at 8. 


37 


The fact that the questioning lasted almost two hours, 
rather than one and one-quarter hour, however, is insuffi- 
cient, on its own, to reverse the state courts’ determina- 
tion that Mr. Thompson was not in custody for Miranda 
purposes. Federal courts considering habeas corpus peti- 
tions give deference to the state court;s factual findings. 
28 U.S.C. § 2254(d). The state court’s factual determi- 
nation that Thompson was not in custody is, thus, pre- 
sumptively correct. See Marshall v. Lonberger, 459 U.S. 
422, 431-32 (1983); see also Dres. v. Campoy, 784 F.2d 
996, 998 (9th cir. 1986) (state court findings of fact 
are presumed correct in habeas corpus proceedings). Ac- 
cordingly, this court agrees with the Magistrate Judge’s 
recommendation that Mr. Thompson’s petition should be 
denied. 


IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED THAT: 


For the reasons stated above, this petition (Docket no. 
1) is DENIED. 


DATED the 7th day of December, 1993, at Anchor- 
age, Alaska. 


/s/ John W. Sedwick 
JohN W. SEDWICK 
United States District Judge 


38 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case Number: A91-171CIV (JWS) 


CARL THOMPSON 
v. 
JOSEPH CLASS, et al. 


JUDGMENT IN A CIVIL CASE 


Jury Verdict. This action came before the Court for 
a trial by jury. The issues have been tried and the 
jury has rendered its verdict. 


D Decision by Court. This action came to trial or hear- 
ing before the Court. The issues have been tried or 
heard and a decision has been rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED 


THAT the petitioner’s, Carl Thompson, petition for 
Writ of Habeas Corpus is DENIED. 


APPROVED: 
/s/ John W. Sedwick 

US. District Court Judge 
Date 8 December 93 


/s/ [Ilegible] 
Clerk 
12/9/93 


/s/ [Illegible] 
(By) Deputy Clerk 


39 


MINUTES OF THE 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF ALASKA 


Case No. A91-171 CV (JWS) 
CARL THOMPSON 
V. 


JOSEPH CLASS, et al. 


THE HONORABLE JOHN W. SEDWICK 
Deputy Clerk Pam Richter 


ORDER FROM CHAMBERS 


Petitioner’s motion for a certificate of probable cause 
is hereby GRANTED. 


[Filed Jan. 11, 1994] 


DATE: January 11, 1994 INITIALS: prr 
Deputy Clerk 


40 


IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


C.A. No. 94-35052 
D.C. No. CV-91-00171-JWS 


CARL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner-A ppellant, 


V. 


PATRICK KEOHANE, Warden; CHARLES E. CoLR, 
Attorney General, State of Alaska, 
Respondent-A ppellee. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Alaska 


John W. Sedwick, District Judge, Presiding 


Argued and Submitted August 5, 1994 
Anchorage, Alaska 


BEFORE: PREGERSON, CANBY and BOOCH- 
EVER, Circuit Judges 


MEMORANDUM * 


Carl Thompson appeals the district court's denial of 
his petition for writ of habeas corpus. Thompson alleges 


* This disposition is not appropriate for publication and may 


not be cited to or by the courts of this circuit except as provided 
by Ninth Cir. R. 36-3. 5 


41 


that his incarceration violates the Constitution because 
the state trial court admitted statements that Thompson 
argues were obtained in violation of his Miranda rights 
and a confession that he argues was involuntary. We 
affirm. 

I. 


We recently have held that a state court's determina- 
tion that a defendant was not in custody for purposes of 
Miranda is a question of fact entitled to the presumption 
of correctness under 28 U.S.C. § 2254 (d). Krantz v. 
Briggs, 983 F.2d 961, 961-64 (9th Cir. 1993). Thomp- 
son has not shown, and it does not otherwise appear, 
that any of the exceptions to the presumption, see 28 
U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1)-(8) (1988), apply in this case. 
Accordingly, we may only disturb the state court’s factual 
determination if it lacks even fair support in the record. 
Krantz at 964. 


We have reviewed the entire transcript of Thompson’s 
interrogation. Thompson voluntarily appeared at the 
trooper headquarters. During the interrogation, the 
troopers assured him several times that he was free to 
terminate the interview and leave. Indeed, even after he 
confessed, Thompson was permitted to leave when the 
interview was complete. “Fair support” exists for the 
state court’s determination that Thompson was not in 
custody for Miranda purposes. See id. at 963 (test for 
determining custody is whether, based upon a review of 
all the pertinent facts, a reasonable innocent person in 
such circumstances would conclude that they were not 
free to leave). 


1 This standard requires that we “more than simply disagree 
with the state court.” Krantz, 983 F.2d at 964. Accordingly, 
Thompson's attempts to analogize the circumstances of his inter- 
rogation to the circumstances of cases in which this court has held 
that a federal defendant was in custody for purposes of Miranda 
are unavailing. 


42 


II. 


We review de novo the question whether, considering 
the totality of the circumstances, Thompson’s will was 
overborne through psychological pressure rendering his 
confession involuntary. See Miller v. Fenton, 474 U.S. 
104, 110 (1985). We have independently evaluated the 
transcript of Thompson’s interrogation and concluded 
that, the cumulative effect of those tactics did not over- 
bear Thompson’s will. 


AFFIRMED. 


43 


EXCERPTS OF TRANSCRIPT OF 
SEPTEMBER 15, 1986— 


STATEMENT OF CARL THOMPSON 


PROCEEDINGS 


I SGT. STOCKTON: The time is time 10:58 a.m. 
and the date is September 15, 1985 (sic). This is Ser- 
geant Stockard. Carl Thompson has just arrived at AST 
headquarters and Trooper Hard has gone to the front 
counter to bring him back to the investigations area. 
Trooper Hard and Sgt. Stockard will be conducting this 
interview. 

(Long pause—awaiting witness ) 

(Indiscernible voices off in a distance) 

SGT. STOCKARD. (Indiscernible—ongoing conver- 
sion as they enter the room). I just don’t know what to— 
what to think here. Let's see this. 

MR. HARD: Why don’t you sit over here for a min- 
ute. Got—got two (indiscernible) here. These, kind of 
gone over some of this stuff of her. Here, you take a look 
at that. 

MR. THOMPSON: Yeah, the three jewelry boxes all 
right. 

MR. STOCKARD: Is that your—how about this 
stuff now this stuff now, this is interesting. Okay. How 
about this, this stuff? (From this point on, A will be 
Mr. Thompson, Q will be Sgt. Stockton and Q2 Hard 


A (indiscernible—interrupted). 
O These I thought they were kind of unusual rings. 
A Ub-huh. 


44 


[4] O Okay. Okay. Because I don't see anything, real 
—but it’s about the same (indiscernible) as hers? 

A Yeah, exactly. It looks like it. 

Q When—when would she have gotten that, if you 
remember? 

A I think her mom use to loan it to her, if I remem- 
ber about a year, oh back last winter sometime. 

Q Oh okay. So (indiscernible) her mom (indiscerni- 
ble—opening packages). 

A Yeah. 


Q Okay. And how about the jewelry box, when did 
she get that? You say her mom gave that. 

A My mom gave that to her about. 

Q Oh your mom. 

AI think last Christmas or the Christmas before. I 
can’t remember. 

* — * * 

[27] Q Uh-huh. 

A But I can’t remember what kind of shirt she had 
on. 


Q 

* 

Q Okay. 

A But she always wore jeans, about all, you know, 
the only thing. She never wore no slacks or anything 
like that. 

Q Nothing real fancy? 

A No. 

Q Well, they (indiscernible) you don’t have to be 
fancy to be a good woman, huh? 

A No. 

O That beauty is only —only skin deep, it's what's 
under that counts. 

A Right. 

O Do you know—of course, I don’t mean to take up 
a lot of your time, you—you can leave any time that you 
want to, if you’ve got something else going on. 

A Oh no (indiscernible) around here, no. 


45 


Q I know we called you and probably woke you up 
A No, I was just laying there. 
281 Q Okay. But you know, you can go any time you 
want to. We got a—you know. we're trying to—trying to 


starting to say stuff that I never even said. First off he’s 
got. 

Q What kind—what kind of stuff is he saying? 

A Oh that I told him that I just came home and she 
was gone. 

Q Uh-huh. 

A That was the time before, you know. I mean it's 
obvious I didn't. 

Q Okay. 

A come home and she was gone. I mean every- 


like that, and he swears up and down I said that. 
said, hey you’re crazy, Man. I never said that: 
Q Yeah. 
A Don't have any reason to say that, for Cripes’ sake. 


and it—it’s real obvious exactly 
somebody backed up with tire tracks (indiscernible) 
stuff like that. And the real good 
tire cast. I mean there’s a couple you kind of figure 
(indiscernible ~~ i And I’ve 


1 


46 


Q And that—that gives me a real problem here. 

A Uh-huh. 

O lt gives us a lot of problem. Because I—I've got 
to tell you I haven’t been entirely honest with you. I 
mean I’ve been pretty—pretty up front here. If I—I’ve 
held some things back from you. 

A Uh-huh. 

Q And I'm real concerned about this tire track out 
there. Now how we're gonna explain that? Was it just 
coincidence that somebody else has the identical tire, 


which of course the lab will be able to tell if they look 


at all the little cuts and scrapes and differential wear, all 
that kind of stuff. 


A Uh-huh. 


[39] O They'll be able to do that for us. 

A Uh-huh. 

Q But I have—I have—I have some problems with 
this. And I think that maybe (indiscernible) have to be 
honest, is where at the point where we're not really 
dealing with the—the how of the thing, we're not really 
dealing with the who, probably not really with the when 
or the where; what we're really dealing with is the why. 
And I think that what we're going to find here is that 
the big question of why is that it’s not—it's to determine 
whether or not we're dealing with a cold calculating 
murderer who sat back, planned this thing for days or 
weeks and finally, let’s do it or—or somebody that hap- 
pened—got out of hand, you know, that—that this fool- 
ish bitch brought on herself really. I mean that—you 
know that she just—just picking and poking and if it's 
one of the things that just happened (snapping fingers) 
like that instantly and it’s over before it starts and—and 
here’s—she’s got you into real trouble this time. I mean 
not just the usual bullshit trouble she’s getting it. 

A Uh-huh. 


47 
Q . . then that’s a whole different complexion on 
—on the other things. 
A All right. I know 
And you know. 


t there’s no way. 
Q .... frankly I think that there's still some ques- 
tion and I—I think that you did do this thing. 
You really do, huh? 
I think that right now it’s still looking that way. 


4 


I wish I could find a way to prove that that wasn’t so. 
But I—I'm sure in my own heart right here. I'll tell you 
why. It's because it's like I—like I told you told. I 
haven't told you everything. It's like we're playing poker. 
Are you a good poker player? 

A I play yeah. 

Q Playa little? Do you win a lot of money? 

A Not usually, no. 

Q No, huh. Well I'll tell you it’s like we're playing 
poker, you know, and I'm holding a hand here and 


Q And—and right now what you're betting on is 
you're betting that whatever you're holding there is more 
than what I’m holding. Now I can assure you that. 

A Well I don’t look at it like that. 

Q Yeah. Between Sam and—and myself and Jim 

and the first sergeant and all of us here, we've probably 
D 
sort of thing. And [41] we'll get to all the facts and 
we've already got a tremendous number of them right 
now. 

A Uh-huh. 

And you know what I'm really—waht I’m getting 
at here is 'm—lI'm giving you now the opportunity to 
make the best of a bad situation. And I think that she 
—she brought the situation on, that she got you into 
what got to be the biggest trouble she’s ever gotten you 


8 
: 
+ 
i 
2 
i 
5 
Hi 


i 

g 

5 

f 

5 

a 
111 
5 


good reason for it. I mean 


at guy out hot springs is an 
ve been out there myself. 


a» 


Q He probably just told youto piss off—piss (in- 
discernible) up the road, or something, didn’t he? 

A (Indiscernible) to clean up. 
142] Ql Yeah and he deserved what he got. Well I 


get—doesn’t get really upset at things until somebody 
does something and they deserve it. And then—then you 
do it. And that’s what you said. You said that guy at 
Chena Hot Springs, if Carl punched him, he'd have had 
to deserve it. He’s have had to—had to do it. 

Q2 Well. 

A YeahI mean 

Q And I think that's true. I mean you were talking 
about what happened to Dixie that time before. I mean 
she stole $7,000. If that isn't a reason. Somebody de- 
serves to get at least the message brought home I don’t 
know what is. 

A Yeah. 

OI mean I'm not gonna leave anybody steal $7,000 
from me and get away with it. 

A Yeah. 


* * * * 


49 


[45] Q .... who are going to say and think that. 
Well they're gonna continue to say and think that unless 
that we can show that that’s not what—what really hap- 
pened. And I’m willing to work with you on this thing 
to make the best of a bad situation. I can’t tell you that 
this isn’t a bad situation. I mean you're free to get up 
and walk out of here now and—and never talk to me 
again. But what I'm telling you now is this is probably 
the last chance we'll have to—for you to say something 
that other people are gonna believe because let’s just— 
let's just say that there's enough (indiscernible) here al- 
ready that we can we can prove conclusively beyond a 
reasonable doubt that that you were responsible for 
this thing this thing. Well really there's a lot that she's 
responsible for, but you're the guy that's stuck with the 
problem. And you get stuck with the mess to clean up, 
you know. You know, say we can prove that, if we 
come down you know, six—a month, two months, [46] 
six months later and now you've come forward and 
you're trying to tell a sotry, people are gonna say, ah this 
guy has had time to think of something. This guy is 
putting this story together. He's making it up now be- 
cause he knows what the police. 

A Ive already told you the story. 

Q And—and he’s making it up. Well you haven't 
told me the critical part and you haven't told me the part 
about where Dixie gets killed. 

A And I don’t know about that. That's your guys’ 
job. You're supposed to know that. 

Q Well like I told you, we know the who, the where, 
the when, the how. The thing we don’t know is the 
why. And that’s—that’s the thing we've got to kind of 
get straight here today between you and I. See I know 
that you did this thing. There’s—there’s no question in 
my mind about that. I can see it. I can see it when I’m 
looking at you. And I know that you care about Dixie. 
I mean this isn’t something that you wanted to happen. 
You never would have—I mean if you’d wanted for this 


50 


to happen to Dixie, would you have let her come back 
into your life? Would you have gone to Anchorage and 
got her? Would you—you gone on—you wouldn't. That 
would have been nonsense. But I know that. 

A You're (indiscernible). 

[47] O .. that sometimes things happen. 

A Well. 

Q Sometimes, you know, people get pushed and 
and things happen. I don’t know—you know, I can’t— 
I can only speculate, you know. I can see the results of 
what happened. I can see the physical things, right? I 
can see the physical evidence, I can see what led up to 
it. Like I say, I got those—the who, the when, the why 
—or the who, the where, the how, the what, those things. 
Those are just physical. But they don’t get to the heart 
of the matter, and that’s the why. I mean there are times 
when things get. 

A (Indiscernible) don't even know why that — well 
why don’t you arrest me if I did it? 

Q_ I don’t want to arrest you. I'm not gonna arrest 
you today. I think—I told you a dozen times. You're 
free to walk out cf here any time, and you can. But 
what I’m telling you is that—that I think that now it’s 
the time for you to come honest about this thing, because 
if you turn around later and try to. 

A Iam being honest about it. 

Q No, you haven’t. You told part of the truth and 
you told a lot of it, but you haven’t told all of it. And 
—and that’s the problem. I mean your—you're not 
probably lying directly to me, but you're lying by omis- 
sion (indiscernible) [48] on those things. Now like I 
told you we don’t—I haven't told you everything and 
and I’m not going to. And even—no matter what you 
think it’s not everything. I can tell you that right now 
there’s a search warrant being served out at the place, 
15.1 mile and a search warrant for your truck is gonna 
be served and we've got a forensic expert up from from 
Anchorage and they'll have techniques which you prob- 


51 


ably aren't familiar with, and I’m not an expert that's 
why we got them here called —a thing called luminal 
(ph) and it's a way that you can pick up microscopic 
traces of blood ever after it's been washed and cleaned- 
away. I mean it's an amazing thing, you know, they 
spray the stuff around, they turn on the black lights and 
all—all the little droplets of blood and everything light 
up. 
A Huh. 

Q And they're doing that stuff right now. And I— 
and I have no doubt in my—in my heart that’s what 
they’re gonna find out there, because I’ve looked through 
other things, and—and I’ve looked at you. And I don't 
believe that you're a bad person. I really don’t. I don’t 
believe that you're - you've got an evil cold-hearted (in- 
discernible) criminal who decided to do these things. I 
believe genuinely (ph) I mean right here, that wlat— 
that what happened here was never planned, what hap- 
pened here was one of these things that just happen. I 
mean things happened bad, things happen to [49] even 
good people. And when it happened you're stuck with 
this—I mean you're stuck with a hell of a mess now. 
She’s got—she’s finally got you into more trouble than 
she can possibly imagine. I mean she’s brought this 
thing on you. She causes that. She’s the one—I mean 
you're happy. You're out drinking, having a good time. 
You come back and she’s pissed and moaning and saying 
well I’m gonna pack my shit out andon and on. I don’t 
know what exactly what happened out there. I mean I 
don’t know whether she started the thing by grabbing 
the knife and saying she was gonna (indiscernible) at 
you and it got turned around or just what happened. I 
mean I don’t know those things. All—there’s only two 
people who know these things. That’s her and that’s you. 
And of course she can’t tell us. She can tell us a lot of 
things, from what's left. I mean she tells us things. She 
can’t—can’t tell us the why, but she can tell us all those 
how and the whens and all those things. And—and that’s 


52 


what's critical, because we've got those things. And we're 
getting more of them every moment. And I have no 
doubt and I know that you know in your heart that all 
those things are gonna come out because the truth does 
come out in the end 

A Uh-huh. 

QO almost all of it. 

Q2 Uh-huh. 

Q Now we're at the point right now where two things 
can [50] happen. Obviously you can just walk right out 
of here, like you're gonna do. I mean you're gonna walk 
right out of here today no matter what. No matter what 
you tell me you'll walk out of here. Okay? I mean 
there’s no question in my mind on that. And I hope 
there’s no question in yours. Is there? 

A No. 

Q Okay. But the question here is are you gonna end 
up labelled and stuck with that label that people are 
gonna want to put on you, that hard-core, that bad 
image, or—or are you gonna take the time and the 
courage—because that’s what it takes, to come forward 
and explain why this thing really happened, because I 
suspect that this thing is not the way some people are 
gonna say. I mean some people are—Dave is gonna 
say, yeah, he went out there and he just said he’d had 
enough and stab her. Period. I mean he probably stuck 
it in her back. I mean who knows what he’s gonna say. 
He’s gonna say—you know he’s gonna say that. I mean 
people are going to say that. No way that people are 
gonna believe that. Maybe so, but you know, there are 
people who are gonna believe that stuff. Well you have 
a—a unique opportunity here and that opportunity is to 
help us to get at the real truth, not the speculative well 
maybe this is what happened. We know the physical: 
this is where it happened and who— [51] who it hap- 
pend with and that sort of thing, but the why it hap- 
pened. The exact—I mean because that’s what makes a 
big difference. I mean obviously you know that you're 


53 


in trouble right now. There’s no question about that, 
rignt? 

A I'm not in any trouble. I didn’t do anything. 

Q Well but you did—you killed Dixie. I mean that’s 
—that’s what you're in trouble over and you know that. 
There's no question about that. Now I—I.... 

A If I killed her how come you never arrested me? 

Because we dont. 

Q2 We don't think you're a cold-blooded killer. 

Al want to know why. 

Q We don't think—if you were a cold-blooded killer, 
a contract killer and somebody who plots these things 
out, well then we’d have to move fast, wouldn’t we, be- 
cause you might do it again. I mean you could do it any 
time, right? I mean that makes sense, right? If you 
were a you were a professional killer, somebody who 
went totally “AWOL,” who didn’t care about anything. 
Well we don’t think that’s the case. I certainly don’t. I 
think what you are is just somebody—an ordinary guy 
who made a simple mistake, not because you wanted to, 
but because you were forced in it, you were backed in 
that corner and the thing just happened and you're stuck 
with the results. Like somebody who runs through a red 
light, runs [52] into your car; you're stuck with the re- 
sult of what’s somebody else does. Well I think that’s 
what happened. And because of that yeah, I mean if 
that’s true, you’re not gonna go out and kill somebody 
else. I mean there’s no danger to anybody else, so why 
should I arrest you? I mean I should give you—it’s 
what we’re here for right now—the opportunity to explain 
—to put your best face forward, put your best foot 
forward, to explain exactly what happened, rather than 
later on having to get back there and trying to you know, 
shuffle and try to make things make sense and saying no, 
no, no. Wait you misunderstood that. That’s not ex- 
actly the way it happened; this is what happened. I mean 
I don’t want you to get in a point of trying to explain 
things when other people have already made up their 


54 


mind. I’m giving you the opportunity to help us to come 
to the real truth of this thing. Because I—I know that 
you did this thing. You know, there’s—there’s other 
evidence which like I say I haven't told you about. You 
know, we've got things, we've got—got the knife that 
came from the same place as the rest of the stuff. And 
it’s been sent off to Anchorage to the forensic people and 
they're gonna do blood analysis, finger printing, laser 
(ph), the latest stuff, all the stuff that they do. And I 
don’t know if your—if your fingerprints are gonna be on 
that knife. I don’t know that. Is—is traces of your blood 
gonna be on [53] there mixed with hers? I don’t know 
those things. But I do know is that all these things, all 
these (indiscernible) all these little teeny bit pieces of the 
puzzle are come—you know, are coming together. And 
all those out, they’re all pointing at you. And all the 
bits of the puzzle are fitting in the grand picture here. 
Now there’s only one part of that picture which only you 
can supply is the part that says why, intentions. What 
was in that (indiscernible)? I mean if you set out, in- 
tended to kill and you aren’t sorry about it and you don’t 
give a damn, then fine. I mean I wash my hands of you. 
I don’t care what they do to you, because I mean that’s 
probably what you deserve, right. I don’t think that 
you’re that kind of person. I think that there’s—there’s 
good in you, that there’s—that there’s something bad 
that happened to you. But that—that you didn’t set out 
and intend for this to happen. You didn’t intend for 
Dixie to die. You didn’t even intend to hurt her. It's 
just like the other times she did things that were so out- 
rageous—and I don’t know what that outrageous thing 
was, but it was worse than stealing $7,000. It was 
worse than all the other things she’d ever done together 
and it was so bad and for all that you just did—in a 
blink of an eye something happened. And I don’t think 
whether she started it and it just happened to get finished 
the way it did, that you finished what she started or what 
happened. I mean I— [54] I don’t know those things. 
A Uh-huh. 


55 


Q Because those are the why. That’s—that’s what's 
here. 

A Does that make any difference? 

O That's the human element. Sure as hell does. 

O2 Sure. 

O Think — think of the difference here, what we 
have a just system which has a problem. We've got little 
cubbyholes where people when people who are human 
and who are different and unique, and have to fit in. 
And what they do when somebody does something we 
have to take their act, what they were thinking and 
what they did and fit it into one of these cubbyholes. 
Now one of those cubbyholes, of course, is first degree 
murder, right? That’s—that’s an unclassified felony, de- 
serve a 99 years, presumptive sentence of 20 years, all 
that kind of stuff. Well then there’s another cubbyhole 
that’s called second degree murder, And that’s—I don’t 
remember. It’s like an A felony and it’s 20 years or— 
or—maybe that’s nin—up to 99 but presumptive is 5, 
I think that’s what it is. Then there's there's negligent 
homicide, there’s manslaughter. There’s all these little 
cubbyholes, right? Well I'd be the first to admit that 
trying to fit human actions and human things that hap- 
pen into cubbyholes isn’t always easy. You know, be- 
cause there’s—there’s an infinite range [55] of what peo- 
ple do and what happens, but there’s only a finite range 
of cubbyholes to fit people in. But that’s what—that’s 
where we are and that’s where the DA and the grand 
jury is going to be on this thing to try and pick the 
right cubbyhole. And I’ll—I—TI’ll—I have to feel that 
whatever happened to Dixie, if she’s partially responsible 
for it, you shouldn’t take all of the blame for it. Right? 
I mean that makes sense, right? I have to believe that 
if you’re partially responsible for it, you should take 
some. You know, we all have responsibilities as adult 
human beings. We have a responsibility to take our licks 
when they’re coming to us, right, even if they’re aren’t 
fun. Would you agree with that? I mean when you 


56 


do something wrong, to everything we do there’s a cost 
associated with it. 

A Yeah, if I did something wrong, sure. 

Q That's right. And that’s—that’s what we're look- 
ing at here. We're looking at making sure that you don't 
get more than you deserve here. I mean I—if you didn’t 
commit a first-degree murder, if you didn’t set up and 
preplan this thing, why should you be charged with that, 
why should you go to jail for that? If you didn’t commit 
a second-degree murder, I don’t want you to be charged 
for that. If all that happened here is a manslaughter or 
a negligent ham—homicide, something which which 
where [56] she starts it an she’s coming at you and you 
defend yourself or whatever it is, I don’t know. I—I 
don’t know that. That’s the thing I don’t know. Then 
I want to see that justice is done here, that—that are you 
subject to an injustice. Now there are going to be those 
people—there are going to be the DAs and all those 
people who are going to look at—they’re going to look 
at the old—the other case, the allegations she’s made, 
and they'll look at the man at Chena Hot Springs— 
they’re gonna look at, you know, other times when 
you had fights or been (indiscernible) This guy is a bad 
guy, God. I mean that’s gonna be their—their first idea, 
gosh, think gosh, what a terrible guy. Right? Well I— 
I’ve looked at those and I’ve looked at it carefully you 
know I have because—because I—I can tell you things 
about it. 

A Uh-huh. 

Q . each one of those times there was a rea- 
son that you did what you did. You didn’t do these 
things just out of space. I mean you didn’t just sud- 
denly decide something for no reason or you're not crazy. 
You’re not a psychopath or something like that. You're 
just an ordinary guy who when he gets pushed, when he 
gets backed into a corner, when he’s subject to an in- 
justice, when somebody does something to you which they 
shouldn’t have done, that you react. I mean it just hap— 


85 
5 
8 8 
— 


3 
11 
LE 
hk 
7. 


Those things aren't important, use right now 
what we've done is she's got you in a hell of a bind. 
I mean she brought this thing on, she left you there, 
stuck with this body and the problem of how—how—how 
the hell do I—how to explain this. I mean what do you 
do? You've got to sit there and say well gosh, you know, 
I got this body here. If I just—if I just call the cops 
and say—and try to explain this nobody is going to be- 
lieve me. They're gonna say, ah bullshit. You know, 
we've got your past record. We've got the complaints 
you made in the past, you must've just decided that you 
had enough oi this and killed her. I mean you got to be 
thinking tht when you're sitting there with her lying there 
So you did the thing which you felt you had to do. And 
that was just to get rid of it and just wash your hands, 
just forget. She brought this thing on. It’s her fault 
Why should you be forced to live with that. I mean 


27 
if 
2% 

23 
bd 
: 
3 


to—{58] to show that you're sorry. 
that you're sorry that Dixie’s dead. 


papers and all that stuff and gone all 
with it, she—you were still letting her come back with 


h 
she’s the one—she’s the one who's flying off 
not 


—that’s where we're at. You know, we're at that place 
where it’s time to be really honest about this thing, be- 
cause I think, I believe here that just in this case, just 


! 
a 
it 
if 
E 


gS 
akk: 
0 
121715 
1111 i 
5 GL 
117151 
H 


7 
a5 

21 

73 


now he 
about it for a few weeks and then 
he’s got a story. Right? It’s kind of a like if it's called 
reasoned evidence, it’s the best evidence. 

A I don’t know how you guys work or—you know 
what your angles are and anything, but it’s not what 
happened. 

Q Well only you and Dixie Can—can tell exactly 
what happened. 

A You guys (indiscernible). 

Q Dixie is not (ph) telling us. No you can. Because 
2 the guy who killed her. There's no question about 
that. 

O2 Carl, we dont. 

Q But you 

Q2 We don’t—we don’t—we do’n—we don't bluff 
and we don’t play little games. You've seen the stuff we 


A You don't think somebody could have set 
me up for this? 

Q No. There’s no way, Carl. That’s just not the 
way it happened. We know our job and we do it well. 


O I know you're not. 

O2 You loved her. You spent five years of her life 
with her. But you were drinking that night, things weren't 
going well, she was mad at you, you got mad, maybe. 
I don’t know. We're asking you to tell us because we 
don’t have that answer. 

And we don’t have—I can’t tell you we have every 
answer, because only you have that—really the human 


because I have—you know, I’ve looked at these—all the 
other things that you've been involved in to 
your friends. If they said, Yeah Carl is j 
goes in bars and punches people out for no reason. 
They didn’t say that. Everybody said and all the stuff 
we have, says that every time that he [60] ever got into 
a problem that Dixie got you into a problem and really, 
she’s the one who's causing most of these problems. She's 
there. You had a reason. And you had a reason which 
is understandable, which is explainable, which makes 


61 


by LAE eee ¢ e 
THU Atte ape 
2 Soe tS BEE Ey y go 5 332 i 
nt nadine 111361 
2337125 1188 3388 111 ae E 392 
11 (taut 
1125111111111 i 1 221 
tag] 11 112 111111 i 
214 Hae 11 11111418 
7 = 12378878181 f 
ae 7135 et 232 1111485 115 
11777720 2117215 IH „i112 


ttt! ores ee rt 


1271271141111 11 

1115 aus rite 117 1 5 111114 £ 

. E 74 17710 Hh 
5 ili Wi 


: 322215 . 22225 F 
e of aH il 
15812212115 lianas 117112717 


you about three of them. I've still got more in here. 
I'm not gonna show them to you and you know, you can 
bet against them if you want but you know how it is. 
The odds are always with the house and right now I’m 
dealing. The situation is we can—people can assume 
as the DA will want to—I mean I know Harry. I mean 
(indiscernible) Harry Davis in the paper. He's been 
our DA for years. Harry is gonna assume the worst. 
He's gonna assume hey, let’s—let’s get this guy. This guy 
is bad. Let’s get him. Right? Well if he wants to do 
that, that’s fine. I can’t stop him unless I have other 
information to show him that that’s not the way it hap- 
pened. That yeah, you were there, you did do that but 
there was a reason for it, and a good reason, one that 
other people could understand, one that’s explanable. 
And I’m sure there is. I mean I don’t—like I told you 
I don’t know why exactly is—I don’t know what the 
words were. I don’t know what the thing that she said 
was that was so bad that this thing went to—went to 
pieces. I don’t know what that is. Only you know that. 
Now only you can—can help yourself at this point by 
coming forward with those things and explaining ex- 
actly what did happen. You know and I know that this 
is a—the hardest thng you'll ever do. 

tion about it. [64] I mean if you think it was hard getting 
rid of her and doing all that stuff and getting rid of her 
clothes and taking them out and throwing them away 
and stuff, that’s nothing compared to the courage it takes 
to confront me and to talk to me. I mean there’s no 
question about that. You know, I—I can’t blame you 
for being slow (ph) about the thing and for wanting 
to think about it. But unfortunately we've got like a 
limited reasonable opportunity here, The things—the 
thing is going down now. This—this is it. I mean this 
re 
to deal with this thing. And I I know you're going to do 
the right thing. —_ I know that when the thing hap- 
pened originally when Dixie got killed, it wasn’t because 


63 


you planned it, it wasn't because you wanted it to hap- 
pen, you loved her. That—that—that’s the central issue. 
You loved her. Because of that whatever happened out 
there happened not because you wanted it to, not because 
you set out to have it happen, but because she brought 
it on. She had to do something so outrageous, I mean 
she stole $7,000 before and you didn’t kill her then. I 
mean you slapped her around a little bit, right? So it 
had to be something worse than that. Now I don’t know 
whether she said yeah, I’ve been sleeping around town 
on you this whole time or yeah I don’t—I don’t know 
what that us. Only you can tell us that [65] right now. 
And if you tell us those things I can promise you, I can 
give you my solemn word that I’m going to do every- 
thing I can to prove that the way you told it to me was 
the way it really happened. And I’m asking for a chance 
to do that because I don’t want to see an injustice be 
brought down on you. You know, you may think that 
sounds a little foolish and a little altruistic. But that's 
the way I am. I’m in this job because I—I believe in it. 
I believe that—that if I'm doing this job, then I know 
it’s gonna be done right. It’s not going to be some t.v. 
cop on there that’s out for glory and just out to get 
people. I am not in it for that. I’m in this job because 
I want to see—(indiscernible) I want to see you—that 
—that my place in this world is a safe place to live. 
And that when bad things happen like happened in this 
case, when bad things happen that we can maybe pre- 
vent them from happening in the future to somebody 
else by knowing why they happened this time. Maybe 
there's something that somebody could have done to stop 
this thing from happening. And I don't know. I—I hope 
there was. And I—you’ll never—you know, you'll never 
get over that. I know that. It's a thing you've got to 
carry for ever and ever. But I want to prevent this from 
happening to anybody else. And that’s one of the rea- 
sons that it’s so important to me right here today to find 
out the truth about what really happened. I mean I— 


you wouldn't believe it. I'm constantly amazed by what 


right on the floor. Tm m j m 
genius. I’m—I’m—but these guys are And 
I'll tell you, the wizards are working now. They're doing 
their magic. And—and I know from past experience 
Oe whet „ ae 
There’s just no question about that. What there i 

ready that’s been found, it’s just—I mean (indiscernible) 
these things are just—they just—they just point to you. 
Im- [67] don’t want to tell you I'm begging with you, 
but I guess I'm imploring you, Im encouraging. I'm saying 


real nut (ph) cut. This is where it take the real card, 
to step forward and saying yeah you're right. I was there. 
I did this thing and yeah, I got rid of her body and 
this is why it happened. It didn’t happen because I 
wanted to kill her, it didn't happen because I planned 
to kill her, 7 
out of hand. Only you can fill in that gap though, be- 
cause only two people who knew those things there's 


65 


Dixie and she can’t tell us. And if you're not—lI’ll bet 
that if there was something you could do and that you 
could have done that night to bring her back from the 
dead and to cause her to rise up again and live, you 
would have done it, no matter what, because you loved 
that woman. You loved Dixie. You didn’t want to see 
her die. But it happened and you've been stuck with it. 
That’s her final revenge, that’s the final time that she 
screws you. She left you stuck with this fallacious mess 
that she brought on. And I’m asking you to do that hard 
thing. I think you've got the courage to step forward 
and explain what really happened. I really do, otherwise 
I wouldn’t waste my time on you. You know, I—I could 
be out there with these forensic guys doing their thing. 
But frankly, you know, the thing that I worry more about 
[68] in these cases is (indiscernible). That’s my spe- 
cialty. You know, I could do the forensic stuff but I—I 
don’t want to. What I want to do, I want to find out 
why this thing happened. I want to make sure it doesn’t 
happen again. I want to—I want to know the truth 
about it. And only you can do that. Now I think that 
whatever happened out there, that I can be sure that you 
loved Dixie and that you didn’t want this thing to hap- 

Al didn’t want whatever happened to happen. 

Q Well you did it. There’s no question that you 
killed Dixie. Let's get passed that. I mean that's 
we've got to get past this hurdle here. You know, I’m 
sure that you’re sorry for what you did out there. I’m 
sure of that. Are you sorry that you killed Dixie? 

A I didn’t kill her. 


Q But you did. That's the problem here, Carl. Now 
I-II thought that you—you were courageous enough and 
had enough courage to deal with this thing. But I’m 
beginning to—to reconsider that. From what everybody 
told me I thought you were the kind of person that was 
going to do the right thing, who was going to be honest 


66 


about this thing and to do the thing that’s for your best 
interest. 

Q2 We all make mistakes. 

Q Right now. But ain’t that the truth. If I could 
go back and take back some of the things I’ve done. 
I'd do it in [69] a flash. But unfortunately life isn’t like 
that. But if we make that—you know, if we do some- 
thing and it’s done, we say a word and we can’t pull 
it back. I don’t know what it was that you did that 
night that was so bad that this thing happened. And I 
don’t think that—that she’s—you know, I—you could 
imagine it in a couple of different ways this thing. You 
could have said, okay the two of you are standing there 
and she said something and you grabbed a knife and 
kill her. I don’t believe that, because that—that just 
doesn’t make sense. What makes sense to me is that 
something happened, she said something, she does some- 
thing and it starts out like it has in the past, starts out 
with a little slapping around or something, because you 
just something to her already, I mean you hit (indis- 
cernible), “Don’t say that to me.” I mean I don’t know, 
something like that and then she fights back and then 
she grabs the knife and—and it’s—the donnybrook is on. 
At that point you’re not thinking as a human being, 
you're not thinking, gees, I'm gonna do X, I’m gonna 
do V. You're reacting. You’re—it’s happening so fast 
that your animal instincts or the parts of you that be- 
lieve in survival, believe in life that when you're threat- 
ened you respond, take it. And if that’s what happened, 
if that’s the way it went down, then we need to know 
that, because that’s not that first degree murder. That's 
not premeditated. [70] I mean that’s not gees, I’m plan- 
ning to do this for months or days, I’m getting paid to 
do this, I expect to get something. You didn’t expect to 
get anything out of this. Jesus, I mean you stood to 
lose everything. Right? You're not—you're not doing 
this for gain, you’re not doing this for hate, whatever 
happened because you love her. Because love and hate 


67 


are so close together, anger and love is so close it can 
flip from one to another. You can be so much in love 
with somebody that when they say something that hurts 
her, and they may not even know how bad it hurts you, 
but it’s like a knife in you and it causes an anger, I mean 
it causes that love just to flip (indiscernible) on anger. 
And it goes back and forth. And it can. And I know 
that. I mean I recognize that. And I can put that into 
words and explain it to other people so that they under- 
stand it, so that the DA understands it, so the court 
understands it, everybody who’s going to deal with this 
thing, can understand what really happened. But before 
I can do that I can’t do it on speculation, I can’t specu- 
late to those people that this is what I think might have 
happened, because there’s three or four mights have 
happened. What I need is, is I need your help on this 
thing to make sure that the truth is—comes out. That 
you only get blamed for what you do. That she takes 
whatever portion of the responsibility she deserves. If 
she brought this thing on, [71] if it was self-defense on 
your part, then I need to know that, because quite— 
quite frankly, if that’s the way it went down, that's 
something like what happened, then that’s a whole lot 
different from if she’s got her back turned and you just 
say well the hell with her, I’'m—I’m tired of this bitch, 
I'm gonna kill her. Well that didn’t happen. I mean 
that’s—that’s just something that’s just not true. That's 
not—I mean that’s just—that’s not you, you know. Be- 
cause there are people like you, lots of them, hundreds 
of them—myself included—that have a temper. I mean 
their own—there’s people in this office who'll tell you 
that—that they—they get to me and the only people 
who get to me—the public doesn’t get to me, somebody 
can come off the street and call me anything they want, 
that’s not gonna bother me. But if somebody close to 
me, like if Joel here, if Joel came to me and said some- 
thing really hurtful to me, that would hurt me. I—I 
might lose my temper on that and I might shout at him 


68 


or I might slam (indiscernible) or I might throw the 
telephone off on the floor, because I have that kind of 
a temper. But only people who are really close to us 
have that kind of power over us. And that’s what hap- 
pened here. I mean Dixie is the woman you love, she’s 
the woman you gave five years of your life to. And even 
though—even though she’s wronged you before, she’s 
taken off, she’s stolen [72] from you. it'll never come 
back. I mean you loved her, you know, more than any 
of us can ever understand really I think. Because you let 
her come back if she did all these things. No matter 
what she did to you you were willing to give her another 
chance, just to—just to have the lady back. And you 
didn’t—you didn’t set out to do this thing, it just hap- 
pened. But whatever she said, whatever she did was that 
—was that thing that was so personal that hurt you so 
bad that you just—it just happened fast. I mean it (snaps 
fingers) like that. And I—I gotta believe that because 
I think that there's worth in every person and there's 
worth in you. Because this bad thing happened to you 
doesn’t mean that you should just be thrown away, doesn’t 
mean that you shouldn’t have any self-respect, doesn’t 
mean that I shouldn't (indiscernible) up to you. You're 
still a human being. You're still a person. You've got 
warmth, you’ve got desire, you’ve got the rest of your 
life which you deserve to be able to lead. Now I’m not 
saying that—that you'll never pay any penalty for what 
happened. I can’t tell you that. I'd be a fool to. You 
wouldn't believe it if I did tell you. But what we're 
talking about here is we're talking about the difference 
between throwing the rest of your life because you don’t 
have the courage to step forward or being honest about it. 

A It wouldn't make any difference if I did. 
[73] Q And stand—yeah it would; it'd make a hell 
of a difference. It'd make a hell of a difference. 

A Well you just—just told me, you're not the DA. 

Q Because we would. 

A Lou can’t be the one who decides what. 


69 


Q Yeah, but what we're doing here is I’m the guy 
who has to go to the DA and tell him, hey this is what 
he said and we've gone on, we've proven this by the 
forensic evidence, we’ve proven that he said that it hap- 
pened X, Y and Z and that’s what happened. The differ- 
ence is—is everything. The difference is between throw- 
ing away the rest of your life. I mean if the DA just 
decides in his own mind because we don’t have anything, 
that if Carl won’t talk, that must mean he was that 
cold-blooded murderer. He’s hiding something. He’s hid- 
ing it because it was worst than what I think it was. 
Then he (indiscernible) puts you away and you could 
be—I mean it could be everything, it could be life. 

A Really. 

Q_ Ninety-nine years, that’s all—that’s life. 

O2 Right. 

O If it's not that. I mean it could be—I mean we’re 
looking at negligent homicide and manslaughter I mean 
we're talking two years, three years, five years, a fair 
amount. You know, you get out on—free on parole. 
[74] We're not talking about the rest of your life. We're 
talking about just a little period of—and then you go on. 
But the trouble is, right now is the time when we've got 
to m 2 the decision of which way we're heading on this 
thing. I mean if that’s what happened, if you deserve 
only a little bit, I mean if you deserve to go to jail for 
your entire life because you planned this thing, then I 
guess my sense of honor would say that that’s what you 
ought to do. Right? But if you didn’t, if that’s not what 
happened, then it is important, because right now it 
makes all the difference in the world. It makes a differ- 
ence between are we talking that first degree, cold, cal- 
culating, actually ammoral psychopathic person, or are 

A You guys already know it wasn’t that kind of 
murder anyway. 

Q But I can’t prove it. I—I suspect it’s not. I don’t 
think it was, but only can tell us exactly what happened. 


70 


Only you can make it apparent. I mean we—lI can 
speculate that there must have been something that hap- 
pened that she said or did that—that started this thing 
off. I mean I can speculate on that. But I don’t know 
you well enough, I don’t know her well enough; I can’t 
ask her the question to know what the bad thing was. 
But if you can share that with us, if you can make us 
understand, if you can make me understand why what- 
ever it was is so bad, because I can explain that, I can 
make other people explain [75] it. I mean I—you’re 
not the kind of guy who writes long books and—and 
who’s real wordy, says a lot of things, and puts things 
into fancy words so that guys like that DA and judges 
and people can understand. You're just an ordinary 
guy like most of us, right? Well one of the things I’m 
trained to do, the thing that I do is I write and I’m able 
to put into words so that they'll understand, to convince 
them if you can convince me that it didn’t happen, a 
cold, calculating killing, you know, I will go to the 
max for you to prove that the way you say it happened 
is what happened. But I have to have your trust. And 
I—I know that’s—that’s a hell of a thing to ask of a 
guy, because you’ve watched t.v. and seen all this stuff. 
Remember, t.v. is not real. It’s—you know, we've got 
to flush all that stuff out of our mind and try to re- 
member that right now we're talking really about your 
whole life. Now there’s nothing we can do to bring 
Dixie back—that anybody can. You feel the loss, you— 
you’ve lost a woman who you love, her family is feeling 
the loss of course, but all those things we can get over. 
I mean eventually you'll get over it. Dixie is not suffer- 
ing any more. And whatever happened to her, she’s not 
in pain; that’s over. All right. So what we're dealing 
with now is we're dealing with what's left over. And 
that’s you. And you're the lose end, you're the person 
who has to live with [76] this thing for your entire life. 
You're the person who has to make the decision now 
whether or not to just take your chances and hope— 


71 


hope like hell that the conclusion that the DA and people 
come up with was that this wasn't first—you know, first 
degree murder, a cold, calculated thing. Or the alterna- 
tive, if you can be honest about this ting, and finally 
explain that’s what happened, to make us understand the 
why, in what way Dixie was responsible, in what way she 
caused this thing to happen, because I—everything you've 
done in the past. 

A Well you can’t punish Dixie. I mean you know. 


Q No, but there’s no reason why you should be 
punished for what she did, right? I mean she can’t be 
punished. You're right, but is there any reason why if 
she did something wrong, if she’s responsible for this 
thing, that Carl should pay a terrible penalty for what 
she did? I don't think so. I mean I—I don’t know the 
circumstances. I think—I think that there are—there are 
things going on and there are explanations which you 
can make which are going to make a tremendous differ- 
ence. They make the difference between being that cold, 
calculating killer who—who people just won't have any 
feelings for, you know, they say we ought to have a death 
penalty for, to the—to the other situation, the situation 
where it’s just a fight that gets terribly out of hand. 
177] The things that go bad and that things that—things 
vou know, A led to B. and B led to C and and before 
anybody knew it, before anybody had time to think 
about it, it was over. And if that’s the way it happened 
I suspect it is because I’ve looked at your past. And 
I suspect that’s what happened. I don’t know that. I 
don’t know that until you're honest with me and you 
come forward and tell me exactly how it happened, so 
that you can explain it, so we can understand it, so we 
can make the best deal for you. I mean that’s really 
why we're giving you the opportunity to do that. You 
can look at it—you can look at it that way. It’s just like 
we're playing Let's Make a Deal.” We're here right 
now, we're willing to listen to you right now. We will 


1123 8 3 


73 
d 
( 
drinking 
me 
you 
g wi 
going 
k up 
I don 
do 
t 
this 
and 
you 
to 
to 
lieve 
you don't 
true 


1211 


eli 


11172115 1110 
92882115 


#333 
: 24845115 514116 Wh 3 


THE 111115411111 
11111171 114145171 HE 4 
Minburn a) nas 
111 e lant 
437777714 41135 1511 11 
ie 
171751151172 4 fo gpa ti 
: J E 27 7711111 if 
92772 I 1771 11218 121175 
4281111411477! ill 
1410 a Me ea 
£3235 1117121457252 lis 1281221211115 


74 


gonna kill Dixie. You didn’t do that, I don’t believe. 
Maybe you did. If you did do that I think you'd better 
not tell me. Okay? If that’s what ha , I think 
you're doing the right thing, you'd better not talk about 
it. But I don’t think the chances are that that’s the way 
it went down is right, because that’s not the way you've 
been in the past. Okay. 

Q2 You've got to believe we're here to help you. 
You've got to believe that. It may not look like it. 

Q_It’s—it’s hard. 

Q2 But you've got to believe that. 

O That’s a hard jump to make, isn’t it, because you've 
got to [81] to trust us and that’s—that’s a hard thing, 
saying, gees here I am with a cop and I’ve got to trust 
him, I've got to tell him about this terrible thing. But 
I can promise you as I've promised you before, no matter 
what we talk about today you'll walk out of here. You'll 
walk out of here just the same way you came in. (In- 
discernible). No matter what. I guarantee you that. Ab- 
solute. positively. 

A No matter what you aint gonna arrest me? 

O No matter what. 

A What I tell you, you aint gonna arrest me. 

O That's right, absolutely. Because we don't believe 
you're a cold-blooded killer. If you—if I thought you 
were that cold-blooded killer, well maybe I would feel 
differently about that, but I’m not gonna arrest you no 
matter what, I pormise you that. And that’s an absolute 

A Why wouldn't you? 

O Why should I? You’re—Yecu're not Dixie is dead. 

Q2 You're not gonna do it again. 

Q You're the per—Dixie was the person that you 
loved enough that she could hurt you enough to bring 
this thing on. And she’s probably the only person that 
you a 


a 


75 


about are never gonna happen again I hope. I mean 
you certainly aren't [82] gonna to let yourself get into 
a position like that again. And I told you and I’m ask— 
Im. 

A lt was a real big (ph) mistake, that's all. 

O There's no question—well that’s—that’s the way 
to look at it, then actually you might say it’s an acci- 
t, in a way, an accident because it’s not what any- 
intended. You didn’t get into this row intending 
her, you didn’t do whatever happened intending 

If you 


2 


1 
885 


inlitteft 
14175 ir 
Fyre gece 
4 | 8 F 
TS fe 
Fe : 51 
2 88 5 
g a 
d 
3 7 
i f 


i 
rE 
| 


out. 

Q2 lt aint gonna be easy, Buddy but it's the right 
thing to do. 

Q And t it’s the thing you can do to help 


a—I think I have a real (indiscernible) in this business. 
And it’s founded on two things, one, on the “kiss” princi- 
ple, “Keep it simple, Stupid.” When things happen, 


P. 
son. We were just —we' ve been talking here for, oh I 
guess about an hour or so, an hour and 15 minutes. Carl 
has asked me to turn on this little tape recorder and I 
think in particular he wanted me to—to make sure that 
re- 


77 


MR. HARD: And I’m repeating. 

SGT. STOCKARD: That's Joel Hard too. Ilm 

MR. HARD: Any other trooper (indiscernible—in- 
terrupted ) 

Q Nobody is going to arrest you here today. You're 
gonna walk out of this building the same way that you 
walked in. I think you’re going to walk out of here with 
a sense of relief be- [85] cause the—the terrible thing 
you've been carrying with you all this time is—is going 
to be lifted from you. You're going to finally have shared 
it and finally have tried to make people understand. 

O2 It aint gonna be easy but you can do it. 

Q I'm going to let you hold this. The red light, of 
course means it’s—it’s recording. I’m not here to play 
tricks with you. 

Q2 We're not liars and we're not (indiscernible). 
We're up front and we're honest. 

Q Im not here to— to tell lies to you or to do... . 

Q2 And that’s what we're asking you to be is up 
front and honest. Tell us the why, Buddy. 

A Well—well.... 

OI know it’s hard. Okay, what can I tell you, you 
know? 

Q2 She meant the most of anybody in your life. Hlep 
her and help you by telling us what happened. 

A Because I—I don't think you guys are going to 
believe me to tell you the truth. 

Q2 We'll believe you. 

Q Well the assure - you've got our guarantees, you're 
going to leave anyways no matter what, right? And 
that’s absolutely the truth. There’s no question about 
that and I Will. 

A As long as you let me go take care of my stuff is 
all I'm asking. 

. * * * * 

[101] Q You know, we'll have to- they'll have to 

work that out through the through the system. And what 


78 79 


Yeah. Okay. Let’s—let’s go on out here and. 


they NI probably do is come up with a summons for you 
I got your keys so I'll just walk you out through 


and—and at that point you'll have to come in and answer 
it. But you’re not gonna do this to anybody else. This 
isn’t—this isn’t a cold-blooded killing. You're not a 
danger to anybody, are you? 

A No 


Q No. And you'd never let yourself get into that 
position again either, I know that. 

A No, it’s an expensive lesson to learn, a hard one, 
I mean. * 

Q Oh God, I guess. 

A Plus the nightmares and everything. 

QI know. I know. 


A .... you know, you can't even imagine. 
* * * * 


[106] (Witness apparently reading waiver - pause) 


Q Is that okay then? 

A Yeah. 

Q All right. Okay. Let’s—why don’t you sign as 
0 


Okay. 
We can go this way, Carl. 


* * * 7 


Q 
Q2 
this. 
Q 
Q2 


a witness, Joel and then I'll sign too. (ph) I guess the 
best thing—the best thing to do would be just ask you t 
drive it around and put it in our garage where it'll be 
safe and then, as I say, Joel can give you a ride ride 
home or we can call a cab or call a friend. Whatever— 
whatever you want. 

O2 Call a friend for you? 

A All my friends over there, my girlfriend, she don’t 
have a vehicle. 

Q Well, do you want us to just run you over there? 

A Sure. 

Q2 How about if I just give you a ride home. 

A Have my dog with me. 

Q Oh yeah, we'll take the dog home. That’s—there’s 
no problem. 

Q2 You bet. I’ve had dogs in my car before. 

Q Yeah I saw him a little bit ago. 

O2 He's almost human. 


80 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


No. 94-6615 
CARL THOMPSON, 
Petitioner 
V. 


PATRICK KEOHANE, Warden, et al. 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


ON CONSIDERATION of the motion for leave to 
proceed herein in forma pauperis and of the petition for 
writ of certiorari, it is ordered by this Court that the 
motion to proceed in forma pauperis be, and the same is 
hereby, granted; and that the petition for writ of cer- 
tiorari be, and the same is hereby, granted. 


January 23, 1995 


