ren be 


i) 


APM 4.9 4095 


OFFICE OF TME 


TOWN & COUNTRY ELECTRIC, INC. AND 


Respondents. 
» a ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
ey UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
ae FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


Bat | | BRIEF FOR RESPONDENT TOWN & COUNTRY 
CPW as, Bey Yes tt ELECTRIC, INC. 


a a ee 


BEST AVAILABLE C COPY 


OLER} 


AMERISTAFF PERSONNEL CONTRACTORS, LTD., 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a paid union organizer who is committed 
by a union’s "salting" resolution to work for the union in 
furtherance of its organizing drive against a nonunion 
employer and who works for, or seeks to work for, the 
targeted nonunion employer, is a bona fide "employee," of 
the targeted nonunion employer within the meaning of 


§ 2(3) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 
152(3)). 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE .............- l 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ............-. 8 
EEE ESSE CEE 9 
A. The NLRA Only Protects Bona Fide 
EE 9 
B. The Law Of Agency Requires That 
An Agent Be Subject To The Control 
Of The Agent’s Master. ........ li 


C. A Person May Not Simultaneously 
Be The Agent Of Two Maste™s With 
Conflicting interests ........... 12 


D. The Alleged Discriminatees Were 
Not Employees Of TCE ........ 15 


1. The alleged discriminatees 
herein were subject to the 
Union’s control while 


YB The Union’s interests conflict 
with those of the targeted 
nonsignatory contractor .... 26 


CONCLUSION 


‘3 


Bona Fide employees who are 
zealous union supporters 
without a contractual com- 
mitment to act contrary to the 
interests of the employer do 
not have a conflicting agency 


ee 


The NLRB’s Definition of 
"Employee" Is Not Entitled to 


Sy uw’ k-w 6 Seas cok 


That the Salted Organizers 


cs re a 


The Eighth Circuit’s Holding 
Does Not Lead To Absurd 
REN ee ae Fe 


The Eighth Circuit’s Holding 
Does Not Thwart 
Congressional Intent ...... 


ee 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES: 
Anthony Forest Products, 
231 N.L.R.B. 976 (1977) .......-..-.--- 33, 34 
263 N.L.R.B. 1143 (1983), 
enfd. 719 F. 2d 292 (8th Cir. 1983).......---. 37 
Glass Company, 404 U.S. 157 (1971) ...... 10, 39 
Fruehauf Trailer Company, 
1 WELRB. GB CIES) 2. ccc ccc ccc eee eeee 43 
General Cable Corp., 170 N.L.R.B. 1682 (1968) .. 21 

, 886 F.2d 70 

(ath Cir. 1969)... ccc cere cece ees 33 
IUOE Local 487 Health and Welfare Trust Fund 
Hi C —y —_ f 


Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 
502 U.S. 527 (1992) .....-- eee eeeees 9, 10, 39 


Mailing Services, Inc., 293 N.L.R.B. 565 (1989) . . 20 


iv 


McCarty Processors, Inc., 286 N.L.R.B. 703 (1987). 20 


Nationwidi uF. jurancs ) Jarden, 

503 U.S. __, 117 L. Ed. 2d 581 

GY cccasccavepet 4 ae 10, 39, 46, 48, 49 
NLRB v. Big Three Welding Equipment Co., 

See Uae Ce Gee Ge HE 1 60 Re ewe's oe 37 


NLRB vy. Boeing Company, 412 U.S. 67 (1973) ... 17 


327 F. 2d 421 (6th Cir. 1964) .............. 20 
NLRB v. I tenet Berthahoad of Blectsical 
Workers, Local 340, 481 U.S. 573 (1987) ...... 17 
356 F. 2d 955 (ist Cir. 1966), 

cert. denied 385 U.S. 900 (1966) ............ 38 
Oak Apparel, Inc., 

218 N.LMB. FO (ISTS) .. ww coe 21, 22, 36, 37 
Owens-Illinois, 271 N.L.R.B. 1235 (1984) ...... 20 


Parker-Robb Chevrolet, Inc., 262 N.L.R.B. 
402 (1982), rev. den. sub. nom., 
iB Ss F fF ie Be Lee ere 37 


-_ 8 we ee EE 
tone bees « = — 


Vv 


Sullivan Electric Company (Administrative 
Law Judge’s Decision), JD (NY)-04-95, 
Case Nos. 26-CA-16107 and 16157, 


1995 NLRB Lexis 82 (Feb. 1, 1995) ....... 


309 N.L.R.B. 1224 (1992) .......-..+5-: 


Town & Country Electric, Inc., 309 N.L.R.B. 
1250 (1992) enf. denied, 34 F.3d 625 
(8th Cir. 1994) cert. granted 


130 L. Ed. 879 (1995) .....--- eee eeees 


WACO, Inc., 316 N.L.R.B. No. 9 (1995) 


Ww Electric C on Chatham Divisi 
167 NLRB 532 (1967) .....-.--- eee 


Windsor Castle Health Care Facility, Inc., 
310 N.L.R.B. 579 (1993) 


enfd. 13 F.3d 619 (2nd Cir. 1994) ........ 


STATUTES: 


Labor Management Relations Act, § 302(a) 


(29 U.S.C. 18GG@)) .. 2... cece rec cccees 


National Labor Relations Act, § 2(2) 


(29 U.S.C. 152(2)) ...-- eee eee eee eees 


National Labor Relations Act, § 2(3) 
(29 U.S.C. 1S2GB)). 2. eee e evens 


22, 23 


vi 


National Labor Relations Act, § 7 
(29 U.S.C. 157) 


ee ee a passim 
National Labor Relations Act, § 8(a)(1) 

Ger es MED a a's 6 we Oe a Be atk 3, 37 
National Labor Relations Board, § 8(a)(2) 

GP Wee ED GS cc kw ecuhiceeeccces 26 
National Labor Relations Act, § 8(a)(3) 

Ge We SE oo co RT Se eK 37 


MISCELLANEOUS: 


53 Am. Jur. 2d, Master and Servant, § 97 (1970) .. 14 


Back Where You Work—And Win! 

[A Labor Notes Book, 

A cc ewe 18, 27, 28, 29, 43 
Daily Labor Report (BNA), No. 226, D-1, D-2, 
a re 19 
F. Bartosic and R. Hartley, Labor Relations Law 

in the Private Sector, ALI-ABA, 

PRS Ane. eee ase we Liem 27 


Vii 


H. Millis and Emily Clark Brown, 


Relations, University of Chicago Press, 1950 ..... 42 


Journal of Labor Research, Vol. XIV, 
Number 4, Fall, 1993 ..........-. 20, 25, 29, 36 


Restatement (Second) of Agency 
js r= “Seo 11 


Restatement (Second) of Agency 
§ 1 cmt. b. (1958) .....- eee eee eee ees 11 


Restatement (Second) of Agency 
7 Sooo 12, 14, 44 


Restatement (Second) of Agency § 227 (1958) .... Il 
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 236 (1958) .... 13 


» 
~ 


l 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Town & Country Electric, Inc. (hereinafter 
"TCE"), a large nonunion electrical contractor located in 
Appleton, Wisconsin, has a history of hiring workers 
affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers (hereinafter "IBEW"), even though that Union 
has targeted TCE for unionization. J.A. 100; Tr. 298- 
299.' Approximately forty percent of TCE’s workforce 
is made up of union-affiliated employees. J.A. 116. This 
is consistent with TCE’s progressive management 
philosophy which is described in the record. J.A. 261- 
264. 


In early September, 1989, TCE obtained a contract 
from Boise Cascade to perform supplemental maintenance 
work, on an as-needed basis, at Boise Cascade’s existing 
International Falls, Minnesota facility. TCE, which had 
not previously worked in Minnesota, learned, shortly 
before the work was to begin, that it needed one 
Minnesota-licensed electrician for every two unlicensed 
electricians working at the Boise Cascade facility. Pet. 
App. 2a. Since none of its regular crew had Minnesota 
licenses, and it would take some time for them to become 
licensed, TCE needed Minnesota-licensed journeymen 
electricians to supplement its crew in order to perform the 
work initially assigned to it by Boise Cascade. 


' The following abbreviations are used: Joint Appendix, 
"J.A."; Appendix submitted with Petition for Certiorari, "Pet. App."; 
Petition for Certiorari, “Pet."; and Transcript, "Tr." 


2 


TCE contacted Ameristaff, an independent 
temporary help agency, and asked them to find the needed 
Minnesota-licensed electricians. Ameristaff scheduled 
seven interviews with job applicants at the Embassy Suites 
Motel in Minneapolis, Minnesota.* Pet. App. 3a. 


When the interviewers arrived at the Embassy 
Suites approximately two hours late due to a flight delay, 
some unidentified people were waiting for them.’ The 
interviewers didn’t know that only one of the people 
waiting had a scheduled appointment. Pet. App. 3a. 


The interviewers offered a job to the second person 
they interviewed. Pet. App. 3a. After the second 
interview, Steve Buelow of Ameristaff reported that the 
remaining applicants, who had filled out applications in the 
adjoining room, were not scheduled for interviews. 
Buelow also indicated to the interviewers that the uninvited 
applicants appeared to be from the Union. Pet. App. 3a. 
Ron Sager, TCE’s manager of human resources, decided, 
because they were already two hours behind schedule due 
to a flight delay and because he was responsible for 
conducting the company-wide manpower meeting in 


*  Ameristaff, on its own initiative, asked applicants if they were 
willing to work on a nonunion job, because of an experience its 
president, Steve Buelow, had with a union electrician who Buelow had 
tried to place, but who was unwilling to work, on a local nonunion job 
because of fear of union discipline. Applicant responses, if any, were 
not communicated to TCE. J.A. 86-90. 


> Not all the salted organizers were present when the 


interviewers arrived. The salted organizers kept arriving throughout 
the interview process. J.A. 11. 


3 


Appleton that afternoon, [J.A. 101; Pet. App. 3a; Tr. 305- 
306], to interview only those applicants with appoint- 
ments.* J.A. 101-102. When told of TCE’s decision, the 
uninvited applicants became loud and unruly.’ After 
quieting the crowd, TCE was able to confirm that only 
one of the applicants present had made an appointment 
and, accordingly, he was interviewed. That person, 
Malcolm Hansen, told the interviewers that he was a 
member of the IBEW. Nonetheless, he was hired for the 
Boise Cascade work. Pet. App. 4a.° 


‘ By that time the interviewers had already made one offer of 
employment to an applicant who was interested, but wanted more 
money. The ALJ also found that Buelow of Ameristaff intended to 
verify the employment references of the uninvited applicants when he 
returned to Appleton. Pet. App. 57a. 


5 Buelow was correct in his belief that the remaining people 
were from the Union. Hansen and the uninvited applicants all were 
present at the behest of the Union pursuant to the Union's "salting 
resolution." J.A. 256-257. 


* The ALJ dismissed all independent 8(a)(1) allegations relating 
to the interviews at the Embassy Suites, essentially discrediting the 
General Counsel’s witnesses. The ALJ did find that the failure to 
interview the unscheduled applicants was unlawful, but that finding 
was based on the ALJ’s presumption that all nonunion employers will 
discriminate against someone they believe is affiliated with a union 
which may be interested in organizing them. The ALJ expressly 
admitted that he was applying that presumption. Pet. App. 62a-63a, 
108a. 

At the outset of his discussion of TCE’s defense, the ALJ 
described at great length his presumption of the unlawful motivation of 
all nonunion employers, which was pot based on anything . 
representatives of TCE had said or done. The ALJ based his credi- 

(continued...) 


4 


At Boise Cascade, Hansen, who was on 
Ameristaff's payroll, engaged in unionization activity 
when he was supposed to be working, despite being told 
that he was required to work during working time.’ 
TCE’s employees rebuffed Hansen’s efforts and 
complained to their supervisor that Hansen was interfering 
with their work. J.A. 126-127, 145, 151-152, 166. But, 
Hansen persisted in his unionizing efforts. When TCE 
learned it would have to transfer Hansen to its payroll in 
order to count him towards the licensed electrician ratio 
requirements, TCE decided not to do so because Hansen 
spent so much of his time violating TCE’s no solicitation 
rule,* and because, when Hansen did work, he abused 


*(...continued) 
bility findings and his rejection of TCE’s defenses on that 
presumption. The ALJ repeatedly stated that he rejected the testimony 
of TCE’s witnesses because, ¢.g., that testimony was "out of comport 
with economic realities," (Pet. App. 108a), or was otherwise incon- 
sistent with the ALJ's presumption that nonunion employers are 
unlawfully motivated. Pet. App. 65a; 77a, fn.34; 108a; 43a, fn. 1. 
The ALJ's presumption of unlawful intent, which was upheld by the 
NLRB, was also used as the basis for rejecting TCE’s arguments 
which were inconsistent with the presumption. Pet. App. 64a-65a. 
Those applications of the presumption made it irrebuttable. The 
Eighth Circuit found it unnecessary to rule on TCE’s argument that 
the NLRB’s presumption of unlawful motive was inappropriate. Pet. 
App. lla. 


"The ALJ credited Sager's testimony (J.A. 105, 109-110) that he 
advised Hansen of TCE’s no solicitation rule. (Pet. App. 929-949; 
1099-1109 fn.73) 


* — The ALJ and the Board, relying on credibility resolutions 
based on the presumption of TCE’s unlawful motive, described in 
(continued...) 


5 


TCE’s tools and equipment and performed poor quality 
work.’ After being released by Ameristaff, Hansen drove 
directly to the Union’s office in Minneapolis to prepare 
charges for filing with the National Labor Relations Board 
("NLRB" hereinafter).'° J.A. 72. 


The Union paid Hansen One Thousand Ninety-One 
and 82/100 Dollars ($1,091.82) for his three days’ work 
for the Union at Boise Cascade. J.A. 259. That pay was 
in addition to, and substantially greater than, the Seven 
Hundred Twenty-Five and 15/100 Dollars ($725.15) he 
received from Ameristaff for that same period of time. 
J.A. 201. The Union’s business manager testified that, 
pursuant to the Union’s salting resolution, all salts were to 
be paid on the same basis. J.A. 24-25. 


The Union filed charges against TCE and 
Ameristaff, and the NLRB issued a complaint. TCE 


*(...continued) | __ 
footnote 6 herein, found that TCE’s application of its no solicitation 
rule was unlawful. 


* Contrary to the Board’s assertions on page 34 of its Brief, 
there was extensive testimony regarding the abuse of tools and 
equipment by Hansen and the poor quality of his work. JA. 127-128, 
144-149, 151-156, 158-159. The only reason Hansen received a raise 
was that he demanded it at a time when TCE was dependent on his 
license to keep its crew working on the job. Pet. App. 84a-85a. 


" The Eighth Circuit was justified in observing that Hansen 
returned to his full-time Union job after he was let go by Ameristaff. 
The Union's records show that Hansen was employed by a Union ; 
contractor before, after and during the time he was ostensibly working 
on TCE’s crew. J.A. 281. 


6 


denied that it had committed any unfair labor 
Pet. App. 43a. 4 ses 


The ALJ, with NLRB approval, largely discredited 
the testimony of four TCE employees regarding Hansen’s 
poor work performance, essentially based on Hansen’s 
denial, even though the ALJ had discredited Hansen 
elsewhere and had caught him lying in his explanation of 
his work performance.'' Pet. App. 110a-121a. 


ie The ALJ and the NLRB also found that TCE 
discriminatorily refused to interview the uninvited 
unscheduled, unscreened and unruly applicants." And, 


. The ALJ frequently found the General Counsel's principal 
witnesses, Hansen and Priem, unreliable. Pet. App. 54a, fn. 15; 72a- 
74a; 86a, fn.44; 109a, fn.73. Indeed, the ALJ caught Hansen lying 
when Hansen supported his denial that he had ruined TCE’s drill bits 
by claiming that he always carried a unibit with him. Hansen claimed 
that he had the unibit drill bit in his pocket all day during the hearing 
recta he natien sovesied tho metal Uh wen sill eald, 
apparently ving recently been brought into the hearing room 
Mince being outside in the December cold, characteristic of 
inneapolis. J.A. 180-181. Essentially, the only basis for the ALJ’ 
partial crediting of Hansen was the ALJ’ presumption , : 
unlawful motivation. ; ahem 


'° The ALJ acknowledged that TCE had a valid 

for not hir all the di "TCE only business defense 
Minnesota-licensed electricians to get started on the Boise Cascade 
ee There is evidence in the record that two Minnesota-licensed 
ectricians would have satisfied that need. The following 

learned it could ot uso Amerietaff electricians to eatiofy te biresens 
license requirement. All the applications were taken by Ameristaff 
Because of the substantial fee it would have to pay Ameristaff for _ 


(continued...) 


7 


they found that TCE’s failure to put Hansen on its payroll 
was discriminatorily motivated. Pet. App. 12la, 14a. 
The ALJ and the NLRB further found that representatives 
of TCE had made several unlawful statements at the 
International Falls project, again, based primarily on the 
ALJ’s presumption of TCE’s discriminatory motivation. 
Pet. App. 13a-14a, 109a-110a. 


The NLRB held that all the alleged discriminatees 
were “employees” of TCE within the meaning of the 
National Labor Relations Act, as amended (hereinafter the 
"NLRA"), because they were employees within the 
meaning of the law of agency, anc that interpretation of 
the law of agency did not thwart congressional intent or 
produce absurd results. 


TCE challenged all NLRB findings of unlawful 
conduct before the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals. That 
Court decided that the NLRB had incorrectly interpreted 
the law of agency, and that none of the people who were 
the object of the alleged unfair labor practices was a bona 
fide employee of TCE within the meaning of the NLRA. 
Pet. App. 9a. Therefore, no violation of the NLRA 
occurred. The Eighth Circuit found it unnecessary to 
decide whether the NLRB improperly approved the ALJ's 


2. .continued) 
using people who had applied to Ameristaff, TCE would not have used 
those applications and would have independently solicited applicants. 
The ALJ stated that the evidence supporting that defense was "beyond 
suspicion." Pet. App. 57a. The ALJ left to the compliance 
proceeding how many alleged discriminatees were entitled to monetary 
redress. Pet. App. 58a-59a. 


use of an irrebuttable presumption that all nonunion 
employers are unlawfully motivated to discriminate against 
individuals who are affiliated with a union, or whether the 
NLRB failed to follow the precedent that permits 
employers to prohibit solicitation during work time. Pet. 
App. 10a-lla. The Eighth Circuit denied enforcement of 
the NLRB’s order. Pet. App. 11a. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


TCE allegedly violated the NLRA by conduct 
involving salted organizers. The NLRA only protects 
“employees.” Thus, the allegations against TCE can only 
be pursued if the salted organizers are “employees” within 
the meaning of the NLRA. 


In defining "employee" in § 2(3) of the NLRA, 
Congress used a circular definition which incorporated the 
common law of agency. The common law of agency 
provides that a person simultaneously may not be the agent 
of two masters who have conflicting interests. 


The salted organizers had entered into an 
agreement with the Union which subjected them to Union 
control during the time they ostensibly were working for 
TCE. The salting resolution required that their sole 
purpose in working for TCE be to act in furtherance of the 
Union’s organizing campaign, thereby prohibiting them 
from working in furtherance of TCE’s interests while on 
TCE’s payroll. The only way salted organizers could 
work in furtherance of TCE’s interests was to resign from 
the Union, i.e., abandon their relationship with the Union. 
The Union’s control over the salted organizers for a 


2+ ee 


i 


9 


se which conflicted with the interests of TCE, while 
oar eens would be working for TCE, prevented the 
salted organizers from being able to enter into an 
employment relationship with TCE in which they would be 
subject to TCE’s control. Therefore, the salted organizers 
were not, and could not be, bona fide “employees” of 
TCE within the meaning of the NLRA. 


ARGUMENT 


A. The NLRA Only Protects Bona Fide 
Employees. 


Section 7 of the NLRA protects the freedom of 
* F in from engaging, in 
employees” to engage, or to refrain ng, 
concerted activity protected by the NLRA. The limited 
scope of § 7 was affirmed in Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 
502 US. 527 (1992), where this Court held that the 
NLRB had too broadly defined the protection afforded by 
the NLRA when it extended that protection to union 
organizers who were not "employees" within the meaning 
of the NLRA. This Court stated: 


By its plain terms, thus, the NLRA confers 
rights only on employees, not on unions or 
their nonemployee organizers. 


While no restriction may be placed 
on the employees’ right to discuss self 
organization among themselves, . . . no 
such obligation is owed nonemployee 
organizers. As a rule, then, an employer 


10 


cannot be compelled to allow distribution of 
union literature by nonemployee organizers 
on his property. 


Lechmere, supra at pp. 532-533. 


This Court has recognized that when Co 
h ngress uses 
4 circular definition of “employee,” it intends to 
incorporate the traditional agency law meaning of 
employee" into that definition. Nationwide Mutual 
Insurance Company v. Darden, 503 U.S. 117L 
2d $81, 588-591 (1992); see also, Chemical Workers v. 
b , 404 U.S. 157, 166 
(1971) (“The term ‘employee* is not to be stretched 
beyond its plain meaning . . ."); and IUOE Local 487 
Ww 


, 308 N.L.R.B. 805 
805-806 (1992). The NLRB acknowledged in its decision 
herein, that the meaning of the term "employee" is 
provided by the law of agency." Pet. App. 27a-28a. 
Thus, in order to become an employee of an employer, a 
person must become an “agent” of that employer, as that 
term is defined by the law of agency. 


13 
Though the NLRB argued at length in its Petition for i 
_ The a Writ 
of Certiorari that the NLRB’s decision was consistent with the law of 
seeney; the NLRB appears to have retreated from that position in its 


An agency relationship only exists if the agent is 
free to act in furtherance of the employer’s interests and 
to submit to the employer’s control. As stated in 
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 1 cmt. a. (1958), ". . . 
the agent must act or agree to act on the [employer's] 
behalf and subject to [the employer’s] control." 


If a person is not free to act in furtherance of the 
employer’s interests or is not subject to the employer's 
control, that person is not the agent of that employer. 
"The agency relation results if, but only if, there is an 
understanding between the parties which . . . creates a 
fiduciary relation in which the fiduciary is subject to the 
directions of the one on whose account he acts. It is the 
element of continuous subjection to the will of the 
[employer] which distinguishes the agent from other 
fiduciaries and the agency agreement from other 


agreements." Restatement (Second) of Agency § | cmt. 
b. (1958). 


In addition, when determining whether a servant 
(employee) who has been lent by one master (employer) to 
another has become the servant of the borrowing master 
(employer), the issue is who has control. The presump- 
tion is that the servant remains in the employ of the 
original master, even if there has been some division of 
control. The servant only becomes an employee of the 
second employer when the original employer relinquishes 
control. Restatement (Second) of Agency § 227 (1958). 


When the interests of two masters conflict, a person 
simultaneously cannot fulfill the obligation to serve both 
masters, since the control of the first master prevents the 
second master, with adverse interests, from exercising 
control over that person, and prevents that person from, in 
good faith, serving both masters. A person with 
conflicting masters must act in accordance with that 
person’s obligations to the primary master even though 
that conduct is contrary to the interests of the secondary 
master. And, that person may not act on behalf of the 
secondary master in a manner which is contrary to that 
person's obligations to that person’s primary master. In 
such a situation, a person may not be the agent of both 


ters. Restatement (Second) of Agency § 226 (1958) 


States: 


A person may be the servant of two 
masters, not joint employers, at one time as 
to one act, if the service to one does not 
involve abandonment of the service to the 
other. 


Comment a. explains: 


Since one can perform two acts at the same 
time, it is possible for each act to be 
performed in the service of a different mas- 
ter, although ordinarily the control which a 
master _can properly exercise over the 


— 


13 


conduct of the servant would prevent 
— ‘oe f ind ' 

persons. Likewise, a single 2°. may be 
done to effect the purposes of two 


independent employers. Since, however, 


both of them. ... He may be the servant 
of two masters, not joint employers as to 


the same act, if the act is within the scope 
of his employment for both (see § 236); he 


- 

eo eee te lud 

other. ... [emphasis added] 

An employer has the right to expect its employee to 
be free to follow the employer’s direction and to work in 
furtherance of the interests of the employer. This right of 


the employer to control the employee in the perfor nance 
of the employee’s duties for the employer” is the 


” Not being subject to the control of an employer is different 
from being free to be subject to an employer's control but harboring 
different interests from that employer. In the latter case, that person 
is subject to the employer’s control and is able to become an 
"employee" of that employer, though, because of that person's 


interests, person decide to breach its obligation to submit to 
that may co 


14 


foundation upon which the above-quoted § 226 of the 
Restatement (Second) of Agency (1958) rests. '* 


'(...continued) 
the employer's control. In the former case, the i 

, person has no choice 
and is barred by obligations to the first employer from agreeing to 
serve and to submit to the control of the second employer, i.e., that 
person cannot become an agent of the second employer and is not an 


"employee" of the second er within 
tho NLRA. employ the meaning of § 2(3) of 


1S 


These principles of agency are generally accepted. For 


example, 53 Am. Jur. 2d, Master and Servant, § 97 (1970 
171, supp. p. 70, provides: ' i 


The law implies an agreement on the part of the 
servant or employee to faithfully serve and be 
regardful of the interest of his employer during the 
term of his service, carefully discharge his duty to 
the extent reasonably required by the relation of 
employer and employee (citations omitted), and to 
treat his employer with respect. (citations omitted). 


Williston on Contracts, § 1014C states: 


The duty of fidelity to his employment imposes on 
the employee not simply the duty of reasonably 
skillful performance of the work entrusted to him, 
but the negative duty of refraining from deception 
and entering into relations giving him an interest 
inconsistent with that of the employer. 


[T]he employee may neither enter into business 
relations in competition with his employer, even 
though the business is so conducted by agents or 


(continued. ..) 


15 


Thus, a person who is bound to serve and submit 
to the control of a master cannot become a bona fide 
employee of another master who has conflicting interests, 
and therefore, is not an “employee,” within the meaning 
of § 2(3) of the NLRA, of that other master. 


D. The Alleged Discriminatees Were Not 
Employees Of TCE. 


The salted organizers herein were subject to the 
Union’s salting resolution which gave the Union exclusive 
control over the salted organizers while they ostensibly 
were working for TCE. The interests of the Union and 
TCE conflict. The Union’s interest is to confront 
management at every opportunity and to create as much 


'§(...continued) 
otherwise as not to deprive the employer of the 
employee's attention, nor seek to acquire an indirect 
advantage from third persons for performing his duty 
to his employer. 


And, in i vertisi . 
tion, 272 N.Y. 133, 138, 5 N.E.2d 66, 67 (1936), in discussing "the 
standard required by the law of one acting as an agent or employee of 
another," the New York Court of Appeals stated: 


It is an elementary principle that an agent cannot take 
upon himself incompatible duties, and characters, or 

act in a transaction where he has an adverse interest 

or employment. (citations omitted) In such a case he 
must necessarily be unfaithful to one or the other, as 
the duties which he owes to his respective principals 
are conflicting, and incapable of faithful performance 
by the same person. (citations omitted) 


16 


py and controversy between TCE and _ its 
employees as possible to encourage emplo to su 

the Union. TCE’s interest is to one > et on 
diligently follow instructions, perform their work as 
effectively and efficiently as they can, work effectively 
with other employees and with people who have a business 
relationship with TCE, and who are free from control by 
a third party who doesn’t have the same interests as TCE. 
The express purpose of the salted organizers’ employment 
by the Union was to pursue the Union’s interests. That 
purpose necessarily prohibited them from agreeing to 
serve or submit to the control of TCE. Therefore, the 
salted organizers could not have become bona fide agents 
of TCE within the meaning of the law of agency, and 
were not “employees,” within the meaning of the NLRA 
with respect to TCE. 


. In this case, two of the salted organizers were full- 
time business representatives of the Union, and all of the 
organizers were governed by the Union's salting 
resolution. Pet. App. 8a-9a. Under the salting resolution, 
re salted sper by ae oy permitted to work for the 

onsignatory employer if their sole purpose was furthering 
the Union’s organizing effort. If a salted organizer 
accepted employment with a nonsignatory contractor for 
any other purpose, that salt would be in violation of the 


17 


salting resolution and would be subject to Union charges 
and discipline. J.A. 256-258."° 


The salting resolution further provides that while 
working for the nonsignatory contractor, the salted 
organizers “shall promptly and diligently carry out their 
organizing assignments, and leave the employer or job 
immediately upon notification" by the Union. J.A. 256- 
258. Under the salting resolution, the Union has primary 
control over everything the salted organizers do during the 
course of their work day. The control of the Union over 
the salted organizer is pervasive and is paramount to that 
of the targeted nonunion contractor."” 


The salted organizers herein were subject to the 
salting resolution and had lost their freedom to exercise 
any right under § 7 of the NLRA. The salting resolution, 
in effect, prohibits the salt from deciding that TCE is an 
excellent employer who has developed a program that is 
better for its employees than the Union’s program; it 


‘6 The relationship between the Union and its member is 
considered contractual in nature. See, ¢.g., NLRB v. Boeing 
Company, 412 U.S. 67, 75 (1973) and cases cited therein. Members 
who violate the contract are subject to court-enforceable fines and 


expulsion from the Union. 
, 481 U.S. 573, 576 (1987). Thus, any 


Electrical Workers, Local 340 
salted organizer who violated the "sole purpose" requirement of the 
salting resolution would be subject to court-enforceable fines. 


‘7 Apparently, the Union changed its standard salting resolution 
sometime after the incidents involving TCE occurred, though it still 
provides for Union control of the salted organizer. Any such change 
is not a part of the record herein and is immaterial to this case. 


18 


prohibits the salt from concluding that 

would be better off without fo Union it Poe Prony -espore 
from speaking in favor of TCE’s personnel policies; and 
it prohibits the salt from voting against representation by 
the Union in an NLRB election. In short, it prevents the 
salt from exercising any of the rights protected by § 7 of 


the NLRA. 


The extent to which the Union can control the 
salted organizers herein is suggested by a manual on 


organizing titled, 
Vhe s- in!, [A Labor Notes 
Book, Detroit, 1991], which states at page 9: 


Organizing begins when people question 
authority .. . Organizing is about changing 
power relationships, changing the balance of 
forces between management and workers. 
Confrontation with the employer has to be 
built into the escalating activities. 


Under this Strategy, the organizing campaign permeates 
everything the organizer does while on TCE’s payroll. 
Such an organizer is not free to be subject to the control 
of TCE. On the contrary, the salted organizer's obligation 
is to confront and defy efforts of TCE to exercise control 
over the salted organizer. 


to the condash of Malesia Iimann, Gone tn ater tien 
of the extent to which the Union may exercise control over 
salted organizers. For example, the General Counsel of 
the NLRB recently reported on a case of salting in the 


19 


"General Counsel’s Report" issued November 28, 1994, 
i No. 226, D-1, D-2, D-3 


Daily Labor Report (BNA), 
(Nov. 28, 1994). In that case, the union directed the 


"salts," who had been planted with a nonunion electrical 
contractor, to go on strike and then, one hour later, 
unconditionally offer to return to work, then engage in a 
slowdown when they came to work, including coming in 
late and standing around talking. When the slowdown 
caused the employer to fall behind schedule, the salts 
circulated and submitted to the employer a petition in 
which employees demanded a $3.00 per hour increase in 
pay effective immediately. When the employer refused 
the increase, the union told the employer it would “stop 
the games" if the employer would sign a bargaining 
agreement with the union. 


Shortly thereafter, several of the employees, led by 
the salts, went out on strike, and then, twenty minutes 
later, unconditionally offered to return to work. Later that 
month, a "salt" demanded that the employer provide 
employees with health insurance and threatened that 
employees would strike if the employer refused. When 
the employer didn’t accede to that demand, the employees 
went on strike. Two hours later, they made an 
unconditional offer to return to work. Shortly thereafter, 
the employer discovered that work materials had been 
hidden above ceiling tiles and behind walls, and that 
unknown employees had engaged in substantial miswiring. 
The employer claimed that the above course of conduct 
caused it to lose over $100,000, and forced it to go out of 
business. 


20 


Other examples of the type of control that may be 
exercised by the Union over its "salts" can be found in an 
article by Wharton School Professor Emeritus Herbert R. 
Northrup titled, "‘Salting‘ the Contractor’s Labor Force: 
Construction Unions Organizing with NLRB Assistance," 
published in the Journal of Labor Research, Vol. XIV, 
Number 4, Fall, 1993, pp. 475-479, referred to at greater 
length hereinbelow. '* 


In addition to the control imposed on the salted 
organizers herein by the fear of discipline for violating the 
salting resolution, the Union controlled the salted 
organizers by paying them. In NLRB vy. Elias Brothers 
Big Boy, Inc., 327 F. 2d 421 (6th Cir. 1964), the court 
found that the organizer was employed by the union 
because she was paid $15.00 a week to cover expenses for 
telephone calls to employees during her organizing efforts 
and for gasoline to use in her car in driving employees 
home from work so that she could talk to them about the 
union. Shortly after her termination as a waitress from the 
employer, she became a full-time paid union organizer for 
the union. 


The holding in the Elias case is supported by addi- 
tional authorities. It has been held that the waiver of a 
dues obligation (McCarty Processors, Inc., 286 N.L.R.B. 
703 (1987)), a free jacket (Owens-Illinois, 271 N.L.R.B. 
1235 (1984)), free medical screening ili i 
Inc., 293 N.L.R.B. 565 (1989)), free insurance coverage 


“ Copies of Professor Northrup’s article have been lodged with 
the Court for its convenience. 


21 


(Wagner Electric Corporation, Chatham Division, 167 
N.L.R.B. 532 (1967)), or a $5.00 gift certificate (General 
Cable Corp., 170 N.L.R.B. 1682 (1968)) coerces 
employees and can, in effect, destroy the ability of an 
employee to act in the capacity of a bona fide independent 
employee of an employer. It follows that being a paid 
union organizer renders a person incapable of being a 
bona fide employee of a nonunion employer. 


A similar conclusion was reached by Member 
Kennedy in his dissenting opinion in Oak Apparel, Inc., 
218 N.L.R.B. 701, 702 (1975): 


In my view, Mary Calligaris and Antoinette 
Jackson were paid professional organizers 
employed by the Union and _were not 
employees of the Respondent entitled to the 
protection of the Act. 


In my view, the Union controlled their 
employment through the device of com- 
pensation and expense reimbursement 
arrangements, as well as a plan for 
obtaining backpay awards from the 
employees after the completion of unfair 
labor practice proceedings conducted by the 
Board. ... In my opinion, the Union’s 
direction of the employees’ ‘employment’ 
efforts with regard to such important 
elements as time, place, and duration gives 
clear evidence of the fact that Calligaris and 


22 


Jackson were in reality employed by the 
Union and not by Respondent. 


Id. at 702. 


See also, the ALJ’s decision, on facts similar to 


those herein, in WACO, Inc., 316 N.L.R.B. No. 9 
(1995) issued Deceniber 23, 1992, after the NLRB 
issued its decision herein: 


In the instant case, under the terms of the 
Salting Resolution, it would have been 
possible for [the union’s business manager] 
to have terminated the employment of all of 
the electricians, at any time, in his sole 
discretion. In these circumstances, where 
the Union retains control over the very 
existence of the employer-employee 
relationship, it would be a distortion of the 
Act to conclude that these individuals were 
employees’ of Respondent under Section 
2(3) of the Act.® 


____[Fn. 8] This conclusion is consistent 
with NLRB precedent applying the common 
law ‘right of control‘ test in defining 


23 


employee status under Section 2(3) of the 
Act in the following terms: 


Under this test, an employer- 
employee relationship exists where 
the person for whom the services are 
performed reserves the right to 
control not only the end to be 
achieved but also the means to be 
used in reaching such end. (citations 
omitted) 


Id. ALJ slip op. at p. 4. 


In the instant case, the two business agents received 
their full salaries from the Union. The Union paid Hansen 
One Thousand Ninety-One and 82/100 Dollars ($1,091.82) 
for his three days’ work for the Union at Boise Cascade. 
J.A. 259. That pay was in addition to, and substantially 
greater than, the Seven Hundred Twenty-Five and 15/100 
Dollars ($725.15) Hansen received from Ameristaff for 
that same period of time. J.A. 201. The Union’s business 
manager testified that, pursuant to the Union’s salting 
resolution, all salts were to be paid on the same basis. 
J.A. 24-26. That means they were to receive full Union 
scale, plus fringe benefits, just like the salaried business 
agents (and, in effect, Hansen), in addition to the pay they 
received from the targeted nonunion employer. Clearly, 
the salted organizers were not dependent financially on 
TCE. 


Under the salting resolution, the Union’s control 
applies at all times; it is not just limited to nonworking 


24 


time.*” The Union’s control during working time over 
the salted organizer, Malcolm Hansen, who was success- 
fully planted on the crew of the targeted nonsignatory 
Cc ntractor herein, illustrates the Union’s exercise of 
control over "salts" while they are working for the 
targeted employer. Hansen spent much of his working 
time disrupting the work of TCE employees and talking to 
them about why they should be represented by the Union. 
Hansen aggressively persisted in his efforts to persuade 
TCE employees to seek representation by the Union even 
though he repeatedly and vehemently was rebuffed by 
TCE’s employees. And, when he was released by 
Ameristaff and was not hired by TCE, Hansen 
immediately left the site and drove through the night so he 
could get to the Union’s office the first thing the next 
morning to begin preparation of the unfair labor practice 
charge herein. J.A. 72. 


TCE’s inability to control Hansen’s conduct by the 
threat of discipline illustrates the inability of targeted 


” Local 292’s new salting resolution directing salts only to 
engage in organizing on non-work time shows that under the salting 
resolution in effect in this case salts were expected to engage in 
organizing and other activities on behalf of the Union while they were 
supposed to be working for the targeted employer. The change in the 
salting resolution is immaterial since the Union still reserves the power 
to control the salt at all times and, at all times, the salt remains subject 
to the obligation to serve the Union’s interests, which conflict with 
those of the employer. The Union’s revised salting resolution is like a 
lawyer claiming to suspend his or her representation of one client 
while attending a meeting at which the lawyer represents another client 
with conflicting interests to those of the first client. 


25 


nonunion employers to control salted organizers.” 
That’s because the salted organizer isn’t financially 
dependent on the nonunion employer. The salted 
organizer doesn’t worry about being discharged by the 
nonunion employer — the organizer simply will return to 
employment with a unionized employer after providing the 
Union with an opportunity to file unfair labor practice 
charges against the targeted nonunion employer as part of 
the Union’s campaign to inflict economic pain on that 
employer, a practice described by Professor Northrup in 
his article on salting. Journal of Labor Research, supra. 
Indeed, Hansen’s work record maintained by the Union 
shows that Hansen was employed by a union signatory 
employer throughout the time he ostensibly was employed 
by Ameristaff on TCE’s crew. J.A. 281. Indeed, 
discharge by the targeted employer may even be a badge 
of honor. Thus, the basic elements in the bona fide 
employment relationship that make it feasible for an 
employer to maintain discipline are absent with salted 
organizers.” 


21 Asserting that an employer may effectively protect its interests 
through the disciplinary procedure is similar to asserting that lawyers 
should eliminate the rules relating to conflicts of interest because 
clients may sue them for malpractice. 


2 ineffectiveness of er discipline as a means of 
forci a ‘oli mpvinet sated crgunize i ooo shown by the fact 
that, though TCE refused to hire Hansen because of his violation of 
TCE’s licitati rule, the NLRB held that refusal to be unlawful 
because the NLRB found, based on the presumption of TCE’s 
unlawful motivation, that TCE’s action was discriminatorily motivated. 


26 


In summary, salted i j 
ion , organizers are subject 
union's control throughout the time they ror os 
working for TCE. That control is enforced both through 
the ; compensation the Organizers receive and the 
punishme mt they risk if they fail to comply with the 
Union’s instructions. Thus, the Union has paramount 


control over the salted organizer through i 
"the: out the 
salted organizer is on TCE’s payroll. : ag 


In the context of union organizing, if the i 
of the union and the targeted nonunion tiechntbaeomnea 
same, it is likely that salting will be declared in violation 
of § 8(a)(2) of the NLRA which prohibits employers from 
assisting a union to become the representative of the 
employer's employees. Cf Wi 
y, “ie " N.L.R.B. 579 (1993) enfd. 13 F.3d 619 


Therefore, it is reasonable to 
; e, assume that where the 
salting strategy is used, the employer is not affirmatively 
in favor of unionization, i.e., the interests of the union and 
the targeted nonsignatory employer are not the same. 


An organizing union using the salting strate and 
a targeted by that strategy have a rot» Rem 
ict of interest. As acknowledged by Member Oviatt 
in his concurring opinion in Sunland, supra, which was 
nee oon ee for oral argument before 

NLRB, - +. the relationship between a nonunion 


27 


usually adversarial, and sometimes quite heated." Jd. at 
1231-1232. See also, Labor Relations Law in the Private 
Sector, F. Bartosic and R. Hartley, pp. 60-61 (1986). 
"In administering [the NLRA], the Board and the courts 
seek to accommodate the legitimate, but competing, and at 
times conflicting, interests of the employer, the 
employees, the union, and the public at large. .. . The 
clash of competing and conflicting interests is perhaps 
most apparent in the context of union organizational 


In the U.S. Department of Labor and Department 
of Commerce’s “Commission on the Future of Worker- 
Management Relations, Fact Finding Report,” Exhibit I, 
page 88, Joe Crump, Secretary-Treasurer of the United 
Food and Commercial Workers Local 951 is quoted as 
testifying, "Organizing is war. The objective is to 
convince employers to do something that they do not want 
to do. That means a fight. If you don’t have a war 
mentality, your chances of success are limited." 


The NLRA contemplates that an employer and a 
union have equal rights to compete for the support and the 
votes of the employer’s employees. The NLRA 
recognizes that an employer and a union seeking to 
unionize its employees have conflicting interests and that 
law provides rules within which those adversarial interests 
can legitimately compete for the favor of the employees. 
The Union’s pursuit of its interests can lead to the type of 
employer-damaging conduct described in the 

‘ , supra, Professor Northrup’s 
article on salting and the case of salting in the "General 
Counsel’s Report” of November 28, 1994. 


28 


Salted union organizers have an irreconcilable 
conflict of interest with TCE. A paid union organizer who 
is successfully planted on TCE’s payroll has ample oppor- 
tunity to serve the interests of the organizer’s primary 
master, the Union, by acting adversely to the interests of 
TCE while masquerading as an employee of that contrac- 
tor. The salted organizer can cast TCE in a bad light in 
the eyes of the employees by the decisions the organizer 
makes and the manner in which the organizer works, or 
doesn’t work, as well as by what the organizer says and 
does. That is in direct conflict with an employee’s 
obligation to TCE to apply the employee’s best efforts to 
perform work assigned by TCE and to work in furtherance 
of the TCE’s interests while in the TCE’s service. 


Because the salted organizer can conceal this 
conflict of interest, both the employees and the employer 
may be misled to believe that the organizer is acting 
independently, when, in fact, the organizer is merely 
doing what the union has paid the organizer to do. It is 
the corruptness of this situation which is one of the 
reasons the law of agency leads to the conclusion that the 
paid organizer cannot, in good faith, become an employee 
of the nonunion contractor. 


Examples of on-the-job strategies available to the 
salted organizer for use against TCE may be found in the 
chapter entitled "Shop Floor Tactics" in the Trouble- 
maker’s Handbook, supra, wherein it states, "successful 
organizing requires rank and file action, visible organizing 
on the shop floor in confrontation with management." Id. 
at 11. The Union has many ways to bring economic 
pressure short of a strike: 


ee 


29 


- Work-to-rule campaigns in which 
workers adhere exactly to company proce- 
dures or to the contract. 


- Slowdowns, in which members 
reduce output to an agreed amount. 


- Making scrap, producing products 
which will not pass quality control. 


- Getting lost, a common practice of 
warehouse workers, maintenance crews, 
truck drivers and others who work in large 
facilities or on the streets and are not easily 
accessible to police. Some of these 
practices can get you disciplined; for 
example, truck drivers may be charged with 
‘stealing time.* 


Id. at 16. 


The salted organizer’s arsenal is not limited to on- 
the-job-strategies. In his article entitled ‘Salting _the 
Contractors’ Labor Force: Construction Unions 

with NLRB Assistance," a 
Research, supra, Professor Herbert R. or 
several ae of salting activities, primarily those of the 
IBEW, with which the Union involved in this case is 
affiliated, and the Boilermakers’ Union, including strikes, 
slowdowns and undermining of productivity, and he 
concludes that the primary purpose of the salting strategy 
appears not to be to persuade the employer's nonunion 


30 


employees to become unionized, but, rather, to inflict or 
threaten sufficient economic pain on the targeted employer 
so that the employer signs a union contract without regard 


to the wishes of its employees. Professor Northrup states 
at page 479: 


It is quite clear from these cases that the 
NLRB plays a big role in the unions’ salting 
Strategy. The blunt memoranda from 
Michael Lucas, the IBEW salting chief, also 
clearly demonstrates that salters are often 
not interested in permanent employment. 
Rather, they frequently are devoted to 
harassment, destruction of productivity, or 
even in the case of a very successful open- 
shop builder like BE&K, elimination of the 
company itself unless it changes its ways 
and agrees to unionization. 


Professor Northrup’s conclusions” are confirmed 
by the case reported in the "General Counsel’s Report" 
issued November 28, 1994, referred to in more detail 


= See also, i 


nonunion contractor off the job or to make that contractor reluctant to 
bid in the area again. 


Os ee Oe 2 


31 


above, where massive and repeated disruptions of the 
contractor’s operations resulted in the destruction of the 
contractor’s business. Even if the salted organizers in that 
case hadn’t engaged in "unprotected" activity, their 
"protected" activity would have resulted in serious injury 
to the employer’s business. Inflicting serious injury to an 
employer’s business is clearly contrary to that employer's 
interest. Yet, serious injury to an employer's business is 
one of the objectives of unions that engage in the salting 
strategy.” 


The conflict of interest between a union and a 
targeted employer is not limited to the construction 
industry. If salted organizers are considered employees of 
the targeted employer, they may be used in any industry. 


* See pages 18-19. 


2s In Sullivan Electric Company, supra, Michael > sete the 
person in charge of the IBEW’s salting program, testified reg ing 
is cea todpe his evidence included a booklet titled | 
As Protected Activity under the Natior abor Keilations Act , 
published by the IBEW. According to the ALJ, that booklet desribed 
the source of the term "salting" as follows, "We derived the term m 
the process of ‘salting’ mines in order to artificially enrich them by 
placing valuable minerals in some of the working places. The — - 
organizin g potential in nonunion bargaining units is likewise artificially 
enriched by ‘salting‘ valuable craftsmen in some of the working 
places." Sullivan Electric Company, supra, at slip op. at 3. The 
administrative law judge, Raymond P. Green, commented in — 
3 of his Decision, "I wonder if the Union is aware of the irony of 
salted mine analogy. Here, the employer is claiming that the Union's 
ssteanpt t0 salt the job site by inserting members on the jo, Bs 
similarly a fraudulent scheme to get people on the job who not 
really intend to become employees." Id. 


32 


And, their use need not be limited to situations in which 
the targeted employer’s employees are unrepresented. 
Salts could be used in a battle for representative status 
between several unions. 


The control the Union has over a salted union 
organizer while that organizer ostensibly is working for 
TCE, combined with the express union objective the 
organizer is contractually required to pursue, prevents that 
organizer from being subject to the control of TCE. This 
conflict makes it impossible for the paid union organizer 
to enter into a bona fide employment relationship with 
TCE.”** 


The fact that a paid union organizer performs some 
physical tasks for a nonunion employer it is directed to 
organize does not change this analysis since the organizer 
only performs those tasks because the salt is directed to do 
so by the union. Clearly, if an individual performed no 
work at all for an employer and simply stood around 
handing out union literature, an employer would be 
justified in terminating that individual. An employer has 
a right to expect a full day’s work for a full day’s pay. 


as Where there are two masters with conflicting interests, the 


paramount master need not be the first master to enter into an agency 
relationship with an employee. An employee of one employer could 
abandon the obligation to submit to the control of the first employer, 
thereby ceasing to be an agent of the first employer, and agree to take 
on the conflicting obligation of submitting to the control of the second 
employer. In that case, the second employer would become the 
primary employer and the first employer would become the secondary 
employer, and the person would only be considered an "employee" 
with respect to the second employer. 


33 


By performing organizing activities during work | 
by }neemeran being obligated to give primary consideration 
to the Union in everything he or she says and does, a 
salted organizer is incapable of fulfilling his or her duty to 
TCE. 


As the Fourth Circuit stated in its decision in 


H. B. Zachry v. NLRB, 886 F.2d 70, 73 (4th Cir. 1989): 


If Edwards simultaneously performs services 
for Zachry at his union employer's behest, 
he nonetheless remains in the union’s 
employ even though he receives some 
remuneration from Zachry. He cannot be 
considered an employee of Zachry since he 
is performing services for Zachry only 
because instructed to do so by his union 
employer. This is not to say that ps 
employee owes his employer some type o 
transcendent loyalty; rather, it is only to 
emphasize that the plain meaning of the 
term ‘employee* contemplates an employee 
working under the direction of a single 
employer. The term ‘plainly does not 
contemplate someone working for two 
different employers at the same time and for 


the same working hours. 


Id. at 73. 


: ALJ in 
is same conflict which troubled the 
yd dee 231 N.LR.B. 976 (1977). In 


that case, the ALJ stated: 


34 


I personally have great difficulty in 
understanding how an individual can be an 
employee of two different employers at the 
same time for the same working hours. 
There is a certain  master-servant 
relationship encompassed in any employer- 
employee relationship which is absent under 
such circumstances. However, I am bound 


by the Board’s Decision and shall find 
accordingly. 


Id. at 978, n.6. Judge Harmatz, in the first Sunland case, 
expressed similar concerns. See, Sunland, supra, at 1246. 


The distinguishing factor is that the paid Union 
organizer acting pursuant to a salting resolution is not free 
to act as he or she wishes while working for TCE, and, 
therefore, is not subject to TCE’s control. The salted 
organizer is required by the organizer’s paramount 
contractual commitments to the Union imposed by the 
salting resolution to give precedence to the interests of the 
Union to the extent those interests conflict with those of 
TCE. The only way the salted organizer can be free to 
serve TCE’s interest would be to resign from the Union, 
i.e., abandon its relationship with the Union. It is this 
paramount employment relationship with the Union which 
the law of agency recognizes as, by definition, inconsistent 
with a bona fide employment relationship with TCE. 


ee 


The law of agency only disqualifies a person from 
being an agent if that person is controlled by a conflicting 
agency relationship. A zealous union supporter who has 
not entered into a contractual relationship with a union 
requiring the union supporter to work in furtherance of the 
union’s effort to unionize the targeted nonunion 
employer’s employees would be an employee n = 
nonunion employer within the meaning of § 2(3) o : 
NLRA, because the union supporter has not entered into 
a conflicting agency relationship. The avid union 
supporter is, in a legal sense, subject to the nonunion 
employer’s control. 


In the instant case, the salted organizers were not 
merely zealous Union supporters who, of their own free 
will, supported the Union. Rather, they were 
contractually committed to the exclusive service to the 
Union. 


i f the applicant or employee is 
immaterial ad. ~~ under notes of agency is whether 
the prospective employee is free to enter into an agency 
relationship with the employer, as that relationship is 
defined by the law of agency. The determining og 
whether the organizer simultaneously is controlled by 
another master with conflicting interests. If the organizer 
is free from that control, then the organizer is not 


36 


disqualified from being an employee of the nonunion 
employer. 


Therefore, it is immaterial whether the targeted 
employer knows the salted organizer is an agent of the 
union’ or if the employer has a motive that would be 
considered discriminatory against a salted organizer. The 
issue herein is like the issue in unfair labor practice cases 
where the object of the alleged unfair labor practice was 
a supervisor, managerial employee, independent contractor 
or a child of the business’s owner. In those cases, 
discriminatory motive is immaterial.“ The sole issue is 


27 


As illustrated by the examples of salting described by 
Professor Northrup in his article on salting, Journal of Labor 
Research, supra, salted organizers sometimes conceal their relationship 
with a union. Requiring an employer to know of the salted 
organizer's agency relationship before a person would be disqualified 
from becoming an agent due to a conflicting agency would not only 
ignore the fact that the requirements of the law of agency are not 
dependent on the knowledge of the master, but would encourage 
concealment of the conflicting relationship by deception and stealth. 
Moreover, it does little good for the NLRB to say that salts’ right to 
vote can be challenged, if the employer doesn’t know of the salts’ 
relationship to the union. See, also, Oak Apparel, supra, at 706 
wherein the ALJ found that the paid union organizer admitted lying in 
previous NLRB cases. 

* The argument that TCE’s motive is material relies on dicta, 
based on a questionable foundation, in cases dealing with 
discrimination between different types of nonemployees. And, there is 
no allegation that TCE’s employees were unable to obtain information 
regarding unionization. On the contrary, they were well informed on 
the subject and had decided they weren’t interested. The issue herein 
is whether the people in question are entitled to the status of 
(continued...) 


37 


whether the alleged discriminatees had the protected status 
of “employee."” 


Even if the zealous union supporter is a member of 
the union, that doesn’t create a conflicting agency relation- 


semplsjca’ with the full protection of and all the rights provided by 
the NLRA. Therefore, it is immaterial whether TCE was rd 
discriminatorily motivated. See, e.g., NLRB v. Big Three Welding 
i c 359 F.2d 77, 80, (Sth Cir. 1966) a A 
isor is not a violation o 
employee who was found to be a supervisor ; a 
3), regardless of the employer's motivation), 
he a by sai , 262 N.L.R.B. 402, 404 (1982), rev. 
den sub nom., Automobile Salesmen’s Union v. NLRB, 711 F.2d 
383 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (no violation for discharging supervisor tong 
union activity or affiliation); Campbell-Harris Electric, Inc., 26- 
N.L-R.B. 1143, 1143-1144 (1983), enfd. 719 F. 2d 292 (8th Cir. 
1983) (discharge the son of the owner because of union affiliation). 


” i argued that TCE didn’t know that the salted organizers 
were =. nl employment at the behest of the Union. oe 
is contrary to the record and is not pertinent to the issue ore 
a, It became apparent after the second interview that there was 
indeed an organized Union-sponsored activity occurring. oo 
the NLRB found that Buelow reported to the interviewers that 

invited applicants were from the Union. —— 
part of the job-demanding , threatening group of people from © ai 
Union, made no secret of his affiliation with the Union. e 
may not have known the precise terms of the relationship between 
Union and the salted organizers, it was apparent that they were | 
working together and were present at the behest of the Union. 
context, it is a remarkable statement of TCE’s lack of anti-union 


38 


ship, because the general obligation of a union member 
does not include a specific contractual obligation to act as 
a salt against a targeted nonunion employer. The general 
rules of unions do not normally contain a specific affirma- 
tive obligation to work for the union, under the control of 
the business manager, in furtherance of the union’s 
organizing drive against a targeted nonunion employer 
while on that targeted nonunion employer’s payroll, nor do 
they contain any commitment on the part of the union to 
compensate the member for the services provided to the 
union by the member. Further, general union rules 
normally do not contain an express requirement that the 
member perform organizing duties promptly and diligent- 
ly, nor do they contain the express right of the business 
manager to force the member to leave the nonunion 
employer as soon as the member’s organizing service to 
the union is complete.*” See, J.A. 251-253. 


a. 9 oo. " " 
Not Entitled to Deference. 


The NLRB’s definition of “employee” is not 
entitled to deference because it rests on erroneous legal 


* — Likewise, just because a striker who engages in strike miscon- 
duct is a union member doesn’t make the member the agent of the 
union with respect to that misconduct. Union membership doesn’t 
mean the striker was under the union’s control when the misconduct 
occurred. The union will only be responsible for the misconduct if it 
can also specifically be shown that the member was acting as an agent 
of the union when the member engaged in the misconduct. NLRB vy. 
Sea-Land Service, Inc., 356 F. 2d 955, 966 (Ist Cir. 1966), cert. 
denied 385 U.S. 900 (1966). 


39 


foundations. Cf. Lechmere, supra; Chemical Workers v. 

: 404 U.S. 157, 166-168, 92 S.Ct. 383, 
390-392 (1971). Congress has repeatedly made it clear 
that it intended the term "employee" to be interpreted in 
accordance with the law of agency unless it states 
otherwise. See, Darden, supra, and the cases cited 
therein. 


The NLRB, by failing to construe “employee” 
consistent with the law of agency, disregarded the lessons 
of Darden, supra, and of Lechmere, supra.”’ Its purpose 
in doing so apparently was to “promot{e] the right to 
organize." See, Pet. App. 339-349, Pet. 8, Brief at p. 8. 
See, § 7, 29 U.S.C. § 157. However, the more neutral 
purpose of the NLRA is to "protect" the right to 


organize.” 


= NLRB argues that the NLRA doesn’t indicate Congress 
nianmnin salted organizers from the NLRA. In fact, by 
excluding labor organizations, except with regard to their conventional 
employees, and their agents or officers from the definition of 
"employer" in § 2(2), and by excluding individuals employed by a 
person who is not an employer from the definition of employee in 
§ 2(3), Congress did show it did not intend agents of the union such as 
salted organizers to have the status of "employee under the NLRA. 


= The NLRB ignores the fact § 7 of the NLRA also protects the 
rights of employees to refrain from engaging in organizing or other 
protected concerted activity. 


40 


NLRB Incorrectly Assumes That the 
Salted Organizers Are "Employees." 


The NLRB, in its extensive discussion of the 
definition of an "employee" in its Decision herein (Pet. 
App. 22a-40a), ignores the fact that all the references it 
cites assume that the person in question is an employee 
within the meaning of the law of agency. In other words, 
the NLRB’s analysis assumes the issue, i.e., it assumes 
the alleged discriminatees are employees, and then looks 
at whether they have engaged in conduct which causes 
them to lose the protections of the NLRA. 


The NLRB’s position is that no one has so great a 
conflict that they are disqualified from taking on the status 
of agent of both masters. According to the NLRB, the 
only issue is whether the dual agent has engaged in 
conduct so egregious or has interests so patently at conflict 
that, even giving the agent the benefit of the protection of 
§7 of the NLRA, the dual agent loses employee status 
with respect to one of the masters. The NLRB’s analysis 
eliminates the distinction between employees and 
nonemployees and effectively ignores the provisions of 
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 226 (1958) which 
describe situations in which the simultaneous conflicting 
interests of two masters prevents a person from ever 
becoming an agent of the second master. Therefore, the 
NLRB has misinterpreted the statute. 


4/ 


41 
c. | NLRB Ignores Conflict of Interest. 


The NLRB also seeks to avert the unavoidable 
consequences of the law of agency by attempting to deny, 
by definition, that there is a conflict between the interests 
of the employer and the union seeking to organize the 
employer. Pet. App. 23a, fn.11; 33a, fn.28. That denial 
is ineffective because it assumes that the salted organizers 
are entitled to the protections of the NLRA and, because 
employers and unions do have conflicting legitimate 
interests in an organizing situation. As described above, 
an employer, and a union that is willing to inflict serious 
economic pain on that employer, do have conflicting 
interests. 


The inappropriateness of the NLRB’s failure to 
recognize the conflicting interests of the salted organizer 
becomes even more apparent when one compares "salting" 
to the actions of a manufacturer competing for a billion 
dollar contract who assigns one of its employees, who has 
been hired to obtain that contract as part of his job, to 
secure employment with the employer’s chief competitor. 
The manufacturer then orders its employee to do 
everything he or she can to aid the manufacturer’s quest 
for the billion dollar contract while working for the 
manufacturer’s competitor. 


Or, compare a law firm representing the defendant 
in a crucial case that assigns one of its employees who is 
working on the case, as part of his or her job, to obtain 
employment at the law firm representing the plaintiff in 
the lawsuu, and to do everything possible to help the 


42 


defendant win the case while working at the plaintiff's law 
firm. 


In both of the foregoing scenarios there are 
conflicting duties which are to be _ performed 
simultaneously. However, it is impossible for the 
employee to do justice to both employers. In fact, the 
situations described in those examples might be 
characterized as spying or espionage. Yet, they are 
essentially the same as “salting."* 


Indeed, compare the obverse of salting, i.e., an 
employer planting its employee in a union position to 
collect information and otherwise further the interests of 
the employer. That practice has been considered spying 
and industrial espionage. It caused a public outcry, and its 
abolition was considered crucial by Congress. See, From 


*% The distinction between relationships with and without 
inherent conflicts of interest is illustrated by the IBEW, Local 292’s 
example, on pages 32 and 33 of its brief, of the city detective working 
for a restaurant while investigating the customers of the restaurant. 
As Professor Seavey notes, such a relationship doesn’t cause an 
inherent conflict of interest. Assume, however, that Professor 
Seavey’s example was changed so that the city detective was investi- 
gating the restaurant. In the latter case, there would be an inherent 
conflict of interest because the detective would be simultaneously 
pursuing the conflicting interests of the city, who was trying to convict 
the restaurant of a crime, and the owner of the restaurant presumably 
wanting to operate lawfully and not wanting to be convicted of a 
crime. Thus, Professor Seavey’s analysis is consistent with TCE’s 
position herein. 


43 


Clark Brown, at page 101. See also, Fruehauf Trailer 
Company, 1 N.L.R.B. 68, 73 (1935), in which the NLRB 


held that an employer violated the NLRA by having its 
employee apply for and obtain employment with the union 
that represented its employees. 


The NLRB itself recognizes in these salting cases 
that, at least in some situations, there is an irreconcilable 
conflict of interest that prevents a paid union organizer 
from having a bona fide employment relationship with a 
targeted employer. In Sunland Construction Co., Inc., 
supra, at 1230-1231, a companion case to the instant case 
at the oral argument before the NLRB, the NLRB held 
that, in a strike situation, the interests of the salted 
organizer are sufficiently inconsistent with employment 
with the struck nonunion employer to be considered 
"inherently and unmistakably inconsistent with 
employment [for the nonunion employer] behind a picket 
line." Yet, the interests of that nonunion employer were 
only marginally different before the strike. 


The same economic battle that is fought on the 
picket line is also carried on in the workplace. See, the 
discussion in The Troublemaker’s Handbook: How To 
Fight Back Where You Work - And Win!, supra. 


TCE’s interest in preserving its business applies to 
on-the-job strategies with no less force than it applies to 
strikes. TCE’s right to seek to prevail in its struggle for 
the support and the votes of its employees is no less 
significant to TCE than an employer’s struggle to prevail 
in a strike situation. Indeed, as occurred in the case 
reported in the NLRB "General Counsel’s Report" of 


44 


November 28, 1994, a union’s organizational campaigns 
could result in strike-like action. The same inherent and 
unmistakably inconsistent interests exist in both situations. 
It is inappropriate for the NLRB to attempt to distinguish 
between those two situations, and it has inadequateiy 
explained why it has done so. 


In describing the agent-of-a-striking-union exception 
in Sunland, the NLRB used a _breach-of-obligation 
analysis“ to analyze a conflicting agency relationship of 


the type referred to in the Restatement (Second) of Agency 
§ 226 (1958).*5 


“Incorporated in that analysis was the NLRB’s erroneous 
assumption that everyone is entitled to the protections of § 7. Those 
protections significantly increase the threshold which the conflict of 
interest must exceed before it disqualifies the salted organizer. 


*° — The conflict of interest of a salted union organizer seeking 
employment with the targeted nonunion employer is inherent and 
pervasive. It goes to the very core of the relationship and prevents the 
salted organizer from entering into a bona fide employment 
relationship with the targeted employer. This conflict of interest is 
distinguished from a mere breach of an obligation to an employer. 


A breach of an obligation to an employer only occurs after 
the employment relationship exists. And, it doesn’t prevent the 


In the case of the salted organizers, their pervasive and 
inherent conflict of interest prevents them from ever becoming an 
agent of the targeted nonunion employer. The breach-of-obligation 
analysis is inapposite because the salted organizer never effectively 
took on any obligation to the targeted nonunion employer. 


45 


In summary, the NLRA does not protect those 
persons who are not capable of being "employees" as 
defined by the law of agency. A person may not 
simultaneously be the agent of two employers who have 
conflicting interests. Because of the control exercised by 
unions over salted organizers through salting resolutions 
and money, the salted organizers are incapable of entering 
into a bona fide employment relationship with a targeted 
nonunion employer. Therefore, the Eighth Circuit 
correctly held that an employer has no obligation under the 
NLRA to treat union agents as its employees or to afford 
union agents the protections of the NLRA. 


d. The Eichth Circuit’s Holding Does Not 
Lead To Absurd Results. 


It is not absurd to hold that a person may not have 
two masters with conflicting interests. The Eighth 
Circuit’s decision is limited to those who enter into a 
relationship with the Union which prevents them from 
agreeing to serve the interests of a particular employer; it 
doesn’t prevent zealous union supporters who have not 
submitted themselves to contractual control by the Union 
from becoming "employees" of nonunion employers. It 
does, however, preserve the integrity of the employment 
relationship between employers and their employees. 


The Eighth Circuit’s holding only applies in the 
narrow situation in which a person has become the agent 
of the Union for a purpose that conflicts with the interests 
of the particular employer with whom that person is 
seeking to become an “employee.” Those people remain 
employees of the Union, and they are not disqualified 


46 


from being an employee of any employer other than the 
targeted employer.* 


People who contractually bind themselves to the 
task of unionizing the employees of a nonunion employer 
have given up their freedom of choice with respect to the 
targeted employer. To give these paid agents of the union 
the status of employee and, through concealment, the 
ability to vote, is repugnant to the democratic processes 
that are central to the NLRA. The salts have voluntarily 
withdrawn themselves from the group Congress intended 
to protect, just as someone does who becomes a 
supervisor, managerial employee or independent 
contractor. That is a rational result consistent with the 
statute which preserves the democratic process on which 
the NLRA is based. 


= The Eighth Circuit’s Holding D Not 
Thwart Congressional Intent. 
Congress adopted the NLRA to protect the freedom 


of employees to choose whether or not they wish to be 
represented by a labor organization or whether or not they 


** The circular definitions of “employee” in other statutes will 
not necessarily result in salted organizers not being considered 
employees under those statutes. For example, the definition of 
“employer” under the Fair Labor Standards Act, which is used in the 
Family and Medical Leave Act, includes "suffer or permitting to 
work," which expands the definition of “employee”. See, e.g., 
Darden, supra. Moreover, the salted organizer would be protected by 
those other statutes in the organizer’s employment relationship with the 
union, and the union would be responsible for its agent’s conduct 
under the law of torts. 


47 


wish to engage in protected concerted activity. Salted 
organizers have removed themselves from that protected 
group by giving up their freedom to make those choices. 
The Eighth Circuit’s decision merely recognizes that the 
salted organizers are no longer in the group that Congress 
intended to protect. On the other hand, the NLRB’s 
analysis would eliminate the distinction between employees 
and nonemployees, expanding the scope of the NLRA far 
beyond the scope intended by Congress. 


The provisions of § 302(a) of the Labor 
Management Relations Act (29 U.S.C. § 186(a)) are 
consistent with the Eighth Circuit’s holding. Section 
302(a) merely recognizes that there may be situations in 
which a person could work both for a union and for an 
employer without being an agent serving masters with 
conflicting interests. That would normally be the situation 
where union stewards and other officials are expressly 
recognized in the collective bargaining agreement and are 
authorized to engage in their union activity. Section 302 
does not purport to state that every employee of a union is 
also an employee of the employer, any more than it 
converts a child of the owner of an employer, or a 
working supervisor of a unionized contractor, who is also 
a paid union official into an "employee." Section 302 
does not purport to change the definition of "employee." 
It only recognizes that there are situations in which a 
person could be an agent of both a union and an employer 
consistent with the law of agency. 


On the other hand, a finding that salted organizers 
were “employees” effectively eliminates the distinction 
between employees and nonemployees and would transfer 


48 


significant power to the union in its competition with 
employers and tip the balance in favor of the union. In 
view of Professor Northrup’s findings that salting 
Strategies seem to be used to inflict sufficient pain on the 
employer to force the employer to enter into a union 
agreement or go out of business, without regard to the 
wishes of the employees, it is the employees of the 
targeted employers who are the ultimate losers in the 
salting strategy, contrary to the purpose of Congress to 
protect the right of choice of those employees.” 


CONCLUSION 


This case is similar to the Darden case, supra, in 
which this Court was asked to determine whether a 
circular definition of "employee" in ERISA should be 
interpreted in accordance with the law of agency or be 
expansively interpreted by the Court in light of the 
mischief to be corrected. This Court recognized that, on 
several occasions, when this Court approved a definition 
of employee that went beyond the common law, Congress 
amended the statute to demonstrate that it wanted the 
common law of agency definition to apply. In Darden, the 
Court recognized that Congress intends a common law 
definition of "employee" to apply unless it clearly states 
otherwise, and that concern about the mischief to be 
corrected should be left primarily to Congress. 


7 The Boilermakers’ Union in footnote 1 (page 3) of their Brief 
note that their effort to force Sunland Construction Co., into signing 
collective bargaining i agreements without a representation election was 
successful. 


49 


The NLRA’s use of a circular definition of 
“employee” confirms that Congress intended the common 
law definition to apply. The common law provides that a 
person may not be the servant of two masters if service to 
the one requires abandonment of service to the other. 


In this case, the salting resolution prohibits salted 
organizers from having any purpose in working for the 
targeted employer other than acting in furtherance of the 
Union’s organizing campaign. The only way the salted 
organizer could agree to serve the employer’s interests is 
if the organizer resigned from the Union, i.e., abandoned 
the Union’s service. Since the salted organizers were 
committed to the Union, they were not free to become 
agents of the targeted nonunion employer. Therefore, they 
were not “employees” within the meaning of the NLRA 
with respect to that employer. 


As in the Darden case, supra, the government asks 
the Court to ignore the law of agency and expand the 
definition of “employee” to include everyone who isn’t 
expressly excluded by § 2(3) of the NLRA. In effect, the 
NLRB is asking this Court to ignore the lessons of the 
Darden case. TCE asks the Court to heed those lessons 
and to uphold the Eighth Circuit’s decision. 


Respectfully submitted. 
James K. Pease, Jr. 
[Counsel of Record] 


Douglas E. Witte 


April, 1995 


