~ > - aw Gee ee a 


FILED 


\ 
‘981 911 MAY 26 1994 


; OFFICE UF iHE CLERK 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1993 
. 


CINDA SANDIN, Unit Team Manager, 
Halawa Correctional Facility, 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


DEMONT R.D. CONNER, et al., 
Respondents. 


e 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
o 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
¢ 


Ropert A. Marks 
Attorney General 
State of Hawaii 


STEVEN S. MICHAELS* 
Girarp D. Lau 

Deputy Attorneys General 
State of Hawaii 

*Counsel of Record 


Department of the 
Attorney General 

State of Hawaii 

425 Queen Street 

Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 

(808) 586-1360 


Counsel for Petitioner 
Cinda Sandin, Unit Team 
Manager, Halawa 
Correctional Facility 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 } 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 A y 
) 


RN  — 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether a maximum security state prison inmate 
who is not subject to a loss of good time credit, nor to any 
necessary impact on parole, but who “may be” subjected 
to disciplinary segregation for violation of prison rules, 
has a “liberty interest” in avoiding disciplinary segrega- 
tion solely because state prison disciplinary rules require 
a disciplinary committee to find “substantial evidence” of 
a rule infraction before deciding whether and to what 
extent to order the inmate segregated? 


2. Whether, assuming, arguendo, state prison rules 
create a “liberty interest” in avoiding disciplinary seg- 
regation, an inmate who has confessed to facts which 
establish misconduct is entitled, by reason of the Due 
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, to call 
witnesses at his prison disciplinary hearing? 


3. Whether in light of the uncertainty created by 
this Court’s precedents regarding the creation of “liberty 
interests” in the prison setting, and in light of the uncer- 
tainty in the law bearing on prisoners’ rights to call 
witnesses at prison disciplinary hearings, the Ninth Cir- 
cuit erred in reversing the judgment of the District Court 
and in stripping Petitioner of her qualified immunity 
under Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), and its 
progeny, or, alternatively, whether the Court should grant 
the writ, vacate the judgment, and remand in light of 
Elder v. Holloway, 114 S. Ct. 1019 (U.S. Feb. 23, 1994)? 


ii 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


Petitioner Cu? Sandin was, at the times relevant to 
this proceeding, a Unit Team Manager at Halawa Correc- 
tional Facility, Department of Corrections, State of 
Hawaii. She appears in this Court in her official and 
individual capacities. Petitioner was one of sixteen state 
prison officials sued by Respondent Demont R.D. Conner 
in the amended complaint in the District Court in Civil 
No. 88-0169 (D. Haw. am. comp. filed Sept. 8, 1989). She is 
the only official left in the litigation with respect to 
Respondent Conner’s procedural due process claim in 
connection with an August 28, 1987, disciplinary hearing. 
See Pet. App. A8-A9. Ms. Sandin is the only Petitioner. 


Respondents include Demont R.D. Conner, who at all 
times was and is serving a thirty-years-to-life prison sen- 
tence in the Hawaii state penal system. Other Respon- 
dents are Theodore Sakai, Acting Administrator, 
Department of Corrections; Harold Falk, Director of Cor- 
rections, and various employees of Halawa Correctional 
Facility, i.e., Lawrence Shohet, Corrections Supervisor, 
William Oku, Administrator, Leonard Gonsalves, Chief of 
Security, Francis Sequeira, Unit Team Manager, and Adult 
Corrections Officers William Summers, Robert Johnson, 
Gordon Furtado, Abraham Lota, Edward Marshall, Wil- 
liam Paaga, and Brian Lee, all of whom were Defendants 
below. Also named as a Defendant below, and as a 
Respondent here, is Dr. Kim Thorburn, a medical officer 
with responsibility for Halawa facility. Also a Defendant 
below and a Respondent here is the State of Hawaii. The 


ili 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING - Continued 


State and each of the officer respondents have an interest 
in the outcome of (and support) Ms. Sandin’s petition, 
and are named as nominal respondents only pursuant to 
S. Ct. R. 12.4. All of the officer respondents are named, as 
below, in their official and their individual capacities. 


iv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
CSE PRUNE EED cnccccccccccecccescecesse i 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING .................. ii 
Ee I das oho wheusavercdceeeccuent iv 
BARES GE FART POUR U TIED 6 6 vec ci cccecsdccccccceses Vv 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI............ 1 
PP ES ca cciivetaeselegescadesienwnces 2 
EE oer eT ry nT me ne 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PRO- 
Ds dn nc dhe eeaen Ghnheuwadas 3 
SEARCMGECS COP Bite CARE... cece cccccnccccceces 3 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........... 10 


I. This Court Should Grant Review, Because The 
Ninth Circuit’s Reading Of The Requirements 
For A State-Created “Liberty Interest” In The 
Prison Setting Is In Direct Conflict With This 
Court’s Precedents And With Decisions of 
Other Courts Of Appeals; In Any Case, The 
Issue At A Minimum Is An Unresolved Issue 
Of Nationwide Importance And Should Be 
UE WU 56 55 Kpin Cen e WN bn bakin bdk6¢0's < 12 


Il. Review Should Be Granted To Correct The 
Ninth Circuit’s Intrusive Review Of State 
Prison Disciplinary Decisions To Refuse To 
Compel Witness Testimony.................. 16 


Ill. Review Should Be Granted, At A Minimum, 
To Correct The Ninth Circuit’s Drastic Disre- 
gard Of Harlow Immunity................... 18 


GUUS NEE SoNudlacest Culeeueadesteekeneccbeces 22 


a ee ee 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page(s) 
Cases: 
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635 (1987) ........ 19, 20 
Arizona v. Fulminante, 111 S. Ct. 1246 (1991)......... 16 
Brown v. Frey, 889 F.2d 159 (8th Cir. 1989) (en banc) .... 18 
Burgin v. Nix, 899 F.2d 733 (8th Cir. 1990)........... 13 
Burns v. Reed, 111 S. Ct. 1934 (1991) ................ 19 
Codd v. Velger, 429 U.S. 624 (1977) (per curiam) ..... 18 
Elder v. Holloway, 114 S. Ct. 1019 (U.S. Feb. 23, 

PU AvAda Wd Cen ven eecéeccboveedauwedues 12, 21, 22 
Forbes v. Trigg, 976 F.2d 308 (7th Cir. 1992).......... 17 
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982).......... 10, 19 
Hewitt v. Helms, 459 U.S. 460 (1983)................. 15 
Hunter v. Bryant, 112 S. Ct. 534 (1992) .............. 21 
Hutto v. Davis, 454 U.S. 370 (1982) (per curiam)..... 13 
Inaba v. Soong, 112 S. Ct. 40 (U.S. Oct. 7, 1991)...... 19 
Kentucky Department of Corrections v. Thompson, 

GO US. G56 (IGGD) . gcc ccccccccccess 3, 12, 13, 14, 20 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Insurance Co., 62 U.S.L.W. 

GREP GG Ty Gl SUED Scho ecestcenscccccccscess 16 
Malley v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 334 (1986)................. 19 
Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511 (1985) .............. 19 
Montanye v. Haymes, 427 U.S. 236 (1976)............. 15 
Ponte v. Real, 471 U.S. 401 (1985)................. 17, 18 
Ramer v. Kerby, 936 F.2d 1102 (10th Cir. 1991)....... 17 


vi Vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Page(s) | Page(s) 

Scott v. Kelly, 962 F.2d 145 (2nd Cir. 1992)........... 17 Haw. Admin. R. Subchapter 2, Title 17............... 3 
Siegert v. Gilley, 111 S. Ct. 1789 (1993)...........0.4. 19 | Haw. Admin. R. § 17-201-6(b)..........06.00-00 200s. 6 
Smith v. Elkins, No. 93-1585 (9th Cir. Mar. 2, 1994) ..... 9 | Haw Admin. R. § 17-201-18(b)....... 6... 00-0 e ee ee es 6 
United States v. Layton, 767 F.2d 549 (9th Cir. 1985) .... 16 | Rinne, ME, TE PII acs cc vccececbevesedesy ce 6 
United States v. Mendoza, 464 U.S. 154 (1984) ........ 20 / 
Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539 (1974)... 10, 15, 17, 18 
Woods v. Thieret, 903 F.2d 1080 (7th Cir. 1990) (per 

6 ci ode decews daneeeiee ceeded dies 13 
CONSTITUTIONS AND STATUTES: | 
Se ik idk cuca wean citassnedtceeeues 11 
Fourteenth Amendment.....................e0ee00: 3,9 
ee Ne Sais 6 dai 0 de.0 05 664 N conde eOS ve ednaes 4 
ee ID ce binds dheredincdedessnbitenner's 2 
ee iar 56s ody kde bind done ataenneews ids 3 
Be Ce ee Re 65a be rikdn cine CUR Veni ees bc duces 2 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 353-7(b)(1) (1985 & Supp. 1992)..... 5 
ge RG rere 6 | 
Paaee. Giaw. Soak. © TPS CITED oc ccc ccccccvccccccsess 6 
RULEs: 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(g) (as amended Mar. 2, 1987)..... 17 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(g)(2)(C) (as amended Dec. 1, 

RP Pee eee err ey eye ee eee 17 . 


Tae mer 


No. 


+ 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1993 


S 


CINDA SANDIN, Unit Team Manager, 
Halawa Correctional Facility, 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


DEMONT R.D. CONNER, et al., 
Respondents. 


* 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


° 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


° 


Petitioner Cinda Sandin, Unit Team Manager, Halawa 
Correctional Facility, in her official and individual capaci- 
ties, prays that a writ of certiorari issue to review the 
opinion and judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit entered in this proceeding 
on June 2, 1993, as amended by the opinion and judgment 
entered February 2, 1994. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The amended opinion of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit entered February 2, 1994, is 
reported at 15 F.3d 1463 (9th Cir. 1994), and is reprinted 
in Appendix (“App.”) “A,” infra. The order of the Court 
of Appeals, filed February 25, 1994, denying Petitioner's 
petition for rehearing, is unreported and is printed in 
App. “E.” The initial opinion of the Court of Appeals, 
entered June 2, 1993, is reported at 994 F.2d 1408 (9th Cir. 
1993). The order and judgment of the District Court from 
which appeal was taken by Respondent Conner are unre- 
ported and are printed at Apps. “C,” and “D,” infra. 


¢ 


JURISDICTION 


The original opinion of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit was entered June 2, 1993, 
see Pet. App. Al, and a timely petition for rehearing and 
suggestion of the appropriateness of rehearing en banc 
was filed June 16, 1993. On February 2, 1994, the Ninth 
Circuit issued an amended opinion, but did not dispose 
of the petition for rehearing. Id. On February 25, 1994, the 
Court of Appeals denied the petition for rehearing and 
rejected the suggestion for en banc review. See App. “E,” 
The time in which this Pet.tion may be filed therefore 
extends to and includes May 26, 1994, and this Petition is 
timely. Jurisdiction is invoked here under 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1254(1). 


Jurisdiction in the United States District Court for the 
District of Hawaii was alleged to have been conferred by 28 
U.S.C. § 1343(3). Jurisdiction to review the final judgment 


7 Sin bn 


entered in the District Court in favor of all Defendants lay in 
the United States Court of Appeals pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1291. 


* 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution pro- 
vides in relevant part that: 


[No State shall] deprive any person of life, lib- 
erty, or property, without due process of law. 


Subchapter 2, Title 17, of the Hawaii Administrative 
Rules, and which governed the adjustment process at 
Halawa Correctional Facility at all times relevant to this 
litigation, has been reprinted in its entirety in App. “F,” 
infra, Pet. App. A41 et seq. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In Kentucky Department of Corrections v. Thompson, 490 
U.S. 454 (1989), this Court held that a prison’s rules that 
permitted, but did not mandate, denial of visitation privi- 
leges under certain circumstances did not create a “lib- 
erty interest” in receiving visitors. Id. at 464. In response 
to the request of thirty-one States’ Attorneys General, the 
Court found it was unnecessary to create a “bright line” 
rule “that prison regulations, regardless of the mandatory 
character of their language or the extent to which they 
limit official discretion, ‘do not create an entitlement 


protected by the Due Process Clause when they do not 
affect the duration or release from confinement, or the 
very nature of confinement.’ ” Id. at 461 n.3. “Inasmuch as 
a ‘bright line’ of this kind [was] not necessary for a ruling 
in favor of petitioners,” the Court “refrain[ed] from con- 
sidering it at this time,” “express[ing] no view on the 
proposal and leav[ing] its resolution for another day.” Id. 
at 462 n.3. 


This case concerns not the due process implications 
of visitation with those outside the prison, who are pre- 
sumed to be innocent, but the ability of prison officials to 
segregate inmates within the prison for violation of disci- 
plinary rules. In this context, where the need to be free of 
intrusive federal review is at its height, the Ninth Circuit 
has held that Hawaii prison rules create a “liberty inter- 
est” in avoiding “disciplinary segregation” without more. 
Hawaii does not grant “good time” credits, and even the 
most serious disciplinary finding has no necessary impact 
upon parole. The main issue in this case is whether 
Hawaii's prison rules, which authorize, but do not 
require, the imposition of disciplinary segregation, create 
a federally protected “liberty interest” solely because 
those rules require, as a matter of state law, “substantial 
evidence” of misconduct before an official exercises the 
discretion to order, or not order, an inmate to a period of 
segregation. A second issue is whether an inmate who 
has confessed to facts that constitute misconduct is none- 
theless entitled, as a matter of federal Due Process 
requirements, to call witnesses to his prison disciplinary 
hearing. A third issue is whether the prison official who 
failed to ensure the availability of witnesses for the 


accused inmate should have been stripped by the Ninth 
Circuit of her qualified immunity from federal suit. 


1. Inmate Demont R.D. Conner is a Hawaii state 
prisoner serving a thirty-years-to-life sentence for 
attempted murder, robbery, kidnapping, burglary, and 
rape. Pet. App. A2, Clerk’s Record 83 (Exh. “A”). Conner, 
at the times relevant to this Petition, was housed at 
Halawa Correctional Facility, the only maximum security 
correctional facility in the Hawaii penal system. By law, 
Halawa is charged with providing “extensive control and 
correctional programs for categories of persons who can- 
not be held or treated in other correctional facilities,” 
including “[i]Jndividuals committed because of serious 
predatory or violent crimes against the person”; “intract- 
able recidivists”; “[pJersons characterized by varying 
degrees of personality disorders”; “[rJecidivists identified 
with organized crime”; and “[vJiolent and dangerously 
deviant persons.” Haw. Rev. Stat. § 353-7(b)(1) (1985 & 
Supp. 1992). At the times relevant here, Halawa facility 
inmates were governed by a disciplinary system that 
consisted of Hawaii’s general criminal laws and an 
“adjustment process” administered by the prison itself. 
See App. “F,” in‘ra. 


2. Under the “adjustment process,” prison adminis- 
trators have defined a variety of “prohibited acts,” cate- 
gorizing them as to their severity. “Misconduct” is 
categorized as “greatest misconduct,” “high misconduct,” 
“moderate misconduct,” “low moderate misconduct,” 
and “minor misconduct.” Pet. App. A43, A45, A47, A49, 
A51. The maximum punishment for the most serious 
“misconduct” is “[d]isciplinary segregation up to sixty 
days,” or “[a]ny other sanction other than disciplinary 


segregation.” Haw. Admin. R. § 17-201-6(b), Pet. App. 
A45. The “other sanctions” to which the administrative 
rule refers includes loss of privileges, such as access to 
non-legal mail or the commissary, but do not include any 
sanction that lengthen’s inmate’s term of incarceration. 
Hawaii does not employ any system of “good time” 
credits, and the Hawaii State Paroling Authority is free to 
ignore a record of misconduct in granting parole. See 
Haw. Rev. Stat. §§ 353-68, 353-69 (1985). Parole may be 
granted “at any time after the prisoner has served the 
minimum term of imprisonment fixed according to law,” 
id. § 353-68, and so long as “it appears to the Hawaii 
paroling authority that there is a reasonable probability 
that the prisoner concerned will live and remain at liberty 
without violating the law and that the prisoner’s release 
is not incompatible with the welfare and safety of soci- 
ety,” id. at 353-69. In the event an inmate is accused of a 
“serious rule violation,” see Pet. App. A52, the prison 
convenes an “adjustment committee,” which, in relevant 
respect, is required to make “[a] finding of guilt,” only 
“where: (1) The inmate or ward admits the violation or 
pleads guilty” or “(2) the charge is supported by substan- 
tial evidence.” Haw. Admin. R. § 17-201-18(b), Pet. App. 
A57-A58. After a finding of guilt, “[t]he adjustment com- 
mittee may render sanctions commensurate with the 
gravity of the rule and the severity of the violation,” id. 
§ 17-201-19, Pet. App. A58. The committee need not 
impose any sanctions upon the prisoner. 


3. On August 13, 1987, Respondent Conner was 
charged with a variety of misconducts based upon the 
following report of Aduit Corrections Officer Gordon 
Furtado: 


On Thu. Aug. 13, 1987 at approx. 0900 hrs. I 
ACO G. FURTADO while on duty in Module A 
along with ACO R. AHUNA escorted INMATE 
D. CONNER from his cell (quad II) to the mod- 
ule program area. At this time I informed 
Inmate CONNER to move against the wall to be 
strip-searched before leaving the module. 
Inmate CONNER then stripped, faced the wall 
and squatted. I then asked Inmate CONNER to 
put both hands on the wall and lift up both feet 
one at a time to which he did with no incident. 


I then asked him to step back, bend over 
and with both hands spread his buttocks so that 
I could check for contraband in the rectal area to 
which he said “Fuck!” in an angry tone of voice. 
This part of the search was thus completed, but 
as Inmate CONNER turned around and faced 
this writer he stared at me and stated “Why are 
you harassing me?” I informed him that I’m just 
following a routine procedure. He then stated in 
a very sarcastic voice “What you got something 
personal against me! Why you harassing me?” | 
then told him all you have to do is just listen 
and follow what I tell you to do but Inmate 
CONNER just kept on making sarcastic remarks 
about being harassed and the way that this 
writer was doing his job. 


At this time because of the tense atmo- 
sphere and also the very provoking attitude 
towards this writer, Sgt. SUMMERS who wit- 
nessed this incident canceled Inmate CONNER’s 
privilege of religious counselling. Inmate CON- 
NER was then escorted back to his cell by this 
writer and ACO D. COELHO. 


It should be noted that as Inmate CONNER 
went through the strip search procedures he 


moved very slow and questioned every move as 
if trying to hinder the search, hoping that this 
writer might overlook a certain area. Inmate 
CONNER appeared to be very unruly in his 
attitude toward this writer. 


Clerk’s Record 83; Exh. “K”; Pet. App. A61-A62. Conner 
was given notice of the charges, and the opportunity to 
contest them before an adjustment committee. The Com- 
mittee concluded that Conner had “use[d] physical inter- 
ference or obstacle resulting in the obstruction, 
hindrance, or impairment of the performance of a correc- 
tional function by a public servant” (a high misconduct); 
“us[ed] abusive or obscene language to a staff member”; 
and engaged in “[h]arassment of employees” (the latter 
both low-moderate misconducts). Pet. App. A66. The 
Committee, in its August 31, 1987, disposition of the 
charges, gave the following as its contemporary state- 
ment for its decision: 


The Committee based their decision upon 
the inmate’s statements that during the strip 
search procedure he turned around after squat- 
ting and looked at the ACO. He was then 
directed to “spread his cheeks” by ACO Furtado 
as part of the new strip search procedure. He 
felt angry, humiliated and apprehensive. He 
then “eyed up” ACO Furtado and was hesitant 
to comply. He further indicated that he dislikes 
ACO Furtado and feels he should not work on 
the module. The inmate admitted saying the 
word “fuck” during the procedure. The Com- 
mittee also reviewed the submitted reports. Wit- 
nesses were unavailable due to move to the 
medium facility and being short staffed on the 
modules. 


Clerk’s Record 83; Exh. “K”; Pet. App. A66. Although 
Conner’s “high misconduct” was ultimately expunged as 
a result of an internal prison review, Conner filed a 
federal lawsuit in the United States District Court for the 
District of Hawaii against Petitioner, who served as 
Chairman of the adjustment committee, and other offi- 
cials, alleging a variety of defects in the adjustment com- 
mittee process, including the allegedly improper denial of 
witnesses. After over three years of litigation, the District 
Court granted summary judgment to Defendants. See 
App. “C.” 


4. The Ninth Circuit, in a published opinion by 
Judge Reinhardt, joined by Judges Browning and Norris, 
reversed and remanded in part. Pet. App. “A.” In rele- 
vant provision,' the panel concluded that “Conner had a 
liberty interest, protected by the fourteenth amendment, 


1 In a portion of the decision not challenged by this Peti- 
tion, the Ninth Circuit struck down, on procedural grounds, the 
application of a prison rule barring communication in a lan- 
guage other than English to what inmates asserted was Islamic 
prayer. See Pet. App. A9-A12. Because the Ninth Circuit did not 
forbid the prison to proscribe acts susceptible of communicative 
effects in languages other than English, see id. at All n.9, left 
open the issue of qualified immu~ *y, id. at Al2, and affirmed 
the grant of qualified immunity ix related cases, see Smith v. 
Elkins, No. 93-1585 (9th Cir. Mar. 2, 1994), and State officials 
have repealed the rule at issue on the “Islamic prayer” claim, 
certiorari is not sought as to the specific issues implicated by the 
Court’s ruling pertaining to Conner’s alleged claim “that his 
first and fourteenth amendment rights were violated when 
prison officials punished him for praying aloud in Arabic.” See 
Pet. App. A9. This Petition, rather, concerns the Court's reversal 
of “summary judgment as to Conner’s claim regarding disci- 
plinary segregation.” Id.; see also id. at A18-19. 


10 


in not being arbitrarily placed in disciplinary segrega- 
tion.” Id. at A3. To reach this conclusion, the panel relied 
entirely upon the “substantial evidence” provision of the 
prison rules. The Court found the rule that mandates 
“freedom from disciplinary segregation” if “the inmate 
does not admit guilt,” and “the committee does not find 
substantial evidence,” ts “;rovide explicit standards that 
fetter official discretion.” id. at A4. Then, “[h]laving found 
that Conner possessed a liberty interest in not being 
confined to disciplinary segregation,” the panel found, 
despite Conner’s own incriminating statements, that Peti- 
tioner had not sufficiently demonstrated “the adequacy 
of its justification for denying an inmate the right to 
present witnesses.” Id. at A8. The Court reversed the 
summary judgment, even as to claims for monetary relief 
against Petitioner, stating that “[t]he right to call wit- 
nesses at a disciplinary hearing has been clearly estab- 
lished since Wolff v. McDonnell|, 418 U.S. 539 (1974),] was 
decided in 1974.” Id. at A9. Although the Court, on a 
timely petition for rehearing, reinstated summary judg- 
ment for Defendants on other claims, it ultimately let the 
foregoing rulings stand. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


The Ninth Circuit panel’s decision in this case over- 
turning summary judgment as it pertains to Conner’s 
challenge to the 1987 misconduct hearing threatens an 
undue —- and unprecedented — expansion of federal judi- 
cial review of prison management decisions, and an 
equally disturbing constriction of the doctrine of quali- 
fied immunity under Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 


11 


(1982). In the circumstances of this case, the exacting 
federal review directed by the Ninth Circuit does not - 
and cannot — serve to restore “good time” credits, or 
compel or even necessarily affect, parole. Such review 
does not rid Hawaii's prisons of unsafe environmental 
conditions, or deter violence against inmates, either from 
errant correctional officers, or from other inmates; nor 
does it serve to protect the important but limited First 
Amendment rights inmates enjoy despite their incarcer- 
ated status. Nor does it even protect state inmates from 
irrational and arbitrary assignments to disciplinary seg- 
regation. After all, even without procedural Due Process 
protections, inmates would be entitled under the Equal 
Protection Clause to treatment that meets minimum ratio- 
nality. 

Instead, without reason or precedent to back it, the 
Ninth Circuit has simply made every disciplinary pro- 
ceeding a basis for intrusive federal review, and for 
extensive litigation of personal-capacity damage claims, 
regardless of the limited effect of the discipline measures 
at issue, and without heed to the most pertinent fact: a 
confession of inmate misconduct. 


This Court should grant review, if for no other reason 
than to protect inmates from the adverse consequences of 
the decision below. For under that decision, prison 
administrators have far diminished incentive to formu- 
late disciplinary systems containing standards of proof, 
for no matter how minimal the time in segregation, and 
no matter how great the discretion to impose no penalty 
at all, the mere announcement of a standard of proof 
thereby hog-ties prison administrators with the full- 
blown requirements imposed upon prison disciplinary 


12 


decisions that do have a necessary impact on the length 
or very nature of confinement. For these reasons, and 
because the decision below conflicts with the decisions of 
this Court and of the other courts of appeals, the Court 
should grant the petition for certiorari. Because the Ninth 
Circuit did not have the benefit of this Court’s decision in 
Elder v. Holloway, 114 S. Ct. 1019 (U.S. Feb. 23, 1994), the 
Court may wish to grant the petition, vacate the judg- 
ment, and remand for further consideration in light of the 
Elder decision. 


I. This Court Should Grant Review, Because The 
Ninth Circuit’s Reading Of The Requirements For A 
State-Created “Liberty Interest” In The Prison Set- 
ting Is In Direct Conflict With This Court’s Prece- 
dents And With Decisions Of Other Courts Of 
Appeals; In Any Case, The Issue At A Minimum Is 
An Unresolved Issue Of Nationwide Importance 
And Should Be Settled Now. 


In Kentucky Department of Corrections v. Thompson, 490 
U.S. 454 (1989), the Court determined that prison regula- 
tions that authorized administrators to deny visitation 
privileges in particular circumstances failed to establish a 
“liberty interest” because “[t]hey stop short of requiring 
that a particular result is to be reached upon a finding 
that the substantive predicates are met.” Id. at 464. Thus, 
the Court reasoned, although “[v]Jisitors may be excluded 
if they fall within one of the described categories,” “they 
need not be.” Id. Here, as in Thompson, inmates found by 
“substantial evidence” to have committed disciplinary 
infractions “may be” assigned to segregation for a period 
of time, but they “need not be.” This, without more ought 


13 


to have compelled the Ninth Circuit to affirm with 
respect to the disciplinary segregation issues; instead, the 
Ninth Circuit followed the reasoning of the dissent in 
Thompson, see 490 U.S. at 475 (Marshall, J., joined by 
Brennan, and Stevens, JJ., dissenting). 


As this Court has stated in a related context, “unless 
we wish anarchy to prevail within the federal judicial 
system, a precedent of this Court must be followed by the 
lower federal courts no matter how misguided the judges 
of those courts may think it to be.” Hutto v. Davis, 454 
U.S. 370, 375 (1982) (per curiam). Indeed, other courts of 
appeals to have addressed issues of this nature have 
dutifully followed Thompson's reasoning. 


The decision below, for example, directly conflicts 
with the Eighth Circuit’s analysis in Burgin v. Nix, 899 
F.2d 733 (8th Cir. 1990). There, the regulations at issue 
effectively stated that the prison officials must find an 
inmate to be incorrigible before he may be given a sack 
lunch instead of the usual tray lunch. Applying 
Thompson, the Court held that the regulations did not 
create a liberty interest in being served tray lunches 
because the regulations did not mandate that prison offi- 
cials serve sacked lunches to inmates found to be incor- 
rigible. 899 F.2d at 735. Likewise, the Ninth Circuit's 
ruling conflicts with the Seventh Circuit’s analysis in 
Woods v. Thieret, 903 F.2d 1080 (7th Cir. 1990) (per curiam). 
There, while prison rules “mandate[d] who shall make the 
determinations and what shall be considered,” including 
“three substantive predicates,” “they do not mandate any 
particular outcome with regard to the substantive predi- 
cates.” Id. at 1083. Because a decision to place an inmate 
on “lockdown” was not mandated by the prison rules for 


14 


any specific situation the rules did not create a liberty 
interest. Id. The Ninth Circuit's analysis in this case thus 
not only conflicts with this Court’s own holding in 
Thompson, but at least two circuits’ construction of that 
holding. 


Review should be granted, in that, at a minimum, 
federal judicial recognition of “liberty interests” as stem- 
ming from state prison disciplinary schemes that do not 
affect “good time” credits and that do not necessarily 
impact on parole considerations raises unsettled issues of 
nationwide import that the Court should review. In 
Thompson itself, the Court was able to avoid a substantial 
claim, presented both by the Petitioner in that case, and 
more than thirty States’ Attorneys General, see 490 U.S. at 
455 n.*, urging the Court “to adopt a rule that prison 
regulations, regardless of the mandatory character of 
their language or the extent to which they limit official 
discretion, ‘do not create an entitlement protected by the 
Due Process Clause when they do not affect the duration 
or release from confinement, or the very nature of con- 
finement.’ ” 490 U.S. at 461 n.3. The Court “express[ed] 
no view on the proposal and le[ft] its resolution for 
another day.” Id. at 462 n.3. The decision below calls upon 
this Court to decide this issue, which is of vast impor- 
tance to all of the States. 


The Ninth Circuit’s decision to extend due process 
protection to any prison disciplinary proceeding that 
threatens to impose disciplinary segregation is not tied to 
any principle that this Court has espoused in its Due 
Process jurisprudence. 


15 


In the leading case in this area, Wolff v. McDonnell, 
418 U.S. 539 (1974), for example, Nebraska had created a 
scheme for the forfeiture of good-time credits, without 
providing due process protections. The Court subjected 
the scheme to analysis of “the process due,” after deter- 
mining that, because “the State ha[s] created the right to 
good time and itself recogniz[ed] that its deprivation is a 
sanction authorized for major misconduct,” “the pris- 
oner’s interest has real substance and is sufficiently 
embraced within Fourteenth Amendment ‘liberty’ to enti- 
tle him to those minimum procedures appropriate under 
the circumstances and required by the Due Process 
Clause to insure that the state-created right is not arbi- 
trarily abrogated.” Id. at 557. As the Court would later 
hold in Montanye v. Haymes, 427 U.S. 236, 242 (1976) “|a|s 
long as the conditions or degree of confinement to which 
the prisoner is subjected is within the sentence imposed 
upon him and is not otherwise violative of the Constitu- 
tion, the Due Process Clause does not in itself subject an 
inmate’s treatment by prison authorities to judicial over- 
sight.” The Court has also emphasized “that regulations 
structuring the authority of prison administrators may 
warrant treatment, for purposes of creation of entitle- 
ments to ‘liberty,’ different from statutes and regulations 
in other areas.” Hewitt v. Helms, 459 U.S. 460, 470 (1983). 
In Hewitt, the Court did state that a liberty interest had 
been created by Pennsylvania’s procedures for adminis- 
trative detention; but the Court found that no Due Pro- 
cess violation had been shown. See 459 U.S. at 472-78. 
Thus, Hewitt’s statements that the State had “created a 
protected liberty interest” are ultimately dicta, and “lijt is 
the holdings of [the Court's] cases, rather than their dicta, 


16 


that we must attend.” Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Insurance 
Co., 62 U.S.L.W. 4313, 4315 (U.S. May 15, 1994) (Scalia, J., 
for a unanimous Court). It is doubtless for just this reason 
that the “bright-line” rule proposed, and deferred, in 
Thompson remains a pressing question on which this 
Court has “express[ed] no view,” and left “for another 
day.” 490 U.S. at 462. In light of Judge Reinhardt’s opin- 
ion for the court below, that day, at a minimum, has 
come. The writ should be granted. 


Il. Review Should Be Granted To Correct The Ninth 
Circuit’s Intrusive Review Of State Prison Disci- 
plinary Decisions To Refuse To Compel Witness 
Testimony. 


While recognizing, in trial settings, that the judge on 
the scene “is in the best position to assess the impact and 
effect of evidence based upon what he perceives from the 
live proceedings of a trial,” United States v. Layton, 767 
F.2d 549, 554 (9th Cir. 1985), the Ninth Circuit gave no 
deference to the prison administrators who refused to call 
witnesses at Conner’s request, since, in the words of the 
Committee, “[w]Jitnesses were unavailable due to move to 
the medium facility and being short staffed on the mod- 
ules.” In this case, however, Conner admitted to having 
“ “eyed up’ ” and cursed at Correctional Officer Furtado 
during the strip search, admitting to every element of at 
least two different disciplinary infractions. As this Court 
held in Arizona v. Fulminante, 111 S. Ct. 1246, 1255 (1991), 
“[a] defendant's confession is ‘probably the most proba- 
tive and damaging evidence that can be admitted against 
him,’ ” and, in light of this confession, the record on its 


on” 


17 


face proves sufficient reason to deny witnesses, even if 
Respondent had a “liberty interest.” 


As this Court has made clear since Wolff, “|p]rison 
officials must have the necessary discretion to keep the 
hearing within reasonable limits and to refuse to call 
witnesses that may create a risk of reprisal or undermine 
authority, as well as to limit access to other inmates to 
collect statements or to compile other documentary evi- 
dence.” 418 U.S. at 566. See also Ponte v. Real, 471 U.S. 491, 
496 (1985). For years, every lawyer practicing in the fed- 
eral system, when he or she requests discovery in a civil 
case, has certified that a particular request is “not unrea- 
sonable or unduly burdensome or expensive, given the 
needs of the case, the discovery already had in the case, 
the amount in controversy, and the importance of the 
issues at stake in the litigation.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(g) (as 
amended Mar. 2, 1987); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(g)(2)(C) (as 
amended Dec. 1, 1993). The quoted language from Wolff, 
which at a minimum reflects similar concerns, has 
prompted rulings in virtually every Circuit that stand for 
the proposition that prison disciplinary committees have 
broad authority to reject proffered testimony as cumula- 
tive or irrelevant. See, e.g., Forbes v. Trigg, 976 F.2d 308, 
318 (7th Cir. 1992) (allowing refusal to call witnesses 
whose testimony is “irrelevant or repetitive” or “could 
have added little” to the proceeding); Scott v. Kelly, 962 
F.2d 145, 147 (2d Cir. 1992) (“ ‘a prisoner’s request for a 
witness can be denied on the basis of irrelevance or lack 
of necessity’ ”); Ramer v. Kerby, 936 F.2d 1102, 1104 (10th 
Cir. 1991) (allowing denial of prisoner requests if officials 
“affirmatively determine” that the proposed testimony 


18 


“would be irrelevant, cumulative, or otherwise unnecess- 
ary for the committee to come to a fair resolution of the 
matter”); Brown v. Frey, 889 F.2d 159, 168 (8th Cir. 1989) 
(en banc). 


Here, where Conner had confessed to the material 
elements of the charged conduct, and where neither he 
nor the Ninth Circuit took issue with the validity of his 
confession, the Ninth Circuit’s remand simply makes 
nonsense of the law. As this Court ruled in a related 
context, “if the hearing mandated by the Due Process 
Clause is to serve any useful purpose, there must be some 
factual dispute . . . which has some significant bearing” 
on the matter in controversy. Codd v. Velger, 429 U.S. 624, 
627 (1977) (per curiam). Here, as in Codd, Conner “made 
out no claim under the Fourteenth Amendment that he 
was harmed by the denial of [witnesses].” Id. at 628. At 
the very least, the record does not allow any reasonable 
factfinder to conclude that Conner was unconstitutionally 
denied witnesses. 


Because the Ninth Circuit’s reversal of summary 
judgment on the denial of witnesses issue conflicts with 
this Court’s decisions in Wolff, and Ponte, and with a 


broad array of rulings in the courts of appeals, the Court 
should grant certiorari. 


III. Review Should Be Granted, At A Minimum, To 
Correct The Ninth Circuit’s Drastic Disregard Of 
Harlow Immunity. 


As the foregoing demonstrates, it is clear that the 
Ninth Circuit was unwarranted in concluding that Con- 
ner had raised a genuine dispute of material fact with 


19 


respect to the merits of his claims “at all,” Siegert v. Gilley, 
111 S. Ct. 1789, 1793 (1993). But what is perhaps most 
disturbing of all is the Court of Appeals’ drastic curtail- 
ment of the generous protections of the doctrine of quali- 
fied immunity in this case. 


As this Court has emphasized, qualified immunity is 
a “protective” doctrine that “ ‘provides ample support to 
all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly 
violate the law.’ ” Burns v. Reed, 111 S. Ct. 1934, 1944 
(1991) (quoting Malley v. Briggs. 475 U.S. 334, 341 (1986)). 
The scope of the doctrine’s protections is not to be judged 
by reference to “abstract rights,” Anderson v. Creighton, 
483 U.S. 635, 639 (1987). And this is especially so where 
the constitutional rights at stake “have been expressed in 
terms of ‘unreasonable’ ” government conduct. /d. at 643. 
Since this Court adopted an “objective” test for qualified 
immunity in Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), it 
has been clear “that officials performing discretionary 
functions are not subject to suit when [federal] questions 
are resolved against them only after they have acted,” 
and “hindsight-based reasoning on immunity issues is 
precisely what Harlow rejected.” Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 
U.S. 511, 535 (1985). The “decisive fact is not that [a 
defendant's] position turned out to be incorrect, but that 
the question was open at the time he acted.” Id. Such 
“facts,” at worst, are present, and mandate immunity. 


In denying immunity to Petitioner Sandin, the Ninth 
Circuit fundamentally misconstrued the teachings of this 
Court, and in a way that plainly warrants review, or, at a 
minimum, a summary remand. Cf. Inaba v. Soong, 112 S. 
Ct. 40 (U.S. Oct. 7, 1991). 


20 


First, if nothing else, this Court's explicit reservation 
of issues in Thompson, see 490 U.S. at 462 n.3, constitutes 
the very sort of authoritative deferral that should allow 
officials to continue to press legal claims and defenses 
without fear of personal liability. After all, when this 
Court “leave[s]” “for another day,” a particular defense 
to Due Process challenges, it is intolerable that state 
officials be subject to personal-capacity damage actions 
by provoking review of that defense. To let the Ninth 
Circuit’s decision stand would not only “substantially 
thwart the development of irnportant questions of law by 
freezing the first initial decision rendered on a particular 
legal issue,” United States v. Mendoza, 464 U.S. 154, 160 
(1984) (Rehnquist, J., for a unanimous Court); it would 
freeze the law in such a way that a legal issue would 
never be litigated. 


Second, wholly apart from the “ ‘bright line’ ” argu- 
ment that renders any particularized analysis of Hawaii's 
prison rules irrelevant to the Due Process issues in this 
case, it is hardly “incompetent” to assert that Thompson's 
“mandatory outcomes” test precludes the conclusion that 
Hawaii has created liberty interests. The fact that 
Thompson, without response to Justice Marshall's dissent, 
held that no liberty interest was created because visitors 
“need not be” excluded, is - and should be - enough to 
warrant qualified immunity as a matter of law on the 
record present. For this reason, too, review is warranted. 


Third, by relying on the “abstract” right to call wit- 
nesses outlined (for good-time-credit States, such as 
Nebraska) in Wolff, the Ninth Circuit committed the very 
error that this court reversed in Anderson v. Creighton, 483 
U.S. 635 (1987). The determination, by Judges Reinhardt, 


21 


- Browning, and Norris, to strip Petitioner of her qualified 


immunity for denying witnesses, even though inmate 
Conner undisputedly confessed to swearing at Correc- 
tional Officer Furtado, “convert[s] the rule of qualified 
immunity that [this Court's] cases plainly establish into a 
rule of virtually unqualified liability.” 483 U.S. at 635. 
Like other refusals by the Ninth Circuit to recognize 
qualified immunity, see, e.g., Hunter v. Bryant, 112 S. Ct. 
534, 537 (1992), this conversion should be reversed. 


At a minimum, the Ninth Circuit’s decision appears 
to be colored by the narrow review given to immunity 
issues in the Ninth Circuit prior to this Court's reversal in 
Elder v. Holloway, 114 S. Ct. 1019 (1994). Elder unequivo- 
cally mandates that “[w]Jhether an asserted federal right 
was clearly established at a particular time so that a 
public official who allegedly violated the right has no 
qualified immunity from suit, presents a question of law, 
not one of ‘legal facts,’” which, “like the generality of 
such questions, must be resolved de novo on appeal.” 114 
S. Ct. at 1023. Most significantly, Elder mandates that “[a] 
court engaging in review of a qualified immunity judg- 
ment should therefore use its ‘full knowledge of its own 
{and other relevant] precedents.’ ” Id. By remanding Peti- 
tioner for “a fuller development of the record” (Pet. App. 
A9), where, inter alia, the record absolutely and unequivo- . 
cally shows that Connor confessed, the Ninth Circuit 
simply abdicated its appellate function, and disobeyed 
the requirements of the Elder decision. 


Because the Ninth Circuit did not have the benefit of 
this Court’s decision in Elder, at a minimum the Court 
may wish to grant the petition, vacate the judgment, and 


22 


remand for further consideration in light of Elder v. Hollo- 
way, supra. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the Court should grant the 
petition for certiorari. Because the decision in Elder v. 
Holloway, 114 S. Ct. 1019 (U.S. Feb. 23, 1994), was handed 
down only two days before rehearing was denied, the 
Court may wish to grant the petition, vacate the judg- 
ment, and remand for further consideration in light of 
Elder. In any event, the Court should grant the petition 
for certiorari. | 


Dated: Honolulu, Hawaii, May 26, 1994. 


Rosert A. Marks 
Attorney General 
State of Hawaii 


Steven S. MICHAELs* 
Girarp D. Lau 

Deputy Attorneys General 
State of Hawaii 

"Counsel of Record 


Department of the 
Attorney General 

State of Hawaii 

425 Queen Street 

Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 

(808) 586-1360 


Counsel for Petitioner 
Cinda Sandin, Unit Team 
Manager, Halawa 
Correctional Facility 


Al 


APPENDIX “A” 
FOR PUBLICATION 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


) No. 91-16704 
DeMont R.D. CONNER, ) 
Plaintiff-Appellant, ) D.C. No. 
_ CV-88-0169-ACK 
V. 
) ORDER AND 
THEODORE SAKAI et al., AMENDED 
Defendants-Appellees. ) OPINION 
) 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Hawaii 
Alan C. Kay, District Judge, Presiding 


Submitted November 5, 1992* 
Honolulu, Hawaii 


Filed June 2, 1993 
Amended February 2, 1994 


Before: James R. Browning, William A. Norris, and 
Stephen Reinhardt, Circuit Judges. 


Opinion by Judge Reinhardt 


*The panel unanimously finds this case suitable for submission 
on the record and briefs without oral argument. Fed. R. App. P. 
34(a); Ninth Circuit Rule 34-4. 


A2 


OPINION 
REINHARDT, Circuit Judge: 


DeMont R.D. Conner, a Hawaii state prisoner serving 
a thirty-years-to-life sentence, appeals pro se the district 
court's grant of the state’s motion for summary judgment, 
and the district court’s denial of his cross-motion for 
summary judgment on his § 1983 suit against a number of 
prison officials! and the State of Hawaii. We reverse, as to 
certain of the defendants, the district court’s grant of 
summary judgment in the state’s favor on certain of 
Conner’s claims: that he was improperly subjected to 
disciplinary segregation and that he was punished for 
praying aloud in Arabic with a fellow inmate. We affirm 
the remainder of the district court’s order, including the 
denial of Conner’s cross-motion for summary judgment. 


II. 
A. State’s Motion for Summary Judgment 
1. Sovereign Immunity 


The state correctly contends that the eleventh amend- 
ment bars Conner’s suit against the State of Hawaii, Hans 


' The named defendants are Theodore Sakai, Acting 
Administrator, Department of Institutions; Harold Falk, Direc- 
tor of Corrections; and several administrators of the Halawa 
Correctional Facility; Lawrence Shohet, Corrections Supervisor; 
William Oku, Administrator; Leonard Gonsalves, Chief of Secu- 
rity; Cinda Sandin and Francis Sequeira, Unit Team Managers; 
and seven Adult Corrections Officers (ACOs), William Sum- 
mers, Robert Johnson, Gordon Furtado, Abraham Lota, Edward 
Marshal, William Paaga, and Brian Lee. 


A3 


v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890), 10 S. Ct. 504, Quern v. 
Jordan, 440 U.S. 332, 338-41, 99 S. Ct. 1139, 1143-45 (1979),? 
and Conner’s suit against the other defendants in their 
official capacities, Hafer v. Melo, 112 S. Ct. 358, 362 (1991). 
However, the eleventh amendment does not bar Conner’s 
suit against the other defendants in their personal capaci- 
ties. Id. at 362. 


2. Disciplinary Segregation 


Conner contends that the disciplinary segregation 
imposed on him after a hearing on August 28, 1987, 
violated his right to due process. He asserts that, before 
the hearing, he was not given a summary of the facts 
leading to the charges, that he was not permitted to 
question the guard who charged him with the offense, 
that he was not allowed to call witnesses at the hearing, 
and that his testimony was “doctor[ed]” and used against 
him. We agree that Conner has presented a genuine issue 
of material fact as to whether his hearing comported with 
due process. 


[1] The first issue we face is whether Conner had a 
liberty interest, protected by the fourteenth amendment, 
in not being arbitrarily placed in disciplinary segregation. 
The fourteenth amendment protects liberty interests aris- 
ing from the Due Process Clause or created by state law. 
Hewitt v. Helms, 459 U.S. 460, 466, 103 S. Ct. 864, 868-69 


2 Conner claims that the State has waived its immunity 
through Haw. Rev. Stat. § 662-2. However, this section waives 
the state’s immunity only as to tort suits. Conner does not make 
out a tort claim. 


A4 


(1983). To discover whether state law has created a liberty 
interest, we must “examine closely the language of the 
relevant statutes and regulations” to see whether the state 
has placed “substantive limitations on official discretion.” 
Kentucky Dep't of Corrections v. Thompson, 109 S. Ct. 1904, 
1909 (1989) (internal quotation omitted; citation omitted). 
Most commonly a state fetters official discretion by a two- 
step process. First, the state establishes “substantive 
predicates” to govern official decisionmaking. These are 
“particularized standards or criteria to guide the State’s 
decisionmakers.” Id. Next, the state requires, in “explic- 
itly mandatory language,” that if the substantive predi- 
cates are met, a particular outcome must follow. Id. at 
1909-10. We conclude that Hawaii's regulations create a 
liberty interest in remaining free from disciplinary seg- 
regation. The regulations provide explicit standards that 
fetter official discretion. Under Title 17, subtitle 2 (Correc- 
tions Division), Department of Social Services and Hous- 
ing, § 17-201-18(b) (“§ 17-201-18(b)”), the inmate must 
admit guilt or the prison disciplinary committee must be 
presented with substantial evidence before the committee 
may make a finding of guilt. If the inmate does not admit 
guilt, or the committee does not find substantial evi- 
dence, the particular outcome - freedom from disciplin- 
ary segregation — must follow. § 17-201-18(b). 


Having found that Conner possessed a liberty inter- 
est in not being confined to disciplinary segregation, we 
now proceed to the issue whether he was afforded suffi- 
cient process before being so confined. 


A5 


i. summary of facts 


Under the Due Process Clause, an inmate facing a 
disciplinary hearing must be given advance notice of the 
hearing. Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 563-65, 94 S. Ct. 
2963, 2978-79 (1974). Even if state administrative regula- 
tions supply additional process due to inmates of Hawai- 
ian prisons, see § 17-300-3 et seq.,> and even if inmates 
may sue to enforce such regulations in federal court, 
there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether 
Conner was given the opportunity to review the facts and 
other materials supporting the charge against him. The 
record contains a form, apparently signed and dated by 
Conner, that recites the charge against him and states, 
“Facts supporting the charge(s) are as stated on the 
attached Misconduct Report.” Because Conner does not 
contest that he signed and dated the form or that the 
misconduct report was attached, and does not otherwise 
dispute the authenticity of the form, he has failed to show 
that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to this 
contention. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 324, 106 
S. Ct. 2548, 2553 (1986); Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 56(c). 


3 Section 17-201-16(c) requires that an inmate be given an 
opportunity to review all relevant non-confidential reports of 
misconduct or a summary of such reports between the time the 
inmate receives notice of the hearing and the hearing itself. 
Section 17-201-16(d) provides that the misconduct reports or 
summary “shall contain” a description of the specific rule 
alleged to have been violated, the facts that support the charge, 
and the names of witnesses. 


A6 


ii. cross-examination 


No genuine issue of material fact exists as to Con- 
ner’s contention that he was not permitted to cross-exam- 
ine the guard who charged him with misconduct. The 
Due Process Clause does not require prison administra- 
tors to afford inmates such a right. Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 
U.S. at 567-69, 94 S. Ct. at 2980-81. Even if state regula- 
tions may be enforced in a case such as this, Hawaii has 
not created a due process right to cross-examine wit- 
nesses at a disciplinary hearing. 


ii. alteration of testimony 


Conner has not raised a genuine issue of material fact 
to support his contention that his testimony at his hearing 
was doctored. His affidavits do not disclose the alter- 
ations allegedly made. Bare allegations do not suffice to 


* Under § 17-200-16(e), the prison may decline to permit the 
inmate to cross-examine witnesses at a disciplinary hearing. It 
States that the inmate “may” be given the opportunity to con- 
front and cross-examine adverse witnesses unless, in the judg- 
ment of the disciplinary committee, such a confrontation would 

(A) Subject the witnesses to potential reprisal; 

(B) Jeopardize the security or good government of 

the facility; 

(C) Be unduly hazardous to the facility’s safety or 

correctional goals; or 

(D) Otherwise reasonably appear to be impractical 

or unwarranted. 
§ 17-200-16(e)(2). If the inmate is not permitted to confront or 
cross-examine adverse witnesses, the disciplinary committee “is 
encouraged” to record the reason for the denial and to explain 
the reason to the inmate. § 17-200-16(e)(3). 


A7 


defeat a motion for summary judgment: Conner’s obliga- 
tion, rather, was to relate “specific facts showing that 
there is a genuine issue for trial.” Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324, 
106 S. Ct. at 2552. 


iv. witnesses 


[2] Under Wolff v. McDonnell, an inmate “should be 
allowed to call witnesses and present documentary evi- 
dence in his defense when permitting him to do so will 
not be unduly hazardous to institutional safety or correc- 
tional goals.” 418 U.S. at 566, 94 S. Ct. at 2979. The state’s 
regulations, even if applicable, do not expand on this 
right.5 A genuine issue of material fact exists as to Con- 
ner’s contention that he was not permitted to call wit- 
nesses at his hearing. The record contains a form, 
apparently distributed to Conner after the hearing, that 
states that witnesses were unavailable at the hearing 
“due to the move to the medium facility and being short 
staffed on the modules.” 


Prison disciplinary committees may not deny a 
defendant the right to call important witnesses solely for 
the sake of administrative efficiency. Bostic v. Carlson, 884 
F.2d 1267, 1273 (9th Cir. 1989). Rather they must show the 
adequacy of their justification for denying a request to 


5 The state’s regulation’s [sic] track Wolff v. McDonnell, 
supra, in stating that the inmate “should” be given the oppor- 
tunity to call witnesses “as long as it will not be unduly haz- 
ardous to institutional safety or correctional goals.” 
§ 17-200-16(f)(1). Reasons for denial of such an opportunity are 
irrelevance, lack of necessity, the hazards presented in the indi- 
vidual case, and “any other justifiable reason.” § 17-200-16(f)(2). 


A8 


present witnesses in a disciplinary proceeding. Id. Fur- 
ther, we note that “[t]he security issues that concerned 
the Wolff Court were the risk of death or injury to inmate 
witnesses and informants identified at hearings or in 
produced documents, as well as the potential for break- 
down in authority, order and discipline inside the institu- 
tion.” Young v. Kann, 926 F.2d 1396, 1400 & nn. 8, 9 (3d 
Cir. 1991). It is not clear that these were the concerns that 
motivated the disciplinary committee that considered 
Conner’s case. 


[3] In the context of a motion for summary judgment, 
the prisons burden to show the adequacy of its justifica- 
tion for denying an inmate the right to present witnesses 
at his hearing is the one it would bear in a motion for a 
judgment as a matter of law (directed verdict) under Fed. 
R. Civ. Pro. 50(a). Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. at 323, 
106 S. Ct. at 2552. Such a burden requires that the evi- 
dence “permit[] only one reasonable conclusion as to the 
verdict.” McGonigle v. Combs, 968 F.2d 810, 816 (9th Cir. 
1992), cert. denied sub nom. Casares v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 
113 S. Ct. 399 (1992). In stating without more that “wit- 
nesses were unavailable due to [the] move to the medium 
facility and being short staffed on the modules,” the state 
has not met its affirmative burden. 


Conner links only Defendant Sandin to the denial of 
his right to call witnesses.® The state claims that all of the 


© In his affidavit of May 17, 1988, Conner states: “On 
August 28, 1987, Defendant Cinda Sandin did violate my right 
to due process when she denied me the right to question the 
correctional officer whom had written me up, and to review the 
submitted reports, and to call witnesses.” 


AY 


defendants, including Defendant Sandin, are protected by 
qualified immunity. Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 815, 
102 S.Ct. 2727, 2737 (1982); Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 
635, 640-41, 107 S. Ct. 3034, 3039-40 (1987); Erickson v. 
United States, 976 F.2d 1299, 1301 (9th Cir. 1992). Under 
the doctrine of qualified immunity, the issue is whether 
the right infringed was clearly established at the time of 
the defendant’s complained-of action, and whether a rea- 
sonable official could have believed that his or her 
actions did not violate that right. Anderson v. Creighton, 
483 U.S. at 640-41, 107 S. Ct. at 3039-40. The right to call 
witnesses at a disciplinary hearing has been clearly estab- 
lished since Wolff v. McDonnell was decided in 1974. 
Whether a reasonable official could have believed his 
actions in denying Conner the requested witnesses were 
lawful is a matter that cannot be decided without a fuller 
development of the record. 


Accordingly, summary judgment as to Conner’s 
claim regarding disciplinary segregation is reversed with 
respect to Defendant Sandin.’ 


3. Prayer in Arabic 


Conner alleges that his first and fourteenth amend- 
ment rights were violated when prison officials punished 
him for praying aloud in Arabic. He was punished for 
violating a prison rule that requires inmates to “commu- 
nicate in the English language only; including telephone 


7 Conner also contends that no evidence supported the disci- 
plinary committee's finding of guilt. However, he has not supported 
his contention with an affidavit or a verified complaint. 


Al0 


calls, visits, and letters.” Conner contends that as a Mus- 
lim he must say his prayers in Arabic and that he must 
say them aloud; that on February 1, 1989, he was a recent 
convert to Islam and had only begun to learn Arabic; and 
that on that day he was praying aloud in Arabic in unison 
with a more experienced fellow inmate when Defendants 
Paaga and Lee ordered the two men to speak in English 
only. When Conner refused to comply, Defendant Paaga 
issued a misconduct report, which led to Conner’s con- 
finement in disciplinary segregation for fourteen days. In 
addition to Defendants Paaga and Lee, Conner seeks 
relief from Defendants Oku, Sakai, and Falk for the depri- 
vation of due process he claims to have suffered. 


[4] Construing the facts most favorably to Conner, as 
we must on a motion for summary judgment, see Leer v. 
Murphy, 844 F.2d 628, 631 (9th Cir. 1988), we assume that 
Conner was punished after refusing to stop praying in 
Arabic.® It is a fundamental element of due process that 
conduct may be punished under a rule only if that rule 
proscribes the conduct. It seems clear that the prison’s 
English-only rule does not apply to prayer. We believe 
that the plain meaning of the rule forbids the non-English 
interchange of information between or among humans, 
not between humans and their gods. If the rule were 
intended to apply to “communication” with divine 
beings, certainly the term “prayer” would have been 


® The misconduct report states that Conner was punished 
for refusing to obey Defendant Paaga’s order. However, because 
Defendant Paaga’s order was to stop speaking in a foreign 
language, we consider whether, under the Due Process Clause, 
Conner may be punished for violating the underlying rule. 


All 


used. Nor do the examples provided in the rule — tele- 
phone calls, visits, and letters - suggest a more holy 
meaning. 


[5] In addition, even if the interpretation of the rule 
could be stretched to include prayer, we would hold that 
the due process clause forbids the implementation of 
such a construction. The due process clause bars the state 
from imposing punishment on the basis of an unexpected 
and unusual interpretation of plain language. See Bouie v. 
City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347, 352, 84 S. Ct. 1697, 1702 
(1964). The language of the English-only rule on its face 
clearly proscribes only inter-personal communication, 
and the examples accompanying the rule reinforce such a 
reading. Had the state desired to proscribe praying aloud, 
language clearly proscribing such conduct could been 
[sic] included in the rule.? See United States v. Petrillo, 332 
U.S. 1, 7, 67 S. Ct. 1538, 1540 (1947) (upholding a law 
against a void-for-vagueness challenge because no 
“clearer and more precise language. . . . occurs to us, nor 
has any better language been suggested, effectively to 
carry out what appears to have been the Congressional 
purpose”). The interpretation of the English-only rule 
sought by the state would be most unexpected and highly 
unusual. Therefore, the rule cannot be constitutionally 
applied to the conduct at issue here: it gives inmates 
insufficient notice that they are forbidden to pray in a 
foreign language. 


9 We indicate no view regarding the constitutionality of 
such a proscription. 


Al2 


Conner does not proximately connect Defendants 
Oku, Sakai, and Falk to the constitutional wrong he has 
suffered. Summary judgment was therefore appropriate 
as to these defendants. Leer v. Murphy, 844 F.2d at 633-34; 
Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989). The state 
maintains that Defendants Paaga and Lee are immune 
from suit. It is true that government officials performing 
discretionary functions enjoy a qualified immunity inso- 
far as their conduct does not violate statutory or constitu- 
tional rights of which a reasonable person should have 
known. See Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 818, 102 S. Ct. 
at 2738. As indicated by our discussion above, we believe 
a reasonable official would have known that a regulation 
that forbids communication in a foreign language does 
not forbid prayer. Thus, the state cannot assert the 
defense of qualified immunity based on uncertainty in 
the law or the law’s application to this case. 


Nevertheless, Defendants Paaga and Lee may still be 
entitled to qualified immunity. The proper question is 
whether, at the time of the challenged conduct, a reason- 
able official would have understood that the actions of 
Defendants Paaga and Lee violated Conner’s rights. 
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. at 640-41, 107 S. Ct. at 
3039-40. Thus, if a reasonable official would not have 
realized that Conner was praying but could have thought 
that he was simply communicating with humans regard- 
ing earthly subjects, Defendants Paaga and Lee would be 
entitled to qualified immunity. On remand, the district 
court should consider whether Defendants Paaga and Lee 
are entitled to qualified immunity on this basis. 


Al3 


4. Denial of Access 


[6] Conner has submitted affidavits alleging that cer- 
tain defendants have deprived him of legal materials; 
however, he has failed to allege or offer evidence of 
“actual injury” with respect to court access as a result of 
these deprivations. When a claim of denial of access to 
the courts does not involve inadequate law libraries or 
inadequate legal assistance, actual injury must be alleged. 
Sands v. Lewis, 886 F.2d 1166, 1171 (9th Cir. 1989). Sum- 
mary judgment on this issue is therefore affirmed. 


5. Review of Confinement 


Conner argues by reference to Sims v. Falk, No. 
88-0348-DAE (D. Ha. 1989), that he has been denied 
meaningful periodic review of his confinement in the 
maximum security portion of the prison.'!° However, his 
affidavit in support of his contention is conclusory. With- 
out supporting facts, we are required to hold that sum- 
mary judgment was properly granted on this issue. 


10 The district court in Sims, assessing the same claim made 
against several of the same defendants (Falk, Oku, and Shobet) 
regarding the same portion of the same prison, held that such 
confinement was punitive rather than classificatory in nature, 
and issued a preliminary injunction that ordered the prison to 
review Sims’ confinement not less than every thirty days and to 
permit Sims to meaningfully participate in the review. The com- 
plaint was later dismissed by stipulation. 


Al4 


6. Possession of Written Rules 


Conner argues, again by reference to Sims, that due 
process entitles him to retain a copy of the written rules 
that set the standard against which inmates’ behavior is 
judged within the prison. He states in an affidavit that he 
has not been given a copy of such rules. The prison 
contends that Conner has been furnished with a copy of 
the Inmate Handbook. A question of material fact thus 
exists as to this contention. However, Conner has not 
proximately connected any of the defendants to the loss 
he claims to have suffered. Therefore, his argument fails. 
Leer v. Murphy, 844 F.2d at 633-34; Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d at 
1045. 


7. Legal Status of the Segregation and Maximum Cus- 
tody Program 


Conner contends that the existence of the Segregation 
and Maximum Custody Program (“Program”) has vio- 
lated his right to due process because the Program was 
never correctly authorized by the Director of the Depart- 
ment of Social Services or the Governor of Hawaii. He 
asserts that § 17-200-1 and Haw. Rev. Stat. § 353-3 create a 
liberty interest in not being subject to any law not explic- 
itly authorized by the governor, that the Program lacks 
the signatures required by the statute, and that without 
the signatures the Program does not have the force of 
law.!! 


1! Section 17-200-1 states: 


This subtitle shall govern the corrections division of 
the department of social services and housing, State 


Al5 


Whether or not the Program was approved by the 
director or the governor, and whether or not the conjunc- 
tion of § 17-200-1 and Haw. Rev. Stat. § 353-3 creates a 
liberty interest, Conner’s claim fails. The Program was 
implemented in 1981, according to an affidavit of Defen- 
dant Shohet, while § 17-200-1 did not become effective 
until Octobe: 6, 1983. Therefore, § 17-200-1 does not 
govern the Program and cannot create a liberty interest. 


In addition, Conner appears to argue that the Pro- 
gram is invalid because it does not comply with the 
Hawaii Administrative Procedures Act. Conner’s argu- 
ment appears to make a state claim. Such claims are 
barred in § 1983 suits. Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. 
Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 121, 104 S. Ct. 900, 919 (1984). 
Summary judgment on this issue is affirmed. 


of Hawaii. Each individual facility may adopt rules 
governing its unique situation pursuant to Chapter 
353, subject to the approval of the director of the 
department of social services and housing and the 


governor. 


The version of Haw.Rev.Stat. § 353-3 in effect when the Program 
was implemented provided that 


[t]he director of social services and housing . . . may 
make and from time to time alter or amend rules 
relating to the conduct and management of [the state 
correctional] facilities and the care, control, treat- 
ment, furlough and discipline of persons committed 
to his care, which rules must be approved by the 
governor. ... 


Al6 


8. The Program as a Behavior Modification Program 


Conner argues that the Program is invalid because its 
policy of providing privileges for good conduct is a 
behavior modification program of the type rejected in 
Canterino v. Wilson, 546 F. Supp. 174 (W.D. Ky. 1982), as 
amended, 562 F. Supp. 106, aff'd, 875 F.2d 862 (6th Cir. 
1989), cert denied, 493 U.S. 991, 110 S. Ct. 539 (1989). 
Canterino was decided under an eighth amendment the- 
ory. Construing Conner’s complaint and affidavits liber- 
ally, see Haines v. Kerner, 404 U.S. 519, 92 S. Ct. 594 (1972), 
United States v. Bigman, 906 F.2d at 395, we conclude that 
Conner contends that the prison’s behavior modification 
program is so unnecessarily restrictive © to constitute 
cruel and unusual punishment.!? 


Conner alleges that Defendants Falk, Sakai, Oku, and 
Shohet are responsible for deprivation he contends he has 


'? In his affidavit of March 6, 1989, Conner states that the 
most restrictive non-disciplinary confinement within the Pro- 
gram is virtually identical to disciplinary segregation, see Can- 
terino, 546 F. Supp. at 184; that an inmate is permitted to move to 
a less restrictive environment only after completing a set 
number of days free of misconduct and that a single act of 
misconduct erases all the accumulated days and forces an 
inmate to begin at the beginning, see id. at 187; that the Program, 
as administered, leaves Conner “edgy often, argumentative, 
and frustrative,” see id. at 184, 186; and that no written criteria 
are made available to him so that he will know what behavior is 
required in order to move to less restrictive environments, see id. 
at 187. In his affidavit of December 26, 1989, he alleges that, 
while he is confined in the most restrictive prison environments, 
he is denied periodic reviews of his confinement; allowed inad- 
equate exercise time; and denied permission both to receive 
newspaper articles, brochures, books, and magazines through 
the mail, and to contest the rulings of those who censor his mail. 


Al7 


suffered. His contention fails as to Defendant Falk 
because his affidavit is made on information and belief, 
not on the personal knowledge required by Fed. R. Civ. 
Pro. 56(e). See Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d at 1045 n.3. His claim 
fails as to Defendants Sakai, Oku, and Shohet because he 
neglects to set forth facts that proximately connect them 
with the constitutional injury he contends they inflicted. 
Id. at 1045; Leer v. Murphy, 844 F.2d at 633-34."" 


Additionally, Conner asserts that the Program vio- 
lates Haw. Rev. Stat. § 465(2), which requires those who 
practice psychology to be licensed. Such a contention 
presents a state law claim, which is barred under Penn- 
hurst, 465 U.S. at 121, 104 S. Ct. at 919. 


9. 106 Minor Misconduct Warnings 


Conner claims that he was harassed by prison offi- 
cials through numerous 106 warnings. These are written 
citations that in themselves lead to no disciplinary action 
but the accumulation of which may lead to disciplinary 
segregation. 


Even if such warnings infringe on a protected liberty 
interest, there is no constitutional violation unless and 
until the inmate is placed in disciplinary segregation as a 


13 Conner claims, for example, in an affidavit dated Decem- 
ber 26, 1989, that Defendants Oku and Shohet “are liable for 
depriving [him] of adequate exercise and recreation when they 
subject [him] to 22 hours of punitive isolation.” Assuming with- 
out deciding that twenty-two hours of punitive isolation consti- 
tutes cruel and unusual! punishment, Conner’s contention lacks 
the specificity necessary to defeat a motion for summary judg- 
ment. 


Al8 


result of the accumulated warnings. Conner has not set 
forth any facts that indicate that the warnings he received 
resulted in any punishment. Therefore, he has failed to 
support this claim. 


1V. Retaliation Claim 


Finally, Conner contends that the defendants have 
retaliated against him for his activities as a jailhouse 
lawyer. However, none of his allegations is supported by 
an affidavit or verified complaint. Summary judgment on 
this issue is therefore affirmed. 


B. Conner’s Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment 


The foregoing discussion makes clear that the only 
issues on which Conner might be entitled to summary 
judgment are disciplinary segregation and prayer in Ara- 
bic. The state has presented genuine issues of material 
fact as to both these claims. The district court’s denial of 
Conner’s cross-motion for summary judgment is there- 
fore affirmed. 


The district court’s grant of the defendants’ motion 
for summary judgment is reversed on the following 
issues: the disciplinary segregation claim as to Defendant 
Sandin; and the prayer claim as to Defendants Paaga and 
Lee. Summary judgment is upheld on all other claims and 
as to all other defendants. The district court’s denial of 
Conner’s motion for summary judgment is affirmed. 


Al9 


AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND 
REMANDED. 


A20 


APPENDIX “B” 
JUDGMENT 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


NO. 91-16704 
CT/AG#: CV-88-00169-ACK 


DEMONT R.D. CONNER 
Plaintiff - Appellant 
v. 
THEODORE SAKAI, et. al. 
Defendant - Appellee 


(MANDATE ISSUED 
Mar. 25, 1994) 


APPEAL FROM the United States District Court for 
the District of Hawaii (Honolulu). 


THIS CAUSE came on to be heard on the Transcript of 
the Record from the United States District Court for the 
District of Hawaii (Honolulu) and was duly submitted. 


ON CONSIDERATION WHEREOF, It is now here 
ordered and adjudged by this Court, that the judgment of 
the said District Court in this cause be, and hereby is 
AFFIRMED in part, REVERSED in part, and 
REMA.NDED. 


Filed and entered February 2, 1994 


A21 


APPENDIX “C” 
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAII 


CIV. NO. 
88-0169 ACK 


DEMONT R.D. CONNER, ) 
Plaintiff, 

VS. ) 

THEODORE SAKAI, et al., ) 
Defendants. ‘ 

) 


ORDER ADOPTING MAGISTRATE’S REPORT AND 
RECOMMENDATION GRANTING DEFENDANTS’ 
MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT 


(Filed Sept. 30, 1991) 
I. INTRODUCTION 


On May 20, 1991, the Magistrate entered a report and 
recommendation (R & R) wherein it was recommended 
that this court grant defendants’ motion for summary 
judgment, deny plaintiff's motion for summary judg- 
ment, and dismiss the complaint with prejudice. On June 
18, 1991, plaintiff filed his objections to the R & R. 


For the following reasons, the court adopts the R & R. 


II. FACTS 


Plaintiff is an inmate at Halawa High Security Facil- 
ity (HHSF). Plaintiff filed a pro se complaint in 1986 
alleging violations of his rights under 28 U.S.C. § 1983. 


A22 


The complaint was thereafter amended twice, the last 
amendment occurring on September 8, 1989. 


In the current amended complaint, plaintiff alleges 
that his constitutional rights were being violated under 
28 U.S.C. §§ 1983, 1985(3), and 1986. Plaintiff seeks a 
declaratory judgment, injunctive relief, and money dam- 
ages. All defendants are officials of the state’s prison 
system and are sued in their official and individual 
capacities. 


The complaint alleges violations of plaintiff's First, 
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendment 
rights. In addition, the complaint alleges that plaintiff's 
rights under the Hawaii state constitution were violated. 
In particular, plaintiff makes the following claims in his 
complaint: 

(1) defendants impermissibly subjected plaintiff to a 


behavior modification program that was invalid 
under state law; 


(2) defendants subjected plaintiff to punitive isolation 
pursuant to the behavior modification program 
without due process of law, and in violation of state 
law; 


(3) defendants denied plaintiff adequate exercise and 
recreation in violation of state law and the Eighth 
Amendment; 


(4) defendants’ strip-search policy violated plaintiff's 
right to privacy; 

(5) defendants used “#106 Minor Misconduct” forms 
against plaintiff in violation of due process of law; 


(6) defendants were deliberately indifferent to plain- 
tiff’s (and all inmates’) medical needs; 


A23 


(7) defendants violated plaintiff’s free exercise rights 
to religion; 


(8) defendants’ “blanket policy” regarding items plain- 
tiff could receive through the mail violated plain- 
tiff’s rights; 


(9) defendants violated plaintiff's freedom of associa- 
tion and expression rights by way of defendants’ 
“publishers only” rule, and defendants’ rule requir- 
ing plaintiff to first donate the publication to the 
state; 


(10) defendants subjected plaintiff to excessively long 
periods of punitive confinement in dehumanizing 
“strip-cells;” 


(11) defendants subjected plaintiff to “double-celling” in 
inadequately lighted cells for 17 hours per day; 


(12) defendants subjected plaintiff to retribution for his 
activities as a jail-house lawyer; 


(13) defendant’s “English-only” rule violated plaintiff's 
rights to freedom of expression, speech, religion 
and association; 


(14) defendants violated plaintiff's Eighth Amendment 
rights by denying him psychological and psychi- 
atric treatment while he was in the behavior mod- 
ification program; and 


(15) defendants denied plaintiff his state-created liberty 
interests in participating in educational, vocational, 
and counseling programs that are mandated by 
state law. 


Defendants moved for summary judgment. Plaintiff 
filed a cross-motion for summary judgment. The Magis- 
trate’s R & R recommended that defendants’ motion be 


A24 


granted, and that plaintiff's motion be denied. In addi- 
tion, the Magistrate recommended that the complaint be 
dismissed with prejudice. 


Ill. DISCUSSION 
A. Standard of Review 


Any party may file objections to a R & R by filing the 
same within 10 days of service of the R & R. Local Rule 
404-2. This court “shall make a de novo determination of 
those portions of the [R & R] to which objection is 
made. ... ” Id. (bold in original). 


B. The Merits 


The R & R was served on May 21, 1991. Pursuant to 
Fed.R.Civ.P. 6(a), the parties had until June 5, 1991 to file 
objections. Defendants filed no objections. Plaintiff filed a 
motion to extend the time within which to file objections. 
The motion was filed May 31, 1991 and requested that 
plaintiff be granted leave to “submit his objections with- 
in... the week of June 10, 1991.” This court partially 
granted the motion, giving plaintiff until June 10, 1991 to 
file his objections. Plaintiff's objections were filed on June 
18, 1991, although the objections were signed and dated 
by plaintiff on June 6, 1991. 


The court is somewhat puzzled by the late filing date 
of plaintiff's objections in that they are dated some 12 
days beforehand. Nonetheless, the court will consider the 
objections as timely filed because of the latitude that 
must be afforded pro se litigants. 


A25 


1. Order Partially Granting Extension to File 
Objections 


Plaintiff objects to the order partially granting plain- 
tiff an extension of time to file his objections. Plaintiff 
complains that the court should have granted plaintiff 
more time in which to have objected. Plaintiff bases this 
assertion on the grounds that he needed additional time 
because of his limited access to the law library. In addi- 
tion, plaintiff asserts that he needed additional time 
because of time pressures exerted by other cases he has 
filed. Plaintiff also claims he needed additional time 
because of his pro se status and lack of education. 


The court rejects plaintiff’s contention that it should 
have granted him additional time. The Local Rules of this 
court and the United States Code explicitly state that 
objections are to be served within 10 days of the R & R. 28 
U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); Local Rule 404-2. Thus, the court 
was under no obligation to extend that time period. 
Nonetheless, the court gratuitously extended the dead- 
line. In the motion requesting additional time, plaintiff’s 
only stated reason for the request was the fact that he has 
many lawsuits he has filed which also require his atten- 
tion. Under the circumstances, the court’s extension was 
not unreasonable. Furthermore, the court notes that 
plaintiff's contention that his lack of education and his 
status as a non-lawyer hindered his ability to respond 
quickly is unconvincing. Plaintiff has amply demon- 
strated, through his various lawsuits filed in this district, 
that he is very familiar with the legal system and pos- 
sesses enough education to confidently and quickly 
maneuver within the system. 


A26 


2. The R&R 


Plaintiff acknowledges that the R & R is correct inso- 
far as it found that he conceded his claims relating to 
strip-searches and mechanical restraints. Objections, at 
12. Moreover, plaintiff concedes that he does not assert a 
claim for his “placement” in HHSF’s “Segregation and 
Maximum Control Program” (SMCP). Therefore, with the 
exception of the above-mentioned issues (strip-searches, 
mechanical restraints, and any claim that can be con- 
strued as a claim of violation of rights relating to plain- 
tiff’s placement in SMCP) the court will proceed to 
address each issue raised by the R & R. 


a. Summary Judgment Standard 


Plaintiff objects to the Magistrate’s summary judg- 
ment standard on page 3 of the R & R. This court has 
reviewed the standard on page 3 of the R & R and 
concludes that though it is less descriptive than the court 
would prefer, it is accurate and adequate. Therefore, the 
court rejects plaintiff’s objection on this point. 


b. Invalid Rule 


Plaintiff objects to the Magistrate’s characterization 
of plaintiff's claims relating to placement in the behavior 
control program, SMCP. Plaintiff states that he does not 
contest his placement in the program. Rather, plaintiff 
contends SMCP is an invalid “rule” to which he should 
not have been subjected. Moreover, plaintiff claims that 


A27 


the “invalid rule” violates his rights. For the following 
reasons, the court rejects this contention. 


The SMCP was instituted in 1981. See Shohet’s affi- 
davit (attached as exhibit E to plaintiff's opposition to 
defendants’ motion for summary judgment filed January 
8, 1990). It is an inmate behavior program wherein 
inmates demonstrating satisfactory behavior gain greater 
privileges and advance to more favorable levels of the 
program. Id. SMCP was “geared to the security needs of a 
high security facility,” ie, HHSF. Id. 7 4, at 2. SMCP was 
not approved by either the director of the department of 
social services and housing, or the governor of the state 


of Hawaii. 


Plaintiff claims the SMCP is an invalid rule because 
SMCP governs the HHSF facility, and neither the director 
of the Department and Social Services and Housing 
(DSSH) nor the governor approved SMCP. This, plaintiff 
contends was a violation of DSSH Rule 17-200-1, Title 17. 


DSSH Rule 17-200-1 provides: 


This subtitle shall govern the corrections divi- 
sion of the department of social services and 
housing, State of Hawaii. Each individual facility 
may adopt rules governing its unique situation 
pursuant to Chapter 353,['] subject to the approval 


1 The version of HR.S. § 353-3 in effect in 1981 when the 
SMCP was implemented provided that 

[t]he director of social services and housing... may 

make and from time to time alter or amend rules 

relating to the conduct and management of [the state 

correctional] facilities and the care, control treatment, 

furlough and discipline of persons committed to his 


A28 


of the director of the department of social services 
and housing and the governor. However, suppres- 
sion of these rules shall be permitted only where 
necessary due to the unique characteristics of 
the facility. 


(emphasis added). 


SMCP affects the individual “facility” of HHSF. See 
Shohet’s affidavit ¥ 4, at 2 (attached as exhibit E to 
plaintiff’s opposition to defendants’ motion for summary 
judgment filed January 8, 1990). Moreover, SMCP was not 
approved by the director or the governor. Plaintiff cites to 
Wilder v. Tanouye, 753 P.2d 816 (Haw.App. 1988) to indi- 
cate that SMCP is an invalid rule.? 


Wilder held that Rule 17-200-1 “applie[s] only to rules 
governing a ‘facility’. ... ” 753 P.2d at 824. As noted 
above, SMCP governs HHSF. Wilder also held that former 
H.R.S. § 353-1.2 provided for the establishment of a high 
security correctional facility. Id. Presumably, HHSF is that 
facility. Rule 17-200-1 would indicate that SMCP should 
have been approved by the director and governor in 
order to be valid. 


However, this is not the case. Rule 17-200-1 became 
effective on October 6, 1983 while SMCP was imple- 
mented in 1981. Compare Shohet affidavit and Title 17, 


care, which rules must be approved by the gover- 
nor. . 


2 Plaintiff does not attempt to argue that H.R.S. § 353-3 
renders SMCP an invalid rule. Such argument would be merit- 
less because SMCP is applied only to HHSF, and the require- 
ment of 353-3 apply only to rules affecting “correctional 
facilities .. . on a statewide basis.” Wilder, 752 P.2d at 824. 


A29 


Rule 17-200-1 (copy attached to plaintiff's opposition to 
defendant's motion filed January 8, 1990). Thus, SMCP, 
when it was implemented, was not subject to Rule 
17-100-1 because Rule 17-200-1 did not exist then. There- 
fore, Rule 17-200-1 is inapplicable to SMCP. SMCP is not 
an invalid rule. 


Plaintiff also argues that SMCP is invalid because it 
fails to comply to the Hawaii Administrative Procedures 
Act (HAPA). Plaintiff appears to concede that HAPA is 
inapplicable to regulations concerning only the internal 
management of HHSF. See objections, at 5; Tai v. Chang, 58 
Haw. 386, 387 (1977) (“Under HAPA, the term rule is 
defined to exclude “regulations concerning only the inter- 
nal management of an agency.”). However, plaintiff 
appears to contend that SMCP is not an internal manage- 
ment regulation. Plaintiff cites to the “Inmate Guidelines” 
as an example of internal management regulations 
exempt from HAPA, and argues that the SMCP is vastly 
different from the guidelines, and therefore, not an inter- 
nal management regulation. 


The court rejects this argument. The court has reviewed 
plaintiff's exhibits regarding SMCP and concludes that 
SMCP is an internal management regulation. SMCP is 
“geared to the security needs of a high security facility” such 
as HHSF. Shohet affidavit. Security needs are: 


matters relating to the operation and manage- 
ment of state and county penal . . . inst- 
itutions . . . [and are] primarily a matter of 
“internal management” [thus] excluded 
from .. . [HAPA]. 


House Standing Committee Report No. 8 (1961). 


A30 


Since SMCP is not an invalid rule, all of plaintiff’s 
objections and claims based on his contention that he has 
a state-created liberty interest in being free from an 
invalid rule fail. There is no “invalid” rule upon which to 
base the state-created liberty interest.% 


c. Cruel and Unusual Punishment 


Plaintiff objects to the Magistrate's finding that plain- 
tiff’s placement in HHSF was not cruel and unusual 
punishment. Plaintiff claims this issue was not raised by 
either party in their motions for summary judgment. 
Alternatively, plaintiff claims that placement in HHSF is 
punishment and cites to an opinion by Judge Ezra for 
support. See Sims v. Falk, Civil No. 88-348 DAE (Jan. 4, 
1989). 


Plaintiff's first objection that the issue was not raised 
by the parties is without merit. Defendants squarely 
raised the issue in their motion for summary judgment. 
See defendants’ motion, at 7-8. 


In addition, as the R & R correctly notes, plaintiff's 
placement within HHSF is reasonably related to the 
prison system’s legitimate goal of maintaining institu- 
tional security and discipline. HHSF was designed to 
house inmates who attempted escape attempts, assaults, 
etc. Plaintiff was at HHSF for such reasons. Prior to his 
incarceration at HHSF, plaintiff attempted to escape. This 


m The court assumes but expressly notes that it does not 
decide whether plaintiff has a state-created liberty interest in 
being free from an invalid rule under the Hawaii statutes. 


A31 


resulted in his conviction for attempted escape in the 
second degree on April 4, 1984. In addition to attempting 
escape, Plaintiff has committed such misconduct as 
assault, attempted assault on other inmates, and harass- 
ment and abuse of staff personnel. As a result of his 
predicated behavior, Plaintiff, considered a high custodial 
risk inmate, is incarcerated at HHSF which is, of neces- 
sity, the most restrictive prison in the state system. Plain- 
tiff does not dispute or contest the reasons necessitating 
his actual transfer to HHSF.4 


Based on the foregoing, the court rejects plaintiff's 
claim that placement in HHSF is punishment within the 
meaning of the Eighth Amendment. 


d. Inmate Communication 


Plaintiff objects to the R & R insofar as it recom- 
mends summary judgment in favor of defendants on the 
issue of the “English only” rule. Plaintiff claims it 
infringes on his free exercise of religion rights. 


The rule prohibits inmates from conversing with each 
other in any language except English. Defendants con- 
tend that the rule is necessary to prevent entry of contra- 
band, and checking for rumors of plans of escape, 


4 Plaintiff concedes and admits, “Plaintiff does not chal- 
lenge his transfer and placement ‘at and within the Halawa 
High Security Facility,’ as it is obviously apparent from Plain- 
tiff’s institutional filed and from his criminal convictions that 
the high security facility is a proper place for inmates who pose 
such a threat to the community and to the prison environment.” 
Opposition Memorandum at 4. 


A32 


extortion, or of fights within the facility. Allowing such 
communication, defendants contend, would undermine 
prison security. 


The rule states that “[iJnmates shall communicate in 
the English language only; including telephone calls, 
visits, and letters.” 


The U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly held that 
prison regulations alleged to infringe constitutional 
rights are judged under a “reasonableness” test less 
restrictive than that ordinarily applied to alleged 
infringements of fundamental constitutional rights. 
O’Lone v. Estate of Shabazz, 482 U.S. 340, 347, 107 S.Ct. 
2400, 2404 (1987); Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 78, 86-87, 107 
S.Ct. 2254, 2260-2261 (1987); Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 
562, 99 S.Ct. 1861, 1886 (1979). When a prison regulation 
impinges on inmates’ constitutional rights, the regulation 
is valid if it is “reasoanbly related to legitimate penologi- 
cal interests.” O’Lone, 482 U.S. at 347, 107 S.Ct. at 2404, 
(citing Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. at 89, 107 S.Ct. at 2261). 
Moreover, the Supreme Court in O’Lone further articu- 
lated that a separate burden should not be placed on state 
prison officials to prove that “no reasonable method exis- 
ted by which prisoners’ religious rights could be accom- 
modated without creating bona fide security problems.” 
Id., 482 U.S. at 351, 107 S.Ct. at 2405. Although the avail- 
ability of alternatives is relevant to the reasonableness 
inquiry, the Supreme Court rejected the notion that 
“prison officials have to set up every conceivable alterna- 
tive method of accommodating the claimant’s constitu- 
tional complaint.” Id. 


A33 


This court finds that the regulation prohibiting Plain- 
tiff from praying aloud in Arabic together with another 
inmate is valid as it is “reasonably related to legitimate 
penological interests.” Being enforced for reasons per- 
taining to security interests, the regulation does not arbi- 
trarily infringe upon Plaintiff’s constitutional rights. 
Moreover, in Johnson v. Moore, 926 F.2d 921, 923 (9th Cir. 
1991), the Ninth Circuit held that “[p]risons need only 
provide inmates a ‘reasonable opportunity’ to worship in 
accord with their conscience.” 


The regulation does not prohibit plaintiff from indi- 
vidually praying aloud in Arabic, or from praying with 
another inmate in English. Plaintiff has not asserted that 
praying aloud together with another individual in Arabic 
is a necessary and fundamental tenet of his religion. 
Cinda Sandin, Residency Section Supervisor at Halawa 
High Security Facility, attested that “Conner may pray 
quietly as required by his Muslim faith.” (See affidavit of 
Cinda Sandin attached to Defendants’ Motion for Sum- 
mary Judgment filed November 20, 1989 at 4). 


Thus, the “English-only” rule affords plaintiff a rea- 
sonable opportunity to worship pursuant to the Johnson 
test. 


Plaintiff cites to the four-part test for determining 
whether a prison regulation is reasonably related to a 
legitimate penological interest in Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 
78, 89-90, 107 S.Ct. 2254, 2261-62 (1987) for support of his 
contention that the “English-only” violates his rights to 
freedom of religion. The elements of the test are: 


A34 


(1) whether there is a valid, rational connection between 
the regulation and a legitimate and neutral govern- 
ment interest; 


(2) whether there are alternative means of exercising the 
asserted constitutional right that remain open to 
inmates; 


(3) whether and the extent to which the accommodation 
of the asserted right will impact the prison staff, 
inmates’ liberty and prison resources; and 


(4) whether the regulation represents an exaggerated 
response to prison concerns in light of the ready 
availability of alternatives. 


Johnson, 926 F.2d at 924 (citing Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 78, 
89-90, 107 S.Ct. 2254, 2261-62 (1987)). However, as 
pointed out in Iron Eyes v. Henry, 907 F.2d 810, 813 (8th 
Cir. 1990), “[bJefore the Turner factors are applied to a 
prisoner’s free exercise claim, the inmate must first estab- 
lish the existence of a sincerely held religious belief, and 
that the challenged regulation infringes upon that belief.” 


As noted above, plaintiff has not established that 
praying in Arabic infringes upon the practice of his Mus- 
lim beliefs. Plaintiff is free to pray individually in Arabic, 
or jointly with other inmates in English. Plaintiff has not 
established that praying in Arabic is a tenet of the Mus- 
lim religion, and therefore such a prohibition does not 
infringe upon his beliefs. 


The court rejects plaintiff’s objection to the R & R on 
this issue. 


A35 


e. Retaliation Claim 


Plaintiff objects to the R & R insofar as it recom- 
mends granting defendants’ motion and insofar as it 
holds that plaintiff’s retaliation claim is vague and con- 
clusory. Plaintiff claims he was retaliated against because 
of his status as a “jail-house lawyer.” Plaintiff claims that 
his First Amendment rights are implicated. Objections, at 
20 (citing Bridges v. Russell, 757 F.2d 1155 (11th Cir. 1985)). 
The gist of plaintiff’s claim appears to be that defendants 
retaliate against plaintiff because plaintiff exercises his 
freedom of speech rights by being a jail-house lawyer. 
Plaintiff frames the issues as follows: Were “the actions of 
the named defendants done for the purpose of retaliating 
against plaintiff because of his choice to exercise his right 
to seek redress from government?” Id. 


In connection with this claim, plaintiff takes excep- 
tion to the Magistrate’s finding that plaintiff’s claim that 
he “held a virtual positive behavior since his arrival” at 
HHSF was false. Plaintiff points to his record at HHSF 
which indicates that he was cited for negative behavior 
only once. However, plaintiff, in his affidavit attached to 
his motion opposing defendants’ motion states that he 
has accumulated “a collection of misconduct” while at 
HHSF. Conner affidavit { 21. 


Plaintiff claims that his record demonstrates good 
behavior. Even so, plaintiff claims he was denied 
advancement to more favorable phases of SMCP because 
of his jail-house lawyering. Plaintiff “believes he would be 
able to show that his record in H.H.S.F. . . . was better than 
those inmates who were advanced to the next higher 
level of” SMCP. Objection’s [sic], at 24. However, plaintiff 


A36 


provided no evidence substantiating this claim. He con- 
cedes that at this time he is not prepared to defend 
defendants’ motion on this issue. Id. 


Plaintiff attributes this dearth of evidence to the fact 
that he allegedly received no discovery. Plaintiff also 
requests additional time for discovery based on the “com- 
plexity” of this issue. However, the record indicates oth- 
erwise. Defendants were ordered by the Magistrate on 
November 7, 1989 to file responses to plaintiff's inter- 
rogatories by November 27, 1989. Defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment was not filed until November 20, 
1989. After defendants’ filing, the record is devoid of 
evidence indicating that plaintiff requested or was denied 
discovery. Plaintiff has produced no evidence indicating 
that he was deprived of discovery. 


The court rejects plaintiff’s objections. Plaintiff filed 
the lawsuit on March 14, 1988. Defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment was filed on November 20, 1989. 
Plaintiff had until January 2, 1990 to respond to the 
motion. There was an abundance of time for plaintiff to 
conduct discovery. As plaintiff admits, he has provided 
no evidence supporting his retaliation claims. Therefore, 
the court adopts the Magistrate’s recommendation and 
grants summary judgment to defendants on this issue. 


f. “Every Other Issue” 


Plaintiff includes a “catch-all” provision where he 
objects to every remaining issue that the Magistrate rec- 
ommends be decided in defendants’ favor. Plaintiff pro- 
vides no support for this objection. Rather, he complains 


A37 


that he had insufficient time to prepare an adequate 
objection. 


As noted previously, the court rejects plaintiff’s claim 
regarding the amount of time this court granted plaintiff 
in which to file his objections. Therefore, this reason for 
failing to prepare a substantive objection to the remaining 
issues presented in the R & R is rejected. Moreover, upon 
review of the remaining issues, the court adopts the R & 
R and rejects the catch-all objection. 


The court notes that with respect to the publishers- 
only rule, that such a rule is not per se reasonable 
because of Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520 (1979), which held 
that such rules were constitutional. See Johnson, 926 F.2d 
at 923-25. However, in this case, the evidence indicates 
that plaintiff was entitled to order “hard-cover” books 
from publishers as well as from the library, and that the 
plaintiff is not required to donate the books to the state. 
Plaintiff has provided no evidence to prove he is being 
deprived of literature. 


In addition, the court adds the following regarding 
the R & R’s discussion of sovereign immunity. The defen- 
dants are not immune under the Eleventh Amendment to 
the extent plaintiff seeks to sue them in their official 
capacities for prospective injunctive relief 


In all other respects the court adopts the R & R, as 
plaintiff either has not produced evidence to substantiate 
such claims or has failed to argue the merits. 


A38 


g. Issues Not raised in Summary Judgment 


Plaintiff claims that there are other claims in this 
lawsuit that have not been disposed of by way of the 
motions. The court rejects this argument. Plaintiff was 
put on notice by defendants’ motion that defendants 
sought to dispose of the entire lawsuit. For example, 
defendants stated that they sought “Summary Judgment 
in their favor in the above-entitled action on the ground 
that defendants are entitled to judgment in their favor as 
a matter of law.” Defendants, Motion, cover page 
(emphasis added); id. at 20 (“The complaint should 
accordingly be dismissed.”). 


IV. CONCLUSION 


Based upon the foregoing reasons, this court adopts 
the R & R granting defendants’ motion for summary 
judgment, denying plaintiff's cross motion for summary 
judgment, and dismissing the complaint with prejudice. 


DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, SEP 30 1991. 


/s/ Alan C. Kay 
United States District Judge 


DeMont R.D Conner v. Theodore Sakai, et al.; Civil No. 
88-0169 ACK; Order Adopting Magistrate's Report and Rec- 
ommendation Granting Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
Judgment. 


A39 


APPENDIX “D” 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
DISTRICT OF HAWAII 


DEMONT RAPAHEL [sic] JUDGMENT 
DARWIN CONNER IN A CIVIL CASE 


V. CASE NUMBER: 


CIVIL 
T 
HEODORE SAKAI, et al 88-00169 ACK 


(Filed Sept. 30, 1991) 


Jury Verdict. This action came before the Court for a 
trial by jury. The issues have been tried and the jury 
has rendered its verdict. 


| >< 


Decision by Court. This action came to trial or hear- 
ing before the Court. The issues have been tried or 
heard and a decision has been rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED 
that the court adopts the Report and Recommendation 
granting Defendants’ motion for summary judgment, 
denying Plaintiff’s cross motion for summary judgment, 
and dismissing the complaint with prejudice. 


September 30, 1991 /s/ Walter A.Y.H. Chinn 
Date Clerk WALTER 
A.Y.H. CHINN 


cc: all parties 
(By) Deputy Clerk 


A40 


APPENDIX “E” 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Defendants-Appellees. Feb. 25, 1994 


DeMont R.D. Conner, ) No. 91-16704 
Plaintiff-Appellant, pod No. 88-0169- 
" ) ORDER 
Theodore Sakai et al., (Filed 
) 
) 


Before: BROWNING, NORRIS, AND REINHARDT, Cir- 
cuit Judges 


The panel has voted to deny the petition for rehear- 
ing and to reject the suggestion for rehearing en banc. 


The full court was advised of the suggestion for 
rehearing en banc and no active judge has requested a 
vote on whether to rehear the matter en banc. Fed. R. 


App. P. 35. 


The petition for rehearing is denied and the sugges- 
tion for rehearing en banc is rejected. 


A4l 


APPENDIX “F” 
(Seal) 
STATE OF HAWAII 


DEPARTMENT OF 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
AND HOUSING 


TITLE 17, ADMINISTRATIVE 
RULES OF THE 
CORRECTIONS DIVISION 


INMATE HANDBOOK 
OCTOBER 1983 


[MATERIAL DELETED] 


SUBCHAPTER 2 
THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS 


§17-201-4 General provisions. The adjustment process 
tailors punishment for specific rule violations to the indi- 
vidual’s training and treatment needs while maintaining 
facility order and ensuring respect for rules and the 
rights of others. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) 
(Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-5 Rights, privileges, and responsibilities. (a) The 
rights and privileges of all inmates and wards shall be as 
follows: 


(1) You may expect that as a human being you 
will be treated respectfully, impartially, 
and fairly by all personnel. 


(2) You shall be informed of the rules, pro- 
cedures, and schedules concerning the 
operation of the institution. 


A42 A43 

(3) You have the right to freedom of religious (2) You have the responsibility to know and 
affiliation, and voluntary religious wor- abide by the rules, procedures, and sched- 
ship. ules concerning the operation of the insti- 

;' ;' tution. 

(4) You will be provided health care which 
includes nutritious meals, proper bedding (3) You have the responsibility to recognize, 
and clothing, a laundry schedule for respect, and not interfere with the rights 
cleanliness of the same, an opportunity to of others. 
agp regularly, ee ae ge (4) It is your responsibility to not waste food, 
res Porro a t o: nf “sg ese tures to follow the laundry and shower sched- 
SS eee ule, to maintain neat and clean living 

(5) You may reasonably correspond and visit quarters, and to seek medical and dental 
with family members, friends, and other care as you may need it. 
persons according to the rules and sched- (5) It is your responsibility to conduct your- 
to security, order, or correctional program- pass contraband, and to not violate the 
TURE. law through your correspondence. 

(6) You may have access to the courts by cor- (6) You have the responsibility to present to 
respondence on matters such as the legal- the court honestly and fairly your peti- 
ity of your conviction, pending criminal tions, questions, and problems. 
cases, or the conditions of your confine- , — - 

(7) Itis your responsibility to seek and utilize 


(7) 


(8) 


ment. 


You may utilize reading material for edu- 
cational purposes and for your own enjoy- 
ment. 


You have the right to participate in coun- 
seling, education, vocational training, 
employment, and other programs as far as 
resources are available and in keeping 
with your interests, needs, and abilities. 


(8) 


reading materials for personal benefit, 
without depriving others of their equal 
right to the use of this material. 


You have the responsibility to take advar- 
tage of activities which may help you live 
a successful and law abiding life within 
the institution and in the community. You 
will be expected to abide by the regula- 
tions governing the use of such activities. 
[Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3 (Imp: 


HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-6 Prohibited acts within institutions of the divi- 
sion; greatest misconduct category. (a) Acts constituting mis- 
conduct of the greatest category shall be as follows: 


(b) The responsibilities of all inmates and wards 
shall be as follows: 


(1) You have the responsibility to treat others 
respectfully, impartially, and fairly. 


(1) 
(2) 
(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 
(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


(12) 
(13) 


A44 


Sexual assault. 
Killing. 


Assaulting any person, with or without a 
dangerous instrument, causing bodily 
injury. 

The use of force on or threats to a correc- 
tional worker or the worker’s family. 


Escape: 


(A) From closed confinement, with or 
without threat of violence; 


(B) From an open facility or program 
involving the use of violence or 
threat of violence. 


Setting a fire. 


Destroying, altering, or damaging govern- 
ment property or the property of another 
person resulting in damage of $1,000 or 
more, including irreplaceable documents. 


Adulteration of any food or drink which 
does or could result in serious bodily 
injury or death. 


Possession or introduction of an explosive 
or ammunition. 


Possession or introduction of any firearm, 
weapon, sharpened instrument, knife, or 
other dangerous instrument. 


Rioting. 
Encouraging others to riot. 


The use of force or violence resulting in 
the obstruction, hindrance, or impairment 


(14) 


(15) 


(b) Sanctions which may be imposed as punishment 
for acts listed in subsection (a) shall include one or more 


A45 


of the performance of a correctional func- 
tion by a public servant. 


Any lesser and reasonably included 
offense of the acts in paragraph (1) to (13). 


Any other criminal act which the Hawaii 
Penal Code classifies as a class A felony. 


of the following: 


(1) 
(2) 


§17-201-7 Prohibited acts; high misconduct category. (a) 
Acts constituting misconduct of high category shall be as 


follows: 
(1) 
(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


Disciplinary segregation up to sixty days. 


Any other sanction other than disciplinary 
segregation. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS 
§353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


Fighting with another person. 


Threatening another person, other than a 
correctional worker, with bodily harm, or 
with any offense against the other person 
or the other person’s property. 


Extortion, blackmail, protection: demand- 
ing or receiving anything of value in 
return for protection against others, to 
avoid bodily harm, or under threat of 
informing. 


Assaulting any person without weapon or 
dangerous instrument. 


Escape from an open institution or pro- 
gram, conditional release center, or work 


(6) 
(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 
(11) 


(12) 


(13) 


(14) 


(15) 


(16) 


(17) 


A46 


release furlough which does not involve 
the use or threat of violence. 
Attempting or planning escape. 


Destroying, altering, or damaging govern- 
ment property or the property of another 
person resulting in damages between 
$500-$999.99. 


Tampering with or blocking any locking 


‘device. 


Adulteration of any food or drink which 
could or does result in bodily injury or 
sickness. 


Possession of an unauthorized tool. 


Possession or introduction or use of any 
narcotic paraphernalia, drugs, or intoxi- 
cants not prescribed for the individual by 
the medical staff. 


Possession of any staff member’s clothing 
or equipment. 


Encouraging or inciting others to refuse to 
work or to participate in work stoppage. 


The use of physical interference or obsta- 
cle resulting in the obstruction, hindrance, 
or impairment of the performance of a 
correctional function by a public servant. 


Giving or offering any public official or 
staff member a bribe. 


Any lesser and reasonably included 
offense of paragraphs (1) to (15). 


Any other criminal act which the Hawaii 
Penal Code classifies as a class B felony. 


A47 


(b) Sanctions which may be imposed as punishment 
for acts listed in subsection (a) shall include one or more 
of the following: 


(1) Disciplinary segregation up to thirty days. 


(2) Any other sanction other than disciplinary 
segregation. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS 
§353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-8 Prohibited acts; moderate misconduct category. 
(a) Acts constituting misconduct of moderate category 
shall be as follows: 


(1) Engaging in sexual acts. 


(2) Making sexual proposals or threats to 
another. 


(3) Indecent exposure. 
(4) Wearing a disguise or a mask. 


(5) Destroying, altering, or damaging govern- 
ment property or the property of another 
person resulting in damages between 
$50-$499.99. 


(6) Theft. 
(7) Misuse of authorized medication. 


(8) Possession of unauthorized money or cur- 
rency. 


(9) Loaning of property or anything of value 
for profit or increased return. 


(10) Possession of anything not authorized for 
retention or receipt by the inmate or ward 
and not issued to the inmate or ward 
through regular institutional channels. 


(11) 


(12) 


(13) 


(14) 


(15) 


(16) 


(17) 


(18) 
(19) 
(20) 


(21) 


(22) 
(23) 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 


A48 


Refusing to obey an order of any staff 
member. 


Violating a condition of any community 
release or furlough program. 


Unexcused absence from work, or other 
authorized assignment. 


Failing to perform work as instructed by a 
staff member. 


Lying or providing false statements, infor- 
mation, or documents to a staff member, 
government official, or member of the 
public. 


Counterfeiting, or unauthorized reproduc- 
tion of any document, article, or identi- 
fication, money, security, or official paper. 


Participating in an unauthorized meeting 
or gathering. 


Being in an unauthorized area. 
Failure to follow safety or sanitary rules. 


Using any equipment or machinery which 
is not specifically authorized. 


Using any equipment or machinery con- 
trary to instructions or posted safety stan- 
dards. 


Failing to stand count. 

Interfering with the taking count. 
Making intoxicants or alcoholic beverage. 
Being intoxicated. 


Gambling. 


(27) 
(28) 
(29) 


(30) 


(31) 


(32) 


(33) 


(b) Sanctions which may be imposed as punishment 
for acts listed in subsection (a) shall include one or more 


A49 


Preparing or conducting a gambling pool. 
Possession of gambling paraphernalia. 


Being unsanitary or untidy; failing to keep 
one’s person and one’s quarters in accor- 
dance with posted safety standards. 


Unauthorized contacts with the public or 
other inmates. 


Giving money or anything of value to or 
accepting money or anything of value 
from an inmate or ward, a member of the 
inmate’s or ward’s family, or friend. 


Any lesser and reasonably included 
offense of paragraphs (1) to (31). 


Any other criminal act which the Hawaii 
Penal Code classifies as a class C felony 
and misdemeanor. 


of the following: 


(1) 


(2) 


§17-201-9 Prohibited acts; low moderate misconduct cate- 
gory. (a) Acts constituting misconduct of low moderate 


Disciplinary segregation up to fourteen 
days. 


Any sanction other than disciplinary seg- 
regation. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS 
§353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


category shall be as follows: 


(1) 


Destroying, altering, or damaging govern- 
ment property, or the property of another 
person resulting in damage less than $50. 


A50 


(2) Possession of property belonging to 
another person. 


(3) Possessing unauthorized clothing. 
(4) Malingering, feigning an illness. 


(5) Using abusive or obscene language to a 
staff member. 


(6) Smoking where prohibited. 
(7) Tattooing or self mutilation. 
(8) Unauthorized use of mail or telephone. 


(9) Correspondence or conduct with a visitor 
in violation of rules. 


(10) Any lesser and reasonably included 
offense of paragraphs (1) to (9). 


(11) Any other criminal act which the Hawaii 
Penal Code classifies as a petty misde- 
meanor. 


(12) Harassment of employees. 


(b) Sanctions which may be imposed as punishment 
for acts listed in subsection (a) shall include one or more 
of the following: 


(1) Disciplinary segregation up to four hours 
in cell. 


(2) Monetary restitution. 


(3) Any sanction other than disciplinary seg- 
regation. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS 
§353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-10 Prohibited acts; minor misconduct category. 
(a) Acts constituting misconduct of minor category shall 


A51 


be any criminal act which the Hawaii Penal Code classi- 
fies as a violation. 


(b) Sanctions which may be imposed as punishment 
for acts in subsection (a) shall include one or more of the 
following: 

(1) Loss of privileges (i.e., community recre- 
ation; commissary; snacks; cigarettes, 
smoking; personal visits - no longer than 
fifteen days; personal correspondence; per- 


sonal phone calls for not longer than fifteen 
days). 


(2) Impound inmate’s personal property. 
(3) Extra duty. 
(4) Reprimand. 


(c) Attempting to commit any of the above acts, 
aiding another person to commit any of the above acts, 
and conspiring to commit any of the above acts shall be 
considered the same as a commission of the act itself. [Eff. 
Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-11 Minor misconduct; Adjustments. (a) A 
minor rule violation is defined as that which poses no 
serious threat to the safety, security, or welfare of the 
staff, other inmates or wards, or the institution or subjects 
the individual to the imposition of lesser penalties. Such 
misconduct may be punished by a staff member desig- 
nated by the facility administrator who did not make the 
charge against the inmate or ward. The staff member 
shall inform the inmate or ward that the individual is 
accused of committing a minor infraction, to which the 
individual shall be given a brief opportunity to respond, 
to offer an explanation in defense, or otherwise show that 


A52 


the individual is not guilty of the alleged misconduct. 
The following sanctions may be imposed: 


(1) Loss of privileges; e.g., community recre- 
ation; commissary; snacks, cigarettes; 
smoking; personal visits no longer than fif- 
teen days; personal correspondence no 
longer than fifteen days; personal phone 
calls. 


(2) Impound inmate's or ward's personal prop- 
erty. 


(3) Extra duty. 
(4) Reprimand. 


(b) The officer shall prepare a brief written report to 
be given to and placed in the individual’s file, indicating 
the infraction, the sanction, and the date or dates the 
sanction is to be or was carried out. JEff. Oct. 6, 1983] 
(Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-12 Serious misconduct. A serious rule viola- 
tion is defined as that which poses a serious threat to the 
safety, security, or welfare of the staff, other inmates or 
wards, or the institution and subjects the individual to 
the imposition of serious penalties such as segregation for 
longer than four hours. Such misconduct shall be pun- 
ished through the adjustment committee pursuant to the 
procedures in sections 17-201-13 to 17-201-20. [Eff. Oct. 6, 
1983] (auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-13 Adjustment committee. The adjustment 
committee shall be normally composed of at least three 
members who are not actually biased against the inmate 
or ward. A small facility may designate one person to act 


A53 


in the capacity of the adjustment committee. [Eff. Oct. 6, 
1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-14 Pre-hearing detention. An inmate or ward 
may be detained for a reasonable time pending an adjust- 
ment committee hearing if, in the judgment of the facility 
administrator, detention is necessary: 


(1) To protect life or limb; 


(2) For the security or good government of the 
facility; 


(3) To protect the community; 


(4) For any other good reason. [Eff. Oct. 6, 
1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS 
§353-3) 


§17-201-15 Pre-hearing investigation. (a) A staff mem- 
ber may conduct a complete investigation into the facts of 
the alleged misconduct to determine if there is probable 
cause to believe the inmate or ward committed miscon- 
duct. If the staff member finds sufficient cause to believe 
that a rule violation has occurred, the adjudication pro- 
cedures may be initiated. Additionally, the pre-hearing 
investigator may present the evidence against the inmate 
or ward to the adjustment committee. 


(b) The implementation of a pre-hearing investiga- 
tion shall be within the facility administrator’s discretion. 
(Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-16 Notice. (a) The inmate or ward shall 
receive prior notice that an adjustment committee hearing 
will be held regarding the individual. 


(b) Within a reasonable time, not less than twenty- 
four hours before the hearing, the charged inmate or 


A54 


ward shall be served with written notice of the time and 
place of the adjustment committee hearing, what the 
specific charges are, including a brief notation of the 
facts. If the inmate or ward waives the twenty-four hour 
period, the waiver shall be reduced to writing and signed 
by the inmate or ward on the face of the notice. 


(c) The inmate or ward or counsel substitute shall 
have the opportunity to review all relevant non-confiden- 
tial reports of misconduct or a summary of the details 
thereof during the period between the notice and the 
hearing. 


(d) The misconduct report or summary shall briefly 
contain the following: 


(1) The specific rule violated; 
(2) The facts supporting the charge; 
(3) Any unusual inmate or ward behavior; 


(4) Any staff or inmate or ward witnesses; the 
disposition of any physical evidence (e.g., 
weapons); and 


(5) Any immediate action taken. [Eff. Oct. 6, 
1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS 
§353-3) 


§17-201-17 Hearing. (a) The inmate or ward has a 
right to appear at the adjustment committee hearing, 
except where institutional safety or the good government 
of the facility would be jeopardized. If the individual is 
excluded from the hearing, reasons shall be given in 
writing. If the inmate or ward declines to attend the 
hearing, it shall be held regardless of the inmate’s or 
ward’s absence. 


A55 


(b) The committee shall explain the reason for the 
hearing and the nature of the charge or charges against 
the inmate or ward. The inmate or ward shall plead 
guilty or not guilty to the charges. Failure to plead shall 
be accepted as a plea of not guilty. 


(1) A plea of guilty eliminates the need to con- 
sider other evidence against the inmate or 
ward who shall then be given an oppor- 
tunity to explain the actions or offer evi- 
dence in mitigation. 


(2) A plea of not guilty necessitates the consid- 
eration of evidence against the inmate or 
ward. 


(c) The inmate or ward shall be advised of the right 
to remain silent, but that silence may be used as a permis- 
sible inference of guilt. An inmate or ward cannot, how- 
ever, be compelled to testify against oneself without the 
granting of immunity and may not be required to waive 
that immunity. 


(d) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The 
committee may rely on any form of evidence, documen- 
tary, or testimonial, that it believes is reliable. 


(e) Confrontation and cross examination: 


(1) The inmate or ward may be given the privi- 
lege to confront and cross examine adverse 
witnesses. 


(2) The committee may deny confrontation and 
cross examination and identification of 
adverse witnesses if in its judgment such a 
confrontation would: 


aia, | 


A56 


(A) Subject the witnesses to potential 
reprisal; 


(B) Jeopardize the security or good gov- 
ernment of the facility; 


(C) Be unduly hazardous to the facility's 
safety or correctional goals; or 


(D) Otherwise reasonably appear to be 
impractical or unwarranted. 


(3) If confrontation and cross examination and 
identification of adverse witnesses are 
denied, the committee is encouraged to 
enter in the record of the proceeding and 
make available to the inmate or ward an 
explanation for the denial. Additionally, the 
inmate or ward may be given an oral or 
written summary of the confidential evi- 
dence against the individual and provided 
an opportunity to respond. 


(f) The inmate or ward shall be given an opportunity to 
respond to evidence against the inmate or ward, explain 
the alleged misconduct, or offer evidence of mitigation. 


(1) The inmate or ward should be permitted to 
call witnesses and present evidence of 
defense as long as it will not be unduly 
hazardous to institutional safety or correc- 
tional goals. 


(2) The committee may deny the inmate’s or 
ward's calling of certain witnesses or pre- 
sentation of certain evidence, after being 
given an offer of proof as to the nature of 
the evidence, for reasons such as: 


A57 


(A) Irrelevance; 
(B) Lack of necessity; 


(C) The hazards presented in individual 
cases; or 


(D) Any other justifiable reason. 


In this regard, the committee may keep the hear- 
ing within reasonable limits and refuse the pre- 
sentation of evidence or the calling of witnesses, 
keeping in mind the right of the inmate or ward 
to be heard. The committee is encouraged to 
state the reason for the refusal. 


(g) An inmate or ward siall be permitted to employ 
counsel substitute. A counsel substitute shall be a mem- 
ber of the facility staff who did not actively participate in 
the process by which the individual was brought before 
the committee or, in the facility administrator’s discre- 
tion, a sufficiently competent inmate or ward designated 
by the facility staff. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) 
‘Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-18 Findings. (a) The inmate o: ward has a 
right to be apprised of the findings of the adjustment 
committee. 


(b) Upon completion of the hearing, the committee 
may take the matter under advisement and render a 
decision based upon evidence presented at the hearing to 
which the individual had an opportunity to respond or 
any cumulative evidence which may subsequently come 
to light may be used as a permissible inference of guilt, 
although disciplinary action shall be based upon more 
than mere silence. A finding of guilt shall be made where: 


A58 


(1) The inmate or ward admits the violation or 
pleads guilty. 


(2) The charge is supported by substantial evi- 
dence. 


(c) The inmate or ward shall be given a brief written 
summary of the committee’s findings which shall be 
entered in the case file. The findings will briefly set forth 
the evidence relied upon and the reasons for the action 
taken. The findings may properly exclude certain items of 
evidence if necessitated by personal or institutional 
safety and goals; the fact that evidence has been omitted 
and the reason or reasons therefor must be set forth in the 
findings. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS 
§353-3) 


§17-201-19 Punishment. (a) The adjustment committee 
may render sanctions commensurate with the gravity of 
the rule and the severity of the violation. Corporal pun- 
ishment is prohibited, provided that physical force may 
be employed for self defense or defense of others, to 
maintain the immediate order and security of the prison, 
to remove an inmate or ward pursuant to a lawful order, 
or any other reason demanded by the exigencies of insti- 
tutional safety and correctional goals. The following 
types of punishment may be rendered by the adjustment 
committee: 


(1) Temporary loss of privileges. 


(2) Segregation or confinement not longer than 
sixty days, provided that a longer period 
may be imposed with the expressed written 
approval of the corrections division admin- 
istrator, and the committee shall review the 


A59 


inmate’s or ward’s confinement at least 
once every thirty days. 


(3) Any other punishment deemed necessary 
by the adjustment committee. 


(b) The committee may also refer the matter to the 
program committee for further action. A description of 
the basic living levels of disciplinary confinement shall be 
as provided in subsections (c) to (h). 


(c) The quarters used for segregation should be 
ventilated, adequately lighted, and maintained in a sani- 
tary condition by the inmate or ward at all times. Nor- 
mally, a segregated inmate or ward should be entitled to 
clothing, and bedding. If an inmate or ward is likely to 
destroy the clothing or bedding, injure oneself, or create a 
disturbance detrimental to others, or for other good rea- 
sons, materials may be removed from the cell until the 
condition which prompted removal subsides. 


(d) Segregated inmates or wards shall be given an 
adequately nutritious diet. 


{e) Segregated inmates or wards shall maintain an 
acceptable level of personal hygiene. 


(f) Each segregated inmate or ward should be per- 
mitted indoor or outdoor exercise, unless security or 
institutional government dictates otherwise. 


(g) Personal property will ordinarily be impounded, 
inventoried, and receipted. 


(h) Normally, religious and legal materials are per- 
mitted. However, inmates or wards may be denied all 
reading and legal materials during temporary confine- 
ment for not longer than fifteen days. Access to legal 


~~ 


A60 


materials shall be permitted if an inmate or ward demon- 
strates the need for the materials and for prompt access 
to the courts in preparation of a habeas corpus petition or 
other application for relief. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: HRS 
§353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


§17-201-20 Review. (a) Each inmate or ward has the 
right to seek administrative review of the decision of the 
disciplinary hearing officer or adjustment committee 
through the grievance process. Review shall be initiated 
within fourteen calendar days of the day of receipt of the 
committee's decision. 


(b) The facility administrator may also initiate 
review of any adjustment committee decision and it shall 
be within the administrator’s discretion to modify any 
committee findings or decisions. The administrator may 
demand any matter to the adjustment committee for fur- 
ther hearing or rehearing if the administrator believes it 
to be in the interest of justice. [Eff. Oct. 6, 1983] (Auth: 
HRS §353-3) (Imp: HRS §353-3) 


A6l 


APPENDIX “G” 


Department of Social Services and Housing 
Corrections Division 


MISCONDUCT REPORT 
Facility HHSF 
Prepared on: 8-13-87 


TO: MARIANO, Eugene ACO VI 
(Watch Supervisor) 


FROM: FURTADO, Gordon ACO III 
(Name, title — Reporting Officer) 


RE: X CONNER, Demont SSN: 
(Name of Violator) (ID Number) 


FACTS CONCERNING THE MISCONDUCT: 
(Give time occurred/discovered, rule(s) violated, 
location, what happened and time the incident 
ceased or was corrected.) 


On Thu. Aug. 13, 1987 at approx. 0900 hrs. I ACO G. 
FURTADO while on duty in Module A along with ACO 
R. AHUNA escorted INMATE D. CONNER from his cell 
(quad II) to the module program area. At this time | 
informed Inmate CONNER to move against the wall to be 
strip-searched before leaving the module. Inmate CON- 
NER then stripped, faced the wall and squatted. I then 
asked Inmate CONNER to put both hands on the wail 
and lift up both feet one at a time to which he did with no 
incident. 


I then asked him to step back, bend over and with 
both hands spread his buttocks so that I could check for 
contraband in the rectal area to which he said “Fuck!” in 
an angry tone of voice. This part of the search was thus 


A62 


completed, but as Inmate CONNER turned around and 
faced this writer he stared at me and stated “Why are you 
harassing me?” I informed him that I’m just following a 
routine procedure. He then stated in a very sarcastic 
voice “What you got something personal against me! 
Why you harassing me?” I then told him all you have to 
do is just listen and follow what I tell you to do but 
Inmate CONNER just kept on making sarcastic remarks 
about being harassed and the way that this writer was 
doing kishis job. 


At this time because of the tense atmosphere and also 
the very provoking attitude towards this writer, Sgt. 
SUMMERS who witnessed this incident cancelled l#tmate 
CONNER’s privilege of religious counselling. Inmate 
CONNER was then escorted back to his cell by this wrier 
and ACO D. COELHO. 


It should be noted that as Inmate CONNER went 
through the strip search procedures he moved very slow 
and questioned every move as if trying to hinder the 
search, hoping that this writer might overlook a certain 
area. Inmate CONNER appeared to be very unruly in his 
attitude a towards this writer. 

It appears that Inmate D. CONNER is in violation of 
CD rules sec. 17-201-7 #14 & 16, 17-201-9 #5 & #12. 


INVESTIGATION: (by supervisor - statements of violator, 
witness(es)) 


On Friday, 8/14/87 at approximately 1935 hrs. this 
writer interviewed inmate CONNERS concerning an 
alleged misconduct. CONNERS was apprised of his con- 
stitutional rights and the charges against him. 


A63 


CONNERS claims that he did not swear at ACO 
FURTADO and did not disobey any order given by ACO 
FURTADO, CONNERS claims that ACO FURTADO was 
unreasonable in the strip search procedure and that ACO 
FURTADO did not show him (CONNERS) any respect. 
CONNERS also feels that the staff treats inmates like 
dogs when they are being stripped and humiliates 
inmates. 


At that time I explained to inmate CONNERS that 
ACO FURTADO was only following orders in his (ACO 
FURTADO’s) strip searching techniques and that all 
inmates are to be searched in the same manner. 


Subsequently, I talked to ACO FURTADO concerning 
the incident and from ACO FURTADO’s testimony the 
search was conducted properly in a professional manner. 
As a result of this investigation there appears to be proba- 
ble cause that inmate CONNERS may be in violation of 
the DSSH Inmate Handbook/Rules And Regulations and 
that this matter be referred to the adjustment committee. 


R. JOHNSON, ACO IV, HCF 
/s/ R. Johnson 


FINDINGS: 
{[ |] Guilty 
[ ] Not Guilty 


[X] Referred to Adjustment Committee 


A64 


CHARGE(S) RULE # 


17-201-7 The use of physical interference 14 & 16 
or obstacle resulting in the obstruction, 

hindrance, or impairment of the 

performance of a correctional function by 

a public servant. 


17-201-9 Using abusive or obscene 5 
language to a staff member. 


17-201-9 Harassment of employees. 12 
INFORMAL ADJUSTMENT BY SUPERVISOR: 


| |] Withdrawal of: 


(specify) 


| | Extra Work assigned 
| | Confinement 


PERIOD OF CORRECTIVE ACTION: 


hours, OR 


Beginning 


(time) | (day) 


and ending 
BY: 


(Name, supervisor) 
DATE: 


(Title) 


A65 


STATE OF HAWAII 
Department of Social Services and Housing 
Corrections Division 


Facility HHSF 
Conner, Demont 
(Name) (Number) 


NOTICE OF REPORT OF MISCONDUCT 


Date Aug. 25, 1987 Time 1200 hrs. 

(Date) 

e You are herein notified that a written report of miscon- 

duct was filed against you on Aug. 13, 1987 . A copy of 
the charge(s) are listed below. 


e A hearing on the charge(s) has been scheduled and you 
are to be present at HHSF PBHR ; 


(Location) 
0900 hrs. , on Aug. 28, , 1987. 
(Time) (Date) 


As required by Corrections Division procedure, this hear- 
ing has been scheduled to determine the facts and admin- 
ister just corrective action. You have the right to: 1) Have 
any charge explained to you; 2) Question those who have 
made any charge against you and examine any written 
material concerning the charge; 3) Explain any charge 
brought against you; 4) Request an administrative review 
through the adjustment process. 


Charge(s): 17-201-7 (14) & (16); The use of physical 
interference or obstcale [sic] resulting in the 
obstruction, hindrance, or impairment of the 
performance of a correctional funtion [sic] by 
a public servant. 


A66 


17-201-9 (5 ); Using abusive or obscene lan- 
guage to a staff mmember [sic]. 


17-201-9 (12); Harassment of employees. 


Facts supporting the charge(s) are as stated on the 
attached Misconduct Report. 


/s/ Cinda Sandin 
Chairman 


Receipt of notice of charges and rights: 


I acknowledge receipt of the above charges. I understand 
that 1: may __/ may not X, have legal counsel present 
at the hearing. I also understand that I have 24 hours 
notice prior to the hearing. 1 


I do I do not X_ waive legal counsel. 

I do I do not X_ waive my right to 24 hour prior 

notice. 

Date: 8/25/87 Signature: /s/ Demont R.D. Conner 
(Resident) 


Findings and Disposition of Corrective Action: FIND- 
INGS: The Adjustment Hearing was held 8/28/87. The 
Committee consisted of UM Cinda Sandin (Chairman), 
SW Carolyn Corley and ACO Shook. The inmate pled not 
guilty to the three charges. The inmate was found not 
guilty of 17-201-7(14) & (16) 


DISPOSITION: 17-201-7 (14 & 16) 30 days disciplinary 
segregation. 
17-201-9(5) 4 hours disciplinary segrega- 
tion concurrent 


A67 


17-201-9(12) 4 hours disciplinary seg- 
regation concurrent 
17-201-7(14 & 16) charges are expunged. NOT GUILTY ON 
BOTH COUNTS. The segregation period will run from 
8/31/87 to 9/29/87." 


Evidence relied upon for decision: The Committee based 
their decision upon the inmate’s statements that during the 
strip search procedure he turned around after squatting and 
looked at the ACO. He was then directed to “spead his 
cheeks” by ACO Furtado as part of the new strip search 
procedure. He felt angry, humiliated and apprehensive. He 
then “eyed up” ACO Furtado and was hesitant to comply. 
He further indicated that he dislikes ACO Furtado and feels 
he should not work on the module. The inmate admitted 
saying the word “fuck” during the procedure. The Commit- 
tee also reviewed the submitted reports. Witnesses were 
unavailable due to move to the medium facility and being 
short staffed on the modules. 


/s/ Cinda Sandin 8/31/87 
Committee Chairman Date 


Receipt of findings and disposition: 


/s/ Demont R.D. Conner 8/31/87 
Inmate Date 


* [This exhibit reflects the ultimate disposition of the charges. 
Conner was originally found guilty of all charges lodged 
against him.] 


