Supreme Court,” U.S. 


{END 
FOR ARGU | FILED 
/- MAR 15 1996 
No. 95-559 
a CLERK 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. and NICK LOMBARDI, 


Petitioners, 


PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 


Respondents. 
+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The 
Montana Supreme Court 


S 


BRIEF AMICI CURIAE OF THE AMERICAN 
ASSOCIATION OF RETIRED PERSONS AND 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CONSUMER 
ADVOCATES IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


+ 


DeBporAH M. ZuUCKERMAN* 
STEVEN S. ZALEZNICK 
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 
oF Retirep PERSONS 

601 E Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20049 
(202) 434-6045 


PATRICIA STURDEVANT 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF 
CONSUMER ADVOCATES 

225 Bush Street 
San Francisco, CA 94104 
(415) 397-7057 


* Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
ee SE ic.beeeseebescdvdecciceces ii 
STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE.... 1 
a ee re 4 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ................. 4 
PED hinekn 9 n0insede sh) Veoh aad ib whe sckvkes 5 


I. FULL DISCLOSURE OF MANDATORY BIND- 
ING ARBITRATION CLAUSES IS CRITICAL 
BECAUSE THE PROCESS FUNDAMENTALLY 
ALTERS THE PARTIES’ DISPUTE RESOLU- 
VRE CEs casrsvctacessscassetdeccecess 5 


A. Arbitration Was Designed as an Option for 
Commercial Transactions and Is Premised 
CG RR eT ee en ae 5 


B. The Right to a Jury is Fundamental in 
American Jurisprudence and Waivers of 
this Right Must Be Knowing and Voluntary 
and Should Not Be Presumed............ 8 


C. Many Features of Arbitration Inure to the 
Benefit of Equals, But Are Extremely 
Unfair to Individuals of Unequal and 
CET Ge oss vcceviccdvivanecevessees 11 


D. States Recognize that Unanticipated Terms 
of Standardized Adhesion Contracts Must 
Be Called to the Attention of the Adhering 
Party to Be Enforceable ................. 18 


Il. PUBLIC POLICIES FAVORING ALTERNATIVE 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION SHOULD NOT 
OVERRIDE CONSUMERS’ RIGHTS AND 
i D> ose ebcnesonthasengeheiceve se 21 


CEPOEEIED 6 cee 6 hc ca serdeeiceesoosedastoeseueve .23 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. v. Intel Corp., 885 P.2d 
ok? 8... Perret 17 


Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 36 (1974) ..9, 10 


AT&T Technologies, Inc. v. Communications Workers 


of Am., 475 U.S. 643 (1986) .......-. cece eee eee eees 6 
Barber v. Page, 390 U.S. 719 (1968). .......- 6c eeeee eens y 
Barrentine v. Arkansas-Best Freight Sys., 450 U.S. 

FAB (BOGE). os ccvecccovcececctvepsseebuscounesseus 10 
Bernhardt v. Polygraphic Co. of Am., Inc., 350 U.S. 

298 COGDED «00 co vccvccddccocncnecsecsvesesububessnaues 4 


D.H. Overmyer Co. v. Frick Co., 405 U.S. 174 (1972) ..... 9 
First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 115 S. Ct. 


ki errs 6, 10, 11, 22 
Freeman v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 535 P.2d 

eg = B , Ferrer ee ye ree 22 
Hefele v. Catanzaro, 727 S.W.2d 475 (Mo. Ct. App. 

WO). vccecsccceseevcentsésbbbeusbanseteleeeeeneee 20 
Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458 (1938)...........-00 0s 9 


Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 115 S. 
oF PR re 6, 11 


Merrill Lynch v. Bobker, 808 F.2d 930 (2d Cir. 1986) .... 13 


Moncharsh v. Heily & Blase, 832 P.2d 899 (Cal. 
SORE). . coveccausudvenséensesbeemeenne 13, 17, 18, 22 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Ohio Bell Tel. Co. v. Public Utilities Comm'n, 301 
EE IS OS PT 8 
That Way Prod. Co. v. Directors Guild of Am., Inc., 
158 Cal. Rptr. 475 (Ct. App. 1979) ................ 17 
U.S. Bulk Carriers, Inc. v. Arguelles, 400 U.S. 351 
DTESGGEGEGEbs obs en6ennnsoves cockeccccecesce: 10 


Victoria v. Superior Court, 710 P.2d 833 (Cal. 1985)... . 22 


Volt Info. Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland 
Stanford Junior Univ., 489 U.S. 468 (1989)... .. 3, 4, 6, 11 


STATUTES 
Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq. (1988 
SU Ce) C66Use Swe eddcccscccseccecsseves ss 3, 6 
Cal. Civ. Code § 1677(b) (West 1985)................ 19 
Cal. Civ. Code § 1803.2 (West Supp. 1996) .......... 19 
Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1295 (West 1982)............. 20 
Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1298 (West 1982 & Supp. 
ARMED chboedbadbencbedanccesectccesescees: 20 
Mo. Ann. Stat. §§ 435.350, 435.460 (Vernon 1992 & 
DEED G5 Caneeteeeessccccoceceecccccocccccce: 20 
Mont. Code Ann. § 27-5-111 et seq. (1995) .......... 11 
Mont. Code Ann. § 27-5-114(4) (1995)............... 11 
Mont. Code Ann. § 31-1-231(2), (3) (1995)........... 19 


Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 224(b) (West Supp. 
ee cdecbbecetcees 20 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 


CONSTITUTIONS 


Cal. Const. art. 1, § 16 (West 1983 & Supp. 1995)..... 


Mont. Const. art. IL, § 26 (Mont. Code Ann. 1995) .... 
Okla. Const. art. 2, § 19 (1981 & Supp. 1996) ....... 


Orner AUTHORITIES 


Administrative Conference of the United States, 
Sourcebook: Federal Agency Use of Alternative 


Means of Dispute Resolution (1987).............. 11, 16 


American Association of Retired Persons, Toward 
A Just & Caring Society - The AARP Public Policy 


Agenda (1995)... 2. csccccscccccecccscccessccseses 1,2 


Judge Morris Arnold, The Civil Jury in Historical 
Perspective, in The American Civil Jury (1987)....... 


Kirby Behre, Arbitration: A Permissible or Desirable 
Method for Resolving Disputes Involving Federal 
Acquisition and Assistance Contracts?, 16 Pub. 
Gam, Ce GB Ges occ ctccccdcccccedecevantveccsc< 


Edward Brunet, Questioning the Quality of Alternate 
Dispute Resolution, 62 Tul. L. Rev. 1 (1987) ..... 12, 


Mark E. Budnitz, Arbitration of Disputes Between 
Consumers and Financial Institutions: A Serious 
Threat to Consumer Protection, 10 Ohio St. J. on 
Diep. Resel. B67 (OTD) 2... ccccccccccccccccces 14, 


Julius H. Cohen & Kenneth Dayton, The New Fed- 
eral Arbitration Law, 12 Va. L. Rev. 265 (1926) ..... 


Owen M. Fiss, Against Settlement, 93 Yale L.J. 1073 
GRRE oc ccc cevectscosoccesshncndsudeednesoacecdnne 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Aryeh Friedman, The Effectiveness of Arbitration for 
the Resolution of Consumer Disputes, 6 N.Y.U. 
Rev. L. & Soc. Change 175 (1977)............... 5, 14 


Dwight Golann, Developments in Consumer Finan- 
cial Services Litigation, 43 Bus. Law 1081 (1988) .... 15 


Nicholas J. Healy, An Introduction to the Federal Arbi- 
tration Act, 13 J. Mar. L. & Com. 223 (1982)...... 15, 16 


John S. Murray, Processes of Dispute Resolution: The 
LTE 18 


National Institute for Dispute Resolution, Paths to 
Justice: Major Public Policy Issues of Dispute Reso- 
EE EG wacecckesududs cocebedicideddecovccec: 11 


Robert D. Raven, Private Judging: A Challenge to 
Public Justice - A y=. the President, 74 
ADA. Jo Gage. 1, BEER, 68 B...cccccccccess 12, 13, 16 


Sales and Contracts to Sell in Interstate and Foreign 
Commerce, and Federal Commercial Arbitration, 
Hearing on S. 4213 and S. 4214 before a Subcomm. 
of the te Comm. on the Judiciary, 67th Cong., 


tl i tril pe dde Cee sundesaanGén Gee eee ee « 7 
W. Stempel, A Better Approach to Arbitra- 
bility, 65 Tul. L. Rev. 1377 (1991)................... 7 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 


The American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) is 
a non-profit membership organization of approximately 
thirty-three million people aged fifty and older. In repre- 
senting the interests of its members, AARP seeks to: 
(1) enhance the quality of life for older people; (2) 
advance the role and place of older people in society; (3) 
sponsor research on the physical, psychological, social, 
economic and other aspects of aging; and (4) support 
public policies to protect the rights of older people in a 
broad range of marketplace transactions. 


AARP views alternative dispute resolution (ADR) as 
a valuable tool for resolving a range of conflicts. The 
Association is aware, however, that businesses increas- 
ingly are including standard language in contracts that 
requires consumers to agree to binding arbitration as a 
condition for gaining access to goods and services. Arbi- 
tration clauses severely limit customer redress options, 
yet individuals often are unaware of the existence of such 
clauses and their implications. AARP policy thus pro- 
vides that “[vjoluntary arbitration, as a substitute for 
legal action, is appropriate in those cases where con- 
sumers, through informed consent, voluntarily and 
knowingly give up the right to court action in favor of 
arbitration.” Toward A Just & Caring Society - The AARP 
Public Policy Agenda at 354 (1995). 


Where ADR is appropriate, AARP believes certain 
mechanisms are necessary to help ensure fairness. Speci- 
fically, for mediation or arbitration, AARP supports the 
following safeguards: parties must receive reasonable 
notice, an explanation of the rules and consequences, and 


an opportunity to consent to any ADR procedures; ADR 
cannot be imposed upon a consumer as a condition of 
doing business; arbitrators and mediators must be neu- 
tral, well-qualified, and trained in the skills of ADR; and 
mediators and arbitrators should not be affiliated with 
the business involved in the dispute. With respect to 
arbitration, AARP’s policy also provides that: mandatory 
binding arbitration cannot be imposed on a consumer 
prior to a dispute arising; participants must be allowed to 
engage in reasonable discovery; evidentiary protections 
must be guaranteed to both parties, with a right to cross- 
examination; any decision must be in writing, including 
findings and reasons provided for the decision, and must 
be fully accessible to the public, except where the indi- 
vidual has a compelling need for privacy; and any consti- 
tutional issues raised or procedural errors must be 
reviewable by a court. Id. at 401-402. 


The National Association of Consumer Advocates 
(NACA) is a non-profit corporation whose members are 
private, public sector, and legal services attorneys, and 
law professors and students, whose primary practice 
involves the protection and representation of consumers. 
Its mission is to promote justice for all consumers by 
maintaining a forum for information sharing among con- 
sumer advocates across the country, and to serve as a 
voice for its members as well as consumers in the ongo- 
ing struggle to curb unfair and abusive business prac- 
tices. From its inception, NACA has focused on issues 
which involve abusive and fraudulent business practices, 
and has been concerned about the imposition by busi- 
nesses of mandatory arbitration clauses on their con- 
sumers, because of the expense, limitation on discovery 


and remedies such as injunctive relief, and inability to 
reverse decisions which are incorrectly decided and 
result in injustice. Consistent with its goal of promoting 
justice for consumers, NACA has appeared as amicus 
curiae in Badie v. Bank of America, Civ. No. AQ68753, 
before the California Court of Appeals, in support of a 
challenge to the bank’s attempt to impose arbitration on 
its credit card and deposit account customers by means of 
a notice inserted in their billing statements. 


Amici believe that this case has far-reaching implica- 
tions for people entering contracts in a wide range of 
contexts. A decision affirming the Montana Supreme 
Court will further the bedrock principle that enforceable 
contracts require the knowing, voluntary consent of the 
parties. This Court recognized that this principle applies 
to arbitration, holding that the Federal Arbitration Act 
(FAA), 9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq. (1988 & Supp. IV 1995), is 
intended to enforce arbitration agreements that parties 
have entered, not to require parties to arbitrate when they 
have not agreed to do so. Volt Info. Sciences, Inc. v. Board of 
Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., 489 U.S. 468, 478 
(1989). Amici submit this brief to illustrate how this 
Court’s resolution of the present dispute will have a 
significant impact beyond the single franchise agreement 
from which it arises. This Court's ruling can ensure that 
parties to a broad range of transactions will be able to 
choose how disputes are to be resolved, fully apprised of 
the terms governing their rights and responsibilities 
under a contract. This Court’s decision likewise can 
uphold the efforts of many states to ensure that their 
citizens are aware of contract terms that have a signifi- 
cant effect on their rights. An affirmance thus will not 


undermine the FAA’s purpose, but will further its goal of 
enforcing lawful arbitration requirements agreed to by 
the parties. Volt Info. Sciences, supra. 


For these reasons, amici respectfully submit this brief 
in support of Respondent.' 


° 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Amici adopt the Respondent's statement of the case. 


SI 


SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 


Alternative methods of dispute resolution, including 
voluntary arbitration, can play a valuable role in a variety 
of conflicts. These processes fundamentally change the 
nature of a cause of action, however, and effect a waiver 
of the right to a jury trial. It is crucial that individuals 
entering into contractual relationships are aware of how 
these and other important provisions will affect their 
rights and responsibilities. This is particularly true in 
standardized, boilerplate contracts, when the individual 
has little, if any, opportunity to negotiate over the terms. 
The Montana statute at issue in this case is merely an 
attempt to ensure that parties are aware that a contract 
contains an arbitration clause. The Montana legislature 
and those in other states have enacted similar notice and 


' The written consent of the parties to AARP and NACA 
filing this brief have been filed with the Clerk of the Court 
pursuant to Sup. Ct. R. 37.3(a). 


disclosure requirements with respect to other types of 
contract provisions to prevent surprise and to make sure 
that individuals, especially those with less bargaining 
power, give knowing consent to a contract’s terms. These 
laws thus do not conflict with the underlying policy of 
the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), but seek to further the 
principle articulated by this Court, that arbitration is a 
matter of contract and that the Act’s main purpose is to 
ensure enforcement of private agreements to arbitrate. 
This Court also has said that the FAA’s policy in favor of 
arbitration does not operate without regard to the con- 
tracting parties’ wishes. A decision upholding the Mon- 
tana Supreme Court will ensure the validity of 
agreements to arbitrate achieved through knowing con- 
sent. 


ARGUMENT 


I. FULL DISCLOSURE OF MANDATORY BINDING 
ARBITRATION CLAUSES IS CRITICAL BECAUSE 
THE PROCESS FUNDAMENTALLY ALTERS THE 
PARTIES’ DISPUTE RESOLUTION OPTIONS 


A. Arbitration Was Designed as an Option for 
Commercial Transactions and Is Premised on 
Consent 


Arbitration generally is defined as the voluntary sub- 
mission of a dispute to an impartial decisionmaker 
selected by the disputants for a determination reached 
pursuant to procedures chosen by the parties. See Aryeh 
Friedman, The Effectiveness of Arbitration for the Resolution 
of Consumer Disputes, 6 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 175, 


187 (1977). In addition, arbitration is viewed as a contrac- 
tual matter, see, e.g., First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 
115 S. Ct. 1920, 1924 (1995) (“arbitration is simply a 
matter of contract between the parties; it is a way to 
resolve those disputes - but only those disputes — that the 
parties have agreed to submit to arbitration”); Mastro- 
buono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 115 S. Ct. 1212, 1216 
(1995) (citing Volt Info. Sciences, Inc., 489 U.S. at 479; 
“Arbitration .. . is a matter of consent, not coercion. . . . “); 
AT&T Technologies, Inc. v. Communications Workers of Am., 
475 US. 643, 648-49 (1986) (“ ‘arbitration is a matter of 
contract and a party cannot be required to submit to 
arbitration any dispute which he has not agreed so to 
submit.’ . . . This axiom recognizes the fact that arbitra- 
tors derive their authority to resolve disputes only 
because the parties have agreed in advance to submit 
such grievances to arbitration.”). 


As a contractual matter, an arbitration requirement is 
subject to negotiation and acceptance or rejection by the 
parties. When the parties to a contract are fully informed 
and possess equal bargaining power, as typically is the 
case in commercial transactions, arbitration is an appro- 
priate method of resolving disputes. And, where the par- 
ties have assented to the terms of an arbitration 
agreement, courts defer to their judgment due to a strong 
preference for using the dispute resolution mechanism 
selected by the parties. 


The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), 9 U.S.C. § 1 et 
seq. (1988 & Supp. IV 1995), is instructive in this context. 
Congress did not intend the FAA to infringe upon the 
states’ authority to protect individuals from the forced 
surrender of their right to a jury trial. Rather, Congress 


intended the FAA to apply to ordinary contract disputes 
“between merchants.” Julius H. Cohen & Kenneth Day- 
ton, The New Federal Arbitration Law, 12 Va. L. Rev. 265, 
281 (1926). In testimony before the Senate Judiciary Com- 
mittee, the chair of the American Bar Association commit- 
tee that drafted the law stated that it was “ ‘purely an act 
to give the merchants the right or the privilege of sitting 
down and agreeing with each other as to what their 
damages are, if they want to do it.’ ” Sales and Contracts to 
Sell in Interstate and Foreign Commerce, and Federal Commer- 
cial Arbitration, Hearing on S. 4213 and S. 4214 before a 
Subcomm. of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 67th Cong., 
4th Sess. 9 (1923) (statement of W.H. Piatt, Chairman of 
the ABA Committee of Commerce, Trade and Commercial 
Law). Moreover, the Act’s legislative history evidences an 
“implicit assumption that it would be invoked by com- 
mercial actors having relatively equal bargaining power.” 
Jeffrey W. Stempel, A Better Approach to Arbitrability, 65 
Tul. L. Rev. 1377, 1380 (1991). 


Unlike the parties to most merchant-merchant con- 
tracts, however, individuals contracting for goods and 
services generally do not have equal bargaining power 
and are not fully informed of ail relevant contract clauses. 
In fact, a marked imbalance in knowledge and power 
more often characterizes such contracts. When the party 
with superior sophistication, knowledge, and financial 
resources inserts a mandatory arbitration clause into a 
form contract, individuals usually are unaware of and 
have not consented to these terms. The Montana statute 
attempts to remedy that imbalance by requiring that an 
arbitration provision be referred to on the first page of a 
contract, and simply ensures that arbitration agreements 


will be based on knowing consent. This eliminates the 
situation which occurred in this case, where the arbitra- 
tion clause is buried on page nine of the contract and the 
individual is unaware of its existence and has in no sense 
agreed to such a provision. 


B. The Right to a Jury is Fundamental in American 
Jurisprudence and Waivers of this Right Must 
Be Knowing and Voluntary and Should Not Be 
Presumed 


Pre-dispute arbitration requirements imposed on an 
individual without notice effectuate an unknowing 
waiver of the individual’s right to a jury trial. Yet, the 
jury has been called “the single most important institu- 
tion in the history of Anglo-American law,” Judge Morris 
Arnold, The Civil Jury in Historical Perspective, in The 
American Civil Jury 9-10 (1987), and many states recognize 
the importance of this right. See, e.g., Mont. Const. art. IL, 
§ 26 (Mont. Code Ann. 1995) (“the right of trial by jury is 
secured to all and shall remain inviolate”), Cal. Const. 
art. 1, § 16 (West 1983 & Supp. 1995) (a jury trial “is an 
inviolate right and shall be secured to all. . . . In a civil 
case a jury may be waived by the consent of the parties 
expressed as prescribed by statute”), Okla. Const. art. 2, 
§ 19 (1981 & Supp. 1996) (“[t]he right of trial by jury shall 
be and remain inviolate”). 


The waiver of such traditional, fundamental rights 
should not be treated lightly, and this Court will “not 
presume acquiescence in the loss of fundamental rights.” 
Ohio Bell Tel. Co. v. Public Utilities Comm‘n, 301 U.S. 292, 
307 (1937). Further, this Court has stated that where due 


process rights are at risk, waivers must be voluntary and 
knowing, D.H. Overmyer Co. v. Frick Co., 405 U.S. 174, 
185-86 (1972), and has defined waiver as “an intentional 
relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or priv- 
ilege.’” Barber v. Page, 390 U.S. 719, 725 (1968) (quoting 
Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464 (1938)). A waiver 
should not be presumed where, as in this case, one party 
typically has superior knowledge and bargaining power, 
and the party waiving his fundamental rights has rela- 
tively little of either. 


The use of arbitration to resolve a dispute drastically 
changes a cause of action, and individuals should not, 
through lack of disclosure, be forced to make unwitting 
waivers of their right to a jury trial without understand- 
ing the consequences. This Court has recognized that 


the remedy by arbitration, whatever its merits 
or shortcomings, substantially affects the cause 
of action created by the State. The nature of the 
tribunal where suits are tried is an important 
part of the parcel of rights behind a cause of 
action. The change from a court of law to an 
arbitration panel may make a radical difference 
in ultimate result. 


Bernhardt v. Polygraphic Co. of Am., Inc., 350 U.S. 198, 203 
(1956). See also Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 
36, 56-58 (1974). 


Considerable differences exist between arbitration 
and traditional court adjudications, and the parties to an 
arbitration sacrifice numerous procedural safeguards 
guaranteed to court litigants in order to pursue an infor- 
mal resolution of their dispute. First, a judicial proceed- 
ing is public, whereas an arbitration proceeding is 


10 


private. Second, the judge and jury are neutral decision- 
makers, while arbitrators are dependent upon the parties 
for their income and are not required to take an oath of 
fairness and impartiality. Third, court witnesses are 
sworn to tell the truth, while arbitration witnesses are 
sworn only upon a party’s request, and rules of evidence 
do not apply. Fourth, discovery is available to parties in 
court, while it is not guaranteed to participants in an 
arbitration proceeding. Fifth, the trier of fact is required 
to follow the law and the parties can appeal errors of law 
and findings based on insufficient credible evidence, 
while an arbitrator’s factfinding is final. These differ- 
ences have formed the basis for holding pre-dispute arbi- 
tration agreements between parties of unequal bargaining 
power unenforceable under federal law when important 
rights are involved. See, e.g., U.S. Bulk Carriers, Inc. v. 
Arguelles, 400 U.S. 351, 356 (1971); Barrentine v. Arkansas- 
Best Freight Sys., 450 U.S. 728, 742-45 (1981); Alexander v. 
Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. at 55-59. 


Similar principles warrant a ruling that arbitration 
clauses should not be enforced where there exists an 
unreasonably high likelihood that an individual is 
unaware of the clause’s existence and has not given his or 
her consent. As this Court has noted, “a party who has 
not agreed to arbitrate will normally have a right to a 
court’s decision about the merits of its dispute... . ” First 
Options of Chicago, supra, at 1923. Decisions of this Court 
give paramount importance to the wishes and intentions 
of the parties, recognizing that “the basic objective in this 
area is not to resolve disputes in the quickest manner 
possible, no matter what the parties’ wishes . . . but to 
ensure that commercial arbitration agreements, like other 


11 


contracts, ‘are enforced according to their terms,’ . . . and 
according to the intentions of the parties.” Id. at 1925 
(quoting Mastrobuono, 115 S. Ct. at 1214, and Volt Info. 
Sciences, 489 U.S. at 479). 


Montana’s Uniform Arbitration Act, Mont. Code Ann. 
§ 27-5-111 et seq. (1995), specifically recognizes the 
enforceability of arbitration agreements. The law furthers 
the underlying policy that arbitration be a matter of 
consent, not coercion, by ensuring that individuals faced 
with standardized, non-negotiated, form contracts will 
know of the existence of an arbitration clause and know- 
ingly consent to its terms. Id. at § 27-5-114(4). 


C. Many Features of Arbitration Inure to the Bene- 
fit of Equals, But Are Extremely Unfair to Indi- 
viduals of Unequal and Lesser Power 


Some of the very characteristics that make arbitration 
an attractive alternative to litigation underscore the need 
to ensure that both parties have knowingly agreed to the 
process. In 1983 the National Institute for Dispute Resolu- 
tion (NIDR) found that mediation, arbitration, and other 
means to settle disputes without attorneys and judges 
may “lead disputants to make choices they would avoid 
if they were better informed.” This is especially true for 
“women, the poor, the elderly, persons for whom English 
is a second language, and other classes of disputants 
traditionally less powerful or less skilled at negotiations 
than their opponents.” National Institute for Dispute Res- 
olution, Paths to Justice: Major Public Policy Issues of Dis- 
pute Resolution 15 (1983), reprinted in Administrative 
Conference of the United States, Sourcebook: Federal 


12 


Agency Use of Alternative Means of Dispute Resolution 5, 23 
(1987) [hereinafter ACUS Sourcebook]. Moreover, poorer 
people and those with less experience may have more 
difficulty collecting and analyzing the materials that are 
“essential to ‘predict’ the likely dispute result and may be 
‘bought-off’ by a comparatively low settlement offer that 
is less a reflection of the true value of a suit under the 
substantive law than the procedural strength of the richer 
or more experienced opponent.” See Edward Brunet, 
Questioning the Quality of Alternate Dispute Resolution, 62 
Tul. L. Rev. 1, 46 (1987) (citing Owen M. Fiss, Against 
Settlement, 93 Yale L. J. 1073, 1076-78 {1984)). 


In addition to the effect this inequity may have on 
the outcome of an arbitration process, many features of 
the process itself work to the benefit of business, but to 
the detriment of individuals. These features include lim- 
ited discovery, privacy, the absence of a written opinion 
or explanation of its basis, the choice of arbitrator and, 
for all intents and purposes, the finality of the decision. 
See, e.g., Moore v. Conliffe, 871 P.2d 204, 222-23 (Cal. 1994). 
In addition, Robert Raven, former American Bar Associa- 
tion President, has warned that “[cjertain forms of pri- 
vate judging dispense with many of the most cherished 
and carefully developed features of our public system: 
open proceedings, written decisions, appellate review, 
and the evolution of the common law.” Robert D. Raven, 
Private Judging: A Challenge to Public Justice - A Message 
from the President, 74 A.B.A. J., Sept. 1, 1988, at 8. Presi- 
dent Raven made a compelling point with particular rele- 
vance in consumer disputes: “The potential dangers of 
providing one system of justice for the affluent, and 
another for everyone else, should stimulate us to improve 


13 


our system of public justice. This 200-year-old system 
with vital safeguards simply cannot be replaced with 
private judging.” Id. 

Whatever one considers the pros and cons of discov- 
ery in litigation, the extreme limits placed on discovery in 
arbitration generally favor corporate interests, to the indi- 
vidual’s detriment. Absent discovery, individuals often 
will be unable to succeed on their claims because the 
corporation customarily will possess the information and 
documents vital to the individual’s case. This lack of 
access to documents and deposition testimony will insu- 
late the institution because an arbitrator will, at most, be 
able to review documents relating solely to the affected 
individual, and will be unable to examine underlying 
policies or fashion broader relief. Just and fair results of 
any dispute resolution process require mechanisms that 
ensure full disclosure of the facts. See Brunet, supra, at 34. 


Arbitrators generally need not rule according to the 
law, and their decisions are not reversible even if they 
result in manifest injustice. See, e.g., Moncharsh v. Heily & 
Blase, 832 P.2d 899, 900 (Cal. 1992) (“[A]n arbitrator's 
decision is not generally reviewable for errors of fact or 
law, whether or not such error appears on the face of the 
award and causes substantial injustice to the parties.”). 
Even in the limited circumstances in which a court can 
overturn an arbitrator’s decision, because arbitrators 
need not explain the bases for their decisions or make a 
complete record of the proceedings, aggrieved individ- 
uals will be ill-equipped to satisfy their burden, e.g., 
proof in the record that the arbitrator “knew the law and 
expressly disregarded it.” See, e.g., Merrill Lynch v. Bobker, 
808 F.2d 930, 933 (2d Cir. 1986). Also, because arbitrators 


14 


do not have to issue written opinions explaining their 
decisions, businesses need not fear that unfavorable deci- 
sions will lead other people to sue on the same basis, or 
provide precedent that arbitrators or judges will feel 
bound to follow. 


The privacy or confidentiality accorded arbitration 
proceedings generally favors businesses, which prefer 
that customer disputes remain free from public scrutiny. 
Concerns include the fear that publicity may lessen cus- 
tomers’ trust and confidence in these corporations, and 
result in the disclosure of practices and procedures 
which, even if legal, the businesses would prefer to keep 
private. Mark E. Budnitz, Arbitration of Disputes Between 
Consumers and Financial Institutions: A Serious Threat to 
Consumer Protection, 10 Ohio St. J. on Disp. Resol. 267, 285 
(1995). The privacy factor seriously impedes the contin- 
ued development of a body of consumer protection law. 
Individual consumers and government regulatory and 
enforcement agencies are limited in their abilities to take 
actions to protect the general public. The publicity fol- 
lowing a verdict of fraud or similar action informs con- 
sumers about practices and institutions they may want to 
avoid. The inability of consumers to obtain information 
about the experiences of others increases the transaction 
costs for a consumer who seeks information about a 
company, and isolates the consumer. In contrast, the con- 
fidentiality factor allows businesses to control informa- 
tion, thus increasing their power. Id. at 327-28. See also 
Friedman, supra, at 199. 


The choice of arbitrator can play a crucial role in the 
outcome of a dispute. Judges are subject to public scru- 
tiny before and after their appointment or election, while 


15 


neither the public nor any governmental body plays a 
role in the process used by private arbitration organiza- 
tions to determine an arbitrator's qualifications. While a 
party can avoid selecting an arbitrator he or she deems 
biased or unqualified, a “‘repeat player’ such as a large 
lender which determines the arbitration organization and 
uses arbitration frequently, however, has a decided 
advantage over the ‘one shot’ player such as the con- 
sumer. The repeat player is far more likely to know the 
persons in the arbitration pool.” Budnitz, supra, at 293. 


Moreover, unlike consumer cases, the more tradi- 
tional commercial arbitration is likely to involve repeat 
players who risk less if they lose an individual case. 


‘T]he law of averages will insure that a party 
who loses one routine arbitration out of ten that 
he should have won will win one out of ten that 
he should have lost. . . . ‘ The injustice that 
results from an erroneous arbitration award ren- 
dered against a ‘one-shot’ player such as a con- 
sumer, however, may be very grave. The amount 
of money involved is usually far more signifi- 
cant to an individual consumer than a financial 
institution. 


Id. at 322-23 (quoting Nicholas J. Healy, An Introduction to 
the Federal Arbitration Act, 13 J. Mar. L. & Com. 223, 224 
(1982)). See also Dwight Golann, Developments in Consumer 
Financial Services Litigation, 43 Bus. Law. 1081, 1091 (1988) 
(“[AJ}rbitration provides a quick means to lose, as well as 
to win. This is not a major drawback for ‘repeat players’ 
such as financial services providers, who can recoup in 
one case what they have lost in another. It is, however, a 


16 


significant disadvantage for a ‘one-time player,’ such as a 
consumer.” ) 


In addition, institutions that choose arbitrators from 
a for-profit company face an inherent conflict of interest, 
including the company’s “pursuit of repeat business from 
high-volume customers.” Healy, supra, at 294. Unlike 
judges, arbitrators “are paid by the parties, who consent 
to the process.” Raven, supra. This leads to the possibility 
“that an arbitrator will make a decision with an eye 
toward his role in future disputes involving one or both 
of the parties — that is, an arbitrator’s decision might be 
influenced by the desire for future employment by the 
parties.” Kirby Behre, Arbitration: A Permissible or Desir- 
able Method for Resolving Disputes Involving Federal Acquisi- 
tion and Assistance Contracts?, 16 Pub. Cont. L. J. 66, 72 
(1986), reprinted in ACUS Sourcebook, supra, at 371, 380. 


Another purported benefit of arbitration is that 
except in very limited circumstances, a dissatisfied party 
cannot seek court review. This is viewed favorably in 
terms of finality and avoiding appeals that drag on for 
years. And, as with other aspects of arbitration, this is not 
a problem for parties who have made a fully informed 
decision to follow this path. The California Supreme 
Court recognized this, stating that: 


Because the decision to arbitrate grievances 
evinces the parties’ intent to bypass the judicial 
system .. . arbitral finality is the core compo- 
nent of the parties’ agreement to submit to arbi- 
tration. Thus, an arbitration decision is final and 
conclusive because the parties have agreed that it be 
so. By ensuring that an arbitrator’s decision is 


17 


final and binding, courts simply assure that the 
parties receive the benefit of their bargain. 


Moncharsh, 832 P.2d at 903. The court’s emphasis on the 
parties’ agreement, and its use of the words “decision,” 
“intent,” and “bargain,” illustrate a situation that simply 
does not exist in most consumer contracts and, by impli- 
cation, demonstrates why the finality of arbitral decisions 
is inappropriate when one of the parties has not agreed to 
the arbitral forum or has done so without knowing the 
consequences of that decision. See also Advanced Micro 
Devices, Inc. v. Intel Corp., 885 P.2d 994, 1001 (Cal. 1994) 
(“Were courts to reevaluate independently the merits of a 
particular remedy, the parties’ contractual expectation of a 
decision according to the arbitrators’ best judgment 
would be defeated.” (emphasis added)). 


Moreover, an unwitting consumer should not be left 
without recourse to challenge even a clearly erroneous 
decision. The risk that an arbitrator will make a mistake 
may be acceptable when “by voluntarily submitting to 
arbitration, the parties have agreed to bear that risk in 
return for a quick, inexpensive, and conclusive resolution 
to their dispute,” Moncharsh, 832 P.2d at 904 (emphasis 
added), (citing That Way Prod. Co. v. Directors Guild of 
Am., Inc., 158 Cal. Rptr. 475, 477 (Ct. App. 1979)). It is 
unacceptable to bind a consumer to an erroneous deci- 
sion, however, when he or she did not choose or agree to 
the process by which that decision was reached. The 
California court proceeds to support its affirmation of the 
general rule that an arbitrator’s decision cannot be 
reviewed for errors of law or fact with two statements 
that clearly assume a voluntary agreement to arbitrate. 
First, “the parties to an arbitral agreement knowingly take 


18 


the risks of error of fact or law committed by the arbitra- 
tors and that this is a worthy ‘trade-off’ in order to obtain 
speedy decisions by experts in the field. . . . ” Second, 
“(when parties opt for the forum of arbitration they agree 
to be bound by the decision of that forum knowing that 


arbitrators, like judges, are fallible.” Id. (emphasis 
added). 


All of these considerable differences between litiga- 
tion and arbitration can have a substantial effect on the 
outcome of a dispute. This underscores the need to ensure 
that individuals who agree to submit a claim to arbitration 
do so voluntarily and with a full understanding of the 
consequences of that choice. The Montana disclosure law 
at issue in this case will help achieve such knowing, 
voluntary participation in the arbitration process. 


D. States Recognize That Unanticipated Terms of 
Standardized Adhesion Contracts Must Be 
Called to the Attention of the Adhering Party 
to be Enforceable 


State legislatures have long recognized that impor- 
tant rights may be affected by the small print of boiler- 
plate contract provisions. Consequently, in order to 
protect individuals from surprise and to ensure that they 
have given knowing and informed consent to contract 
terms, many states such as Montana have enacted special 
requirements for the formation of adhesion contracts, 
which also apply to contracts containing arbitration 
clauses. John S. Murray, Processes of Dispute Resolution: 
The Role of Lawyers 453 (1989). These laws do not discour- 
age parties from agreeing to particular contract terms, 


19 


such as arbitration requirements, but aim to ensure the 
clear disclosure that certain requirements exist. 


States achieve this by dictating the content, point 
size, typeface, and placement of important contract lan- 
guage, or requiring that certain clauses be separately 
initialed or signed. For example, California requires 
eight-point bold red or ten-point bold type to draw atten- 
tion to a liquidated damages provision in a real property 
purchase contract. Cal. Civil Code § 1677(b) (West 1995). 
California likewise requires that the words “Security 
Agreement” appear in at least twelve-point bold type at 
the top of a retail installment agreement where a security 
interest is retained in goods, and a notice in fourteen- 
point bold type, set apart from the rest of the contract by 
a border, and another similar warning just above the 
signature line, if an interest in real property is taken. Cal. 
Civil Code § 1803.2 (West Supp. 1996). Montana imposes 
a similar requirement for retail installment contracts, pro- 
viding that the printed portion of the contract, other than 
the instructions for completion, must be in at least eight- 
point type, but that a notice must appear in at least ten- 
point bold type telling the buyer not to sign the contract 
without first reading it, that he or she is entitled to an 
exact copy of the contract he or she signs, and that he or 
she has the right to pay off in advance the full amount 
due and to receive a partial refund of the finance charge. 
If the contract covers the sale of a motor vehicle, a speci- 
fic statement concerning liability insurance coverage for 
personal injury and property damage also must appear in 
at least ten-point bold type. Mont. Code Ann. 
§ 31-1-231(2), (3) (1995). 


20 


Many states have adopted similar requirements gov- 
erning arbitration provisions. In Missouri, for example, a 
written agreement to submit any existing controversy to 
arbitration and a contract provision to submit a future 
claim to arbitration must include, in 10-point upper case 
type, adjacent to or above the space provided for signa- 
tures, language substantially similar to the following: 
“THIS CONTRACT CONTAINS A BINDING ARBITRA- 
TION PROVISION WHICH MAY BE ENFORCED BY THE 
PARTIES.” Mo. Ann. Stat. §§ 435.350, 435.460 (Vernon 
1992 & Supp. 1995). In ruling that an arbitration clause 
that did not meet this requirement was unenforceable, a 
Missouri appeals court noted that the “apparent harsh- 
ness of this rule . . . is mitigated by the legislature’s bona 
fide concern that the voluntary nature of arbitration 
agreements be assured.” Hefele v. Catanzaro, 727 S.W.2d 
475, 477 (Mo. Ct. App. 1987). In Texas, arbitration clauses 
in consumer contracts where the total consideration to be 
provided by the individual is $50,000 or less are not 
enforceable unless the parties agree in writing to submit 
to arbitration and the parties and their attorneys sign that 
agreement. Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 224(b) (West 
Supp. 1995). California law also imposes strict disclosure 
and assent requirements for contracts to convey real 
estate that contain arbitration requirements, Cal. Civ. 
Proc. Code § 1298 (West 1982 & Supp. 1995), and con- 
tracts for medical services that contain a provision to 
arbitrate negligence claims require clear disclosures in at 
least 10-point bold type immediately above the signature 
line. Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1295 (West 1982). 


21 


Il. PUBLIC POLICIES FAVORING ALTERNATIVE 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION SHOULD NOT OVER- 
RIDE CONSUMERS’ RIGHTS AND EXPECTA- 


TIONS 


There are many reasons to support alternative dis- 
pute resolution in general, and voluntary arbitration in 
particular. Public policies favoring these mechanisms rec- 
ognize the important role they can play as alternatives to 
litigation. These policies should not be used, however, to 
justify depriving a state’s citizens of the protections of a 
state constitution, consumer protection laws, and other 
public policies. It is not at all clear that the wide array of 
remedies available under state unlawful and deceptive 
practices acts, such as injunctive relief and treble or puni- 
tive damages, would be available in arbitration, and it is 
unlikely that arbitrators would have authority to order 
cessation of unlawful practices or disgorgement of ill- 
gotten gains. 


Moreover, given the importance of an individual’s 
right to a jury trial and the other rights consumers forfeit 
by choosing arbitration, consumers are unlikely to expect 
or realize that the small print on a form contract contains 
a provision that effects a waiver of those rights. It is even 
less likely that customers would reasonably expect to 
have waived their rights before a dispute has even arisen. 
In fact, given portrayals in popular media and the likely 
prior experiences of the consumers and their relatives 
and friends, it is more reasonable to think that consumers 
would expect that disputes regarding their purchases and 
other transactions would be resolved in a court. 


Baa aaa ea aaa cae ian 


22 


This Court has recognized the importance of balanc- 
ing policies favoring arbitration against ordinary contract 
principles that require interpreting agreements so that 
they reflect the intent of the parties. While arbitration is 
accepted as an economical and expeditious means to 
resolve disputes, “arbitration is simply a matter of con- 
tract between the parties; it is a way to resolve those 
disputes — but only those disputes — that the parties have 
agreed to submit to arbitration.” First Options of Chicago, 
Inc., 115 S. Ct. at 1924. Moreover, “a party can be forced 
to arbitrate only those issues it specifically has agreed to 
submit to arbitration.” Id. at 1925. See also Victoria v. 
Superior Court, 710 P.2d 833, 834 (Cal. 1985) (“judicial 
enthusiasm for alternative methods of dispute resolution 
must not in all contexts override the rules governing the 
interpretation of contracts”); Freeman v. State Farm Mut. 
Auto Ins. Co., 535 P.2d 341, 346 (Cal. 1975) (despite the 
“strong policy in favor of enforcing agreements to arbi- 
trate .. . there is no policy compelling persons to accept 
arbitration of controversies which they have not agreed 
to arbitrate... . ”). 


In addition to the tenets of basic contract law, public 
policy should not be used to deprive unwary consumers of 
basic principles of justice. California Supreme Court Justice 
Kennard, concurring and dissenting in Moncharsh, articulated 
this in refusing to “accept the proposition . . . that the general 
policy in favor of arbitration is more important than the 
judiciary’s solemn obligation to do justice.” Moncharsh, 832 
P.2d at 920. The Montana law at issue before the Court has 
balanced those competing interests in favor of ensuring that 
enforceable arbitration provisions, like all other contract 
terms, are based on knowing consent. 


¢ 


23 


CONCLUSION 


Alternative dispute resolution mechanisms can have 
many advantages over litigation in a variety of contexts. 
These advantages are premised on a voluntary agreement 
negotiated by parties who are fully aware of the conse- 
quences of their choices. The magnitude of these conse- 
quences underscores the need to ensure that the parties to 
a contract are made aware that the contract contains an 
arbitration clause. That is all the Montana law at issue in 
this case aims to achieve, by requiring that notice of an 
arbitration clause be placed on page one of a contract. 
Such a requirement in no way conflicts with federal poli- 
cies favoring arbitration; it merely helps to ensure that 
parties make knowing decisions about the contracts they 
enter. 


For the foregoing reasons, amici respectfully request that 
this Court affirm the Montana Supreme Court's decision. 


Respectfully submitted, 


STEVEN ZALEZNICK 
DesorAH M. ZuUCKERMAN* 


AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 

or Retirep PERSONS 

601 E Street, N.W., B4-260 
Washington, D.C. 20049 
(202) 434-6045 


PATRICIA STURDEVANT 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF 
CONSUMER ADVOCATES 

225 Bush Street, Suite 758 
San Francisco, CA 94104 
(415) 397-7057 


* Counsel of Record 
Dated: March 15, 1996 


