vf er 
Pi 


- 


ve 
au 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a state court, applying traditional conflict- 
of-law principles, may enforce a state law requiring dis- 
closure of an arbitration clause in a contract, when the 
contract specifies that state law shall govern the contract 
and when the application of the state law would not 
undermine the goals and policies of the Federal Arbitra- 
tion Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1, et seq. 


ii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ...........--eeeeeeeeees iii 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE...........--00eeeeeees 1 
A. Factual Background ...............-eeeeeeees 1 
B. Initial Decision Below .............+.eesee08: 3 
C. Decision on Remand .............0eeeeeeeees 5 
REASONS FOR DENYING THE WRIT............. 6 


I. THE MONTANA SUPREME COURT PROPERLY 
APPLIED STATE RULES OF ARBITRATION, 
WHICH DO NOT UNDERMINE THE GOALS 
AND POLICIES OF THE FAA, TO A CON- 
TRACT SELECTING STATE LAW ............. 7 


II. THE DECISION OF THE MONTANA SUPREME 


III. THE MONTANA SUPREME COURT DECISION 
IS NOT A GOOD VEHICLE FOR ADDRESSING 
THE CONCERNS RAISED BY PETITIONERS.. 13 


CONCLUSION 2... ccccccnccdovctecveteuseeeuSenunes 16 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases: 
Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies, Inc. v. Dobson, 115 
nab pes eeeegesccaceccceccccccce passim 
American Airlines, Inc. v. Wolens, 115 S.Ct. 817 
DURE RCR ARSE easadeneccceccccccccccccccecces 12 
—— Corp. v. Perryville Feed & Produce, Inc., 685 
Rs os nceseccccccsesscoceccceces 10 
Chor v. Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood, Inc., 862 P.2d 26 
Ee ee ee 14 
David L. Threlkeld & Co. v. Metallgesellschaft Ltd. 
(London), 923 F.2d 245 (2d Cir.), cert. dismissed, 
i an < noc upanessesacssbsceccces se 11 
Downey v. Christensen, 825 P.2d 557 (Mont. 1992) .... 14 
Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S.Ct. 1792 (1993) .............. 13 
Gibson v. James Graff Communications, Inc., 780 P.2d 
TIE Soedveccccecccccccccesdueccocces 14 
Home Bu Warranty Corp. II v. Lopez, 115 S.Ct. 
PURER SAU abwes seberdobecdsocctcccvcccece: 14 
Larsen v. Opie, 771 P.2d 977 (Mont. 1989)............ 14 
Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 115 
SE SD once enhés cnndaes egesescccceccoc: 6, 9 
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, 
Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985) ... 6... ccc cece eens 11, 15 
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. 
i LL rrr rr rrr rrr rr 15 


Passage v. Prudential-Bache Securities, 727 P.2d 1298 
(Mont. 1986), cert. denied, 480 U.S. 905 (1987) ..... 14 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued . 
age 


Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 
U.S. 395 (1967)... .ccccccccecccsccccccvcccccsceces 15 


Securities Industry Ass’n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114 
(1st Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (1990).... 11 


Snap-On Tools Corp. v. Vetter, 838 F. Supp. 468 (D. 
Pham. BOOED oo ccc ccccccccccvccscccccccosecsesee 11, 12 


So. Health Corp. of Hamilton, Inc. v. Lorance, 115 
S.C. GEO (IDS). . wc ccccccccccccsccccceccsccccseves 14 


Terminix Int'l, Ltd. P’ship v. Jackson, 115 S.Ct. 930 
CIODED « occccccccccccccedccecceccccsccccoscedese ses 14 


Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of 
Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468 


(IGE) . cccccccccvsesecccsccncesecccvceccesecss passim 
Vukasin v. D.A. Davidson & Co., 785 P.2d 713 
Bhand, BEGG. « cvcccvcccveccecetdddebdvessddctecicc 14 


Webb v. R. Rowland & Co., 800 F.2d 803 (8th Cir. 


STATUTES AND RULEs: 


D UB. 6 0, B@ GD c ccccccccccccccescvccccoscese passim 
©: BBL. BBB ce ccccccccccccecdvddbesdconsccogtescecs 11 
Mont. Code Ann. § 27-5-114 (1987). ..... 6.66... c nun 3 
Rule 28(j), Fed. R. App. P...... 2... .06ccccceeeceeeees 5 


Respondents Paul and Pamela Casarotto respectfully 
request that this Court should deny the Petition for Writ 
of Certiorari seeking review of the Montana Supreme 
Court’s judgment in this case. That opinion is now 
reported at 901 P.2d 596 (1995). 


¢ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


A. Factual Background 


Respondent Paul Casarotto entered into a Franchise 
Agreement with Petitioner Doctor's Associates, Inc. 
(“DAI”) allowing him to open a Subway Sandwich Shop 
in Great Falls, Montana. Pet. App. 12a-13a. DAI, then a 
Connecticut corporation, franchises Subway Sandwich 
Shops. Pet. App. 12a. Petitioner Nick Lombardi (“Lom- 
bardi”) is an independent contractor who serves as DAI’s 
Montana Development Agent. Pet. App. 12a.! 


Page nine of DAI’s standard Franchise Agreement, 
which was entered by Paul Casarotto and DAI, contains 
an arbitration clause which calls for arbitration of claims 


1 Even though Mr. Lombardi was not a signatory to the 
franchise agreement, he appears to claim that he is also entitled 
to arbitration of the Casarottos’ claims against him, based on a 
franchise agreement to which he is not a party. Although DAI 
refers to Lombardi as its development agent, DAI has been 
equivocal regarding Lombardi’s agency status in the proceed- 
ings below. Pet. 4; Appellees’ Response Brief at 7-8, 21-22, 26, 
Casarotto v. Lombardi, 886 P.2d 931 (Mont. 1994). The Montana 
court did not reach the issue as to whether the arbitration clause 
in DAI’s franchise agreement would extend to Casarottos’ 
claims against Lombardi. 


in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Pet. App. 2a. The full text of 
the arbitration clause is set forth at Pet. App. 13a-14a. The 
Franchise Agreement calls for the application of siate law, 
and designated Connecticut law. Pet. App. 15a. 


A dispute arose when Lombardi and DAI awarded 
Casarottos’ preferred location in Great Falls to another 
franchisee, after agreeing to reserve that site for 
Casarottos, according to the Complaint. Pet. App. 13a. 
The Complaint alleges the following: Lombardi informed 
Casarottos that their preferred location in Great Falls was 
not yet available. Pet. App. 13a. Casarottos agreed to 
open a shop at a less desirable location based upon a 
verbal agreement with Lombardi reserving for Casarottos 
the exclusive right to open a Subway shop in the pre- 
ferred location when it became available. Pet. App. 13a. 
Contrary to that agreement, Lombardi and DAI subse- 
quently awarded the preferred location to another fran- 
chisee. Pet. App. 13a. As a result, Casarottos’ shop 
suffered irreparably and they lost their business and the 
collateral securing their SBA loan. Pet. App. 13a. 


Casarottos brought an action in Montana district 
court in Great Falls to recover damages for tort and 
contract claims against DAI, Lombardi, and the other 
franchisee. Pet. App. 12a. The franchise agreement did 
not comply with the notice provisions of Montana’s Uni- 
form Arbitration Act.? Pet. App. 2a. The district court 


2? Pertinent sections of that statute provide: 

(2) A-written agreement to submit to arbitration any 
controversy arising between the parties after the 
agreement is made is valid and enforceable except 


3 


held that the franchise agreement involved interstate 
commerce and stayed the lawsuit against DAI and Lom- 
bardi pending arbitration, pursuant to section 3 of the 
Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”) (9 U.S.C. § 3). Pet. App. 
49a. Relying on this Court's analysis in Volt Information 
Scien.es v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Uni- 
versity, 489 U.S. 468 (1989), the Montana Supreme Court 
reversed. Pet. App. 2a. This Court granted certiorari, 
vacated the Montana Supreme Court’s decision, and 
remanded for further consideration in light of its inter- 
vening decision, Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos. v. Dobson, 115 
S.Ct. 834 (1995). Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 115 
S.Ct. 2552 (1995). After careful review of this case in light 
of Terminix, the Montana Supreme Court reaffirmed and 
reinstated its prior decision. Pet. App. 6a-7a. DAI and 
Lombardi have again petitioned for a writ of certiorari. 


B. Initial Decision Below 
Applying traditional conflict-of-law principles, the 
Montana Supreme Court held that Montana law gov- 


erned the franchise agreement entered into between 
Casarotto and DAI. Pet. App. 15a-20a. The Montana court 


upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the 
revocation of a contract... . 

(4) Notice that a contract is subject to arbitration 
pursuant to this chapter shall be typed in underlined 
capital letters on the first page of the contract; and 
unless such notice is displayed thereon, the contract 
may not be subject to arbitration. Mont. Code Ann. 
§ 27-5-114 (1987). 


determined that Montana had a materially greater inter- 
est than Connecticut in a contract negotiated in Montana, 
to be performed in Montana, regarding a sandwich shop 
in Montana, and entered into between a Montana resident 
and a Connecticut corporation (which has since merged 
with a Florida corporation, Pet. 4 n.1). Pet. App. 18a. The 
Montana court then found the contractual provision 
selecting Connecticut law was not effective because it 
violated Montana’s fundamental public policy requiring 
disclosure of arbitration clauses, and Montana had a 
materially greater interest. Pet. App. 18a-20a. 


Relying on this Court’s analysis in Volt and standard 
implied preemption analysis, the Montana court found 
that Montana’s notice provision is consistent with the 
goals and policies of the FAA and is therefore not pre- 
empted. Pet. App. 26a-27a. The FAA does not contain a 
preemptive provision ‘or reflect congressional intent to 
occupy the entire field of arbitration. Pet. App. 24a. 
Therefore, state laws, like Montana’s notice provision, 
which do not undermine the goals and policies of the 
FAA, are not preempted. Pet. App. 24a-25a. Because 
DAI’s franchise agreement did not comply with Mon- 
tana’s statutory notice requirements, the agreement is not 
subject to arbitration according to Montana law. Pet. App. 
27a. 


DAI and Lombardi petitioned this Court for a writ of 
certiorari. Pet. App. 2a. This Court summarily vacated the 
Montana court’s decision and remanded for further con- 
sideration in light of an intervening United States 
Supreme Court opinion, Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos. v. Dob- 
son. Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 115 S.Ct. 2552 
(1995). 


C. Decision on Remand. 


After careful review, the Montana Supreme Court 
concluded its earlier decision was consistent with Termi- 
nix. Pet. App. 7a. The central disputed issue in Terminix 
was whether the contract at issue involved interstate 
commerce. Pet. App. 6a. The Montana court presumed 
this case involved interstate commerce, and any state law 
which frustrated the purposes of the FAA would be pre- 
empted. Pet. App. at 6a. In Terminix this Court held the 
FAA preempted an anti-arbitration state law which flatly 
invalidated predispute arbitration clauses. Pet. App. 6a. 
The Montana court noted the challenged statute in this 
case does not make arbitration agreements unenforceable; 
it simply requires adequate notice of an arbitration clause 
in a contract. Pet. App. 6a. Finally, the Montana court 
noted that Terminix in no way modified Volt, the decision 
upon which the Montana court relied. Pet. App. 6a. 
Accordingly, the Montana court reaffirmed and reinstated 
its prior decision. Pet. App. 7a. 


e 


3 Petitioners complain that they were not given the oppor- 
tunity to brief and argue the interpretation of this single case in 
front of the Montana court. Pet. App. 9. However, the Montana 
court allowed extensive briefing (one additional brief per side 
for a total of five briefs) when initially hearing this case. Neither 
the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure nor the Montana Rules 
of Appellate Procedure make any provision for briefing or argu- 
ment in cases remanded from this Court for further considera- 
tion. We note, however, that federal appellate courts routinely 
consider new authorities without briefing or argument. Indeed, 
Rule 28(j), Fed. R. App. P., requires that recently decided cases 
be presented to the court without argument. 


REASONS FOR DENYING THE WRIT 


The Petition should be denied because it does not 
raise issues that warrant review by this Court. The Mon- 
tana Supreme Court's decision on remand is consistent 
with the principles enunciated in Allied-Bruce Terminix 
Cos. v. Dobson, 115 S.Ct. 834 (1995). The reaffirmed Mon- 
tana Supreme Court decision was based on a permissible 
state court application of state rules of arbitration to a 
contract in which the parties agreed to abide by state law. 
This Court does not sit to review a state court's interpreta- 
tion of state rules defining the parameters of arbitration 
when parties agree to apply state law in an arbitration 
agreement. Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of 
Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468, 
474 and 479 (1989); accord, Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman 
Hutton, Inc., 115 S.Ct. 1212, 1217 n.4 (1995) (distinguish- 
ing that a federal court’s interpretation of contract is not 
entitled to such deference). 


Contrary to Petitioners’ protestations, the decisions 
below are consistent with this Court’s holdings in both 
Terminix, 115 S.Ct. 834, and Volt, 489 U.S. 468. Further, the 
decisions below do not conflict with caselaw from the 
Circuits or that of other states. Since the Supreme Court's 
ruling in Volt, no Federal Circuit court or state court of 
last resort (except Montana) has addressed the appli- 
cability of the FAA to state law notice requirements when 
the parties agreed to apply state law. This question has 
not received the degree of judicial scrutiny which would 
warrant issuance of a writ of certiorari. 


I. THE MONTANA SUPREME COURT PROPERLY 
APPLIED STATE RULES OF ARBITRATION, 
WHICH DO NOT UNDERMINE THE GOALS AND 
POLICIES OF THE FAA, TO A CONTRACT 
SELECTING STATE LAW. 


The Montana court’s decisions below are narrowly 
drawn to apply state law in a contract selecting state law, 
and are consistent with both Terminix and Volt. The par- 
ties to the arbitration agreement expressly agreed to 
apply state law. Pet. App. 15a. The Montana Supreme 
Court undertook a thorough conflict-of-law analysis, 
applying standard conflict-of-law principles in reaching 
its decision to apply Montana law.* Pet. App. 15a-20a. 
Petitioners do not present the Montana Supreme Court’s 
application of Montana law and conflict-of-law analysis 
for review. They request review solely on the question of 
whether Section 2 of the FAA preempts Montana’s notice 
requirement. Pet. (i). 


The Montana Supreme Court relied on this Court’s 
decision in Volt to find that the FAA did not preempt 
Montana’s notice requirement. The Montana Supreme 
Court stated: 


Our conclusion that Montana’s notice require- 
ment does not undermine the policies of the 


* Similarly, in Volt, the California courts determined that 
the parties’ choice of law provision incorporated California 
rules of arbitration. 489 U.S. at 472. The contracting parties in 
Volt specified, “[t}he contract shall be governed by the law of 
the place where the project is located.” Id. at 470. As the contract 
was performed on the Stanford University campus, over appel- 
lants arguments, the California courts determined California 
law, including its rules of arbitration, applied. Id. at 470, 474. 


FAA is based on the Supreme Court's conclusion 
that its was never Congress’s intent when it 
enacted the FAA to preempt the entire field of 
arbitration, and its further conclusion that the 
FAA does not require parties to arbitrate when 
they have not agreed to do so. The Court held 
that the purpose of the FAA is simply to enforce 
arbitration agreements into which parties had 
entered, and acknowledge that the interpreta- 
tion of contracts is ordinarily a question of state 
law. 


Pet. App. 16a, citing Volt, 489 U.S. at 474. Nothing in 
Terminix upset these cited principles. Pet. App. 6a. 


Petitioners concede the primary issue in Terminix, 
construing the interstate commerce language of Section 2 
of the FAA, is not at issue in this case. Pet. 13. In fact, the 
Montana court acknowledged this case involved inter- 
state commerce and that any state law which frustrated 
the purposes of the FAA would be preempted. Pet. App. 
6a. 


Nor do,the Montana decisions infringe upon the pro- 
arbitration policy enunciated in Terminix and Volt. While 
the preempted statute in Terminix invalidated all predis- 
pute arbitration clauses, the Montana statute specifically 
recognizes the enforceability of such arbitration agree- 
ments; it merely requires notice of an arbitration clause in 
a contract, to allow parties to be adequately informed. 
Pet. App. 6a. The Montana court presumed that this state 
requirement would not be a threat to the policies of the 
FAA. Pet. App. 4a. To hold otherwise would run contrary 
to the conclusion that contracting parties are free to 
determine how their disputes will be resolved. Pet. App. 
4a. Further, such a holding would suggest that arbitration 


was so onerous that it could only be thrust upon the 
uninformed. Pet. App. 4a. 


The Montana Supreme Court decisions were based 
on a permissible state court application of standard con- 
flict-of-law principles and carefully calibrated state rules 
of arbitration to a contract in which the parties agreed to 
abide by state law. This Court has indicated that it will 
not set aside a state court’s interpretation of the laws of 
the state where the contract is to be performed. Volt, 489 
U.S. at 474; accord, Mastrobuono, 115 S.Ct. at 1217 n.4. 
Thus, this Court should not sit to review the matters of 
state law addressed by the Montana Supreme Court in 
this case. 


Il. THE DECISION OF THE MONTANA SUPREME 
COURT IS IN CONCERT WITH EXISTING CASE- 
LAW. 


In attempting to demonstrate a conflict requiring res- 
olution by this Court, Petitioners mischaracterize the 
holdings of the Montana Supreme Court and other cited 
decisions. In fact, the authorities which Petitioners rely 
on are readily distinguished from the instant proceedings 
because they i) do not include the preemption analysis in 
Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland 
Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468 (1989), or ii) do not 
involve contractual provisions which select state law. The 
Montana court correctly recognized these cases are not 
persuasive. Pet. App. 26a. The authority relied on by DAI 
is inapposite. 

DAI's attempt to portray a conflict based on pre-Volt 
cases, which have lost their authority in light of Volt, 


10 


should fail. Two cited cases which purportedly conflict 
with the decisions below were decided before Volt: Webb 
v. R. Rowland & Co., 800 F.2d 803 (8th Cir. 1986) and Bunge 
Corp. v. Perryville Feed & Produce, Inc., 685 S.W.2d 837 (Mo. 
1985). In Webb the Eighth Circuit applied a pre-Volt anal- 
ysis to a contract which invoked Missouri law. 800 F.2d at 
806. Volt clarifies that when the parties have agreed to be 
bound by state rules of arbitration, enforcing those rules 
according to the terms of the agreement is fully consistent 
with the goals of the FAA. Pet. App. 14a. Applying this 
Court’s preemption analysis as articulated in Volt, the 
Eighth Circuit should reach a different decision regarding 
the Missouri statute. 


Similarly, in Bunge Corp., a decision four years before 
Volt, the Missouri Supreme Court found a contractual 
dispute subject to the rules and regulations of the 
National Grain and Feed Association was subject to arbi- 
tration. 685 S.W.2d at 838. Like the Montana court, the 
Missouri court acknowledged that Missouri's statutory 
notice requirements could not be applied to undermine 
the FAA. Id. at 839. However, the Missouri court refrained 
from invalidating Missouri's statute, stating, “[wJe do not 
have to decide, and we do not decide, whether an arbitra- 
tion agreement governed by Missouri law is unenforceable 
in all events... . ” Id. at 839 (emphasis supplied). Thus 
the Missouri court sidestepped the decision addressed 
squarely by the Montana Supreme Court in this case. 
Despite Petitioners’ arguments, there is no conflict in 
these decisions. 


Furthermore, the decisions of the Montana Supreme 
Court addressed a distinct issue from Petitioners’ 
post-Volt authority in which the parties did not invoke 


— — 


11 


state law. In David L. Threlkeld & Co. v. Metallgesellschaft 
Ltd. (London), 923 F.2d 245, 247 and 250 (2d Cir.), cert. 
dismissed, 501 U.S. 1267 (1991), the parties agreed to arbi- 
tration in accordance with the rules and regulations of the 
London Metals Exchange. Accordingly, the Second Cir- 
cuit applied the international convention (9 U.S.C. § 202), 
a discrete section of the FAA.5 Similarly, where parties 
agreed to be bound by the rules of Federal Arbitration 
Act, rather than the law of any state, the federal district 
court in Montana appropriately applied those rules. Snap- 
On Tools Corp. v. Vetter, 838 F. Supp. 468 (D. Mont. 1993). 
These decisions, enforcing contracts according to those 
rules by which the parties agreed to be bound, are in 
accord with the Montana Supreme Court decisions in the 
instant case. 


Another cited case, Securities Industry Ass’n v. Con- 
nolly, 883 F.2d 1114 (1st Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 
956 (1990), simply did not address the parties’ ability to 
invoke state law. In that case, the First Circuit held that 
the FAA preempted Massachusetts regulations concern- 
ing predispute arbitration agreements for securities bro- 
kers. Unlike the present case, no consideration was given 
to the ability of the parties to invoke state law through a 


5 Unlike the current case, the decision in Threlkeld involved 
international commerce, an area in which the policy favoring 
arbitration is “even stronger” and “applies with special force.” 
Threlkeld, 923 F.2d 248, citing Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler 
Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985). Additionally, Threl- 
keld applied Section 202 of the FAA, 9 U.S.C. § 202, rather than 
Section 2, at issue in this case. 


12 


choice-of-law provision. Thus Connolly addresses a dis- 
tinct issue from that presented in this case where fran- 
chisor invoked state law by the terms of its own franchise 


agreement. 


The Montana decisions are squarely consistent with 
Volt, and the principles enunciated in Terminix. The deci- 
sions below are distinguishable from the cases cited by 
Petitioners. They do not directly conflict with any deci- 
sion of this Court, nor of any federal court of appeals. 
There is no split in the circuits nor an intolerable conflict 
between the decisions of the highest state courts. 


Moreover, and without conceding the point, even if 
one were inclined towards the view that the Montana 
Supreme Court's decision conflicts with rulings by other 
courts, the “conflict” Petitioners allege is plainly tolerable 
at this time. Try as Petitioners might, they could only 
identify three post-Volt cases, in addition to this case, 
from state supreme courts or federal appellate courts in 
which the validity of state notice requirements has been 
litigated. This proceeding is the only one in which the 
parties selected state law. Significantly, there is no conflict 
between the decision below and any ruling of the Ninth 
Circuit, such that a different result would be mandated 
depending upon whether a case is filed in state court or 
federal court. Compare American Airlines, Inc. v. Wolens, 


6 In a footnote, petitioners cite Snap-On Tools Corp. v. Vetter, 
838 F. Supp. 468 (D. Mont. 1993), as a case where the Montana 
notice statute was preempted by the FAA, but that case is distin- 
guishable, as the parties there agreed to be governed by federal 
law, such that the Montana notice law could not take prece- 
dence. Id. at 472. 


13 


115 S.Ct. 817 (1995), and Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S.Ct. 1792 
(1993) (granting review in cases where state and federal 
appellate courts reached opposite conclusions). 


If anything, the weakness in Petitioners’ line of attack 
is illustrated by their reliance, at least in part, on dire 
predictions about what state legislatures and other courts 
might do if this lone decision from the Montana Supreme 
Court is allowed to stand (Pet. App. 22-25), a tacit conces- 
sion that the legal issue they raise has not yet matured to 
the point that review by this Court is appropriate at this 
time. Thus, when all is said and done, Petitioners’ real 
quarrel with the decision below is the fact that they lost. 
That is not sufficient reason for this Court to grant 
review. 


Ill. THE MONTANA SUPREME COURT DECISION 
IS NOT A GOOD VEHICLE FOR ADDRESSING 
THE CONCERNS RAISED BY PETITIONERS. 


The Petitioners attempt to portray the Montana deci- 
sion as one of national importance. Pet. 22-25. However, 
Montana is the only state to hold that the state notice 
provision is applicable when parties select state law in 
their contract, and no federal circuit court has ruled on 
this particular issue after Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. 
Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 
U.S. 468 (1989). Should the states rise and follow Mon- 
tana’s lead regarding the preemptive scope of the FAA, as 
Petitioners predict (Pet. at 25), actual conflicts may 
appear and the issue will then be more appropriate for 
this Court’s review. One of those future cases may pro- 
vide a more straightforward vehicle, without the need for 


14 


this Court to engage in a conflict-of-law analysis or to 
decide whether the acts of the franchisor’s development 
agent are subject to arbitration under the franchise agree- 
ment. 


Nor, unlike the situation this Court confronted in 
Terminix, is this case part of a larger pattern of hostility 
toward arbitration on the part of a state legislature and 
supreme court.” To the contrary, the statute at issue in 
this case has served as the basis for vigorous enforcement 
of arbitration agreements in Montana.* As Petitioners 
readily conceded below, the Montana Supreme Court, 


? After Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies, Inc. v. Dobson, 115 
S.Ct. 834 (1995), this Court also vacated three other Alabama 
Supreme Court decisions that refused to give effect to arbitra- 
tion provisions: Home Buyers Warranty Corp. II v. Lopez, 115 S.Ct. 
930 (1995); Terminix Int'l, Ltd. P’ship v. Jackson, 115 S.Ct. 930 
(1995); and So. Health Corp. of Hamilton, Inc. v. Lorance, 115 S.Ct. 
930 (1995). 


8 See, e.g., Chor v. Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood, Inc., 862 P.2d 26 
(Mont. 1993) (finding contracts requiring arbitration are as 
enforceable in Montana as any other contracts); Downey v. Chris- 
tensen, 825 P.2d 557 (Mont. 1992) (holding franchisor’s partici- 
pation in discovery did not waive right to compel arbitration); 
Vukasin v. D.A. Davidson & Co., 785 P.2d 713 (Mont. 1990) (find- 
ing arbitration clause in annual review document an enforce- 
able part of employment agreement); Gibson v. James Graff 
Communications, Inc., 780 P.2d 1131 (Mont. 1989) (finding con- 
tract involving interstate commerce subject to the FAA); Larsen 
v. Opie, 771 P.2d 977 (Mont. 1989) (holding claim of fraud in the 
inducement of the execution of a contract containing an arbitra- 
tion clause is to be decided by arbitration); Passage v. Prudential- 
Bache Securities, 727 P.2d 1298 (Mont. 1986), cert. denied, 480 U.S. 
905 (1987) (holding parties subject to arbitration even if cus- 
tomer agreement at issue was found to be a contract of adhe- 
sion). 


15 


“has consistently upheld the federal policy in favor of 
arbitration and applied the FAA to arbitration clauses in 
contracts involving interstate commerce.” Brief for the 
Appellees Nick Lombardi and Doctor’s Associates, Inc., 
at 9, Casarotto v. Lombardi, 886 P.2d 931 (Mont. 1994). In 
light of their own concessions below, Petitioners’ asser- 
tions of Montana’s hostility toward arbitration (Pet. 
14-15) ring hollow. 


This Court has consistently held that the FAA only 
places arbitration agreements on the same footing as 
other contracts, but does not make super contracts out of 
such agreements.® Petitioner DAI routinely drafts the 
contracts in question. It certainly remains within its 
power to control the forum for resolving disputes by 
deciding whether to include a choice-of-law provision 
selecting or barring the application of state law and its 
concomitant rules of arbitration. 


° 


% Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies, Inc., 115 S.Ct. at 840; Volt, 
489 U.S. at 474-75 (stating the FAA does not give parties powers 
in excess of any other contract clause); Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. 
Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985) (recognizing a 
party may exclude certain claims from the scope of their arbitra- 
tion agreement); Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. 
Co., 460 U.S. 1 (1983) (finding the FAA puts arbitration clauses 
on the same footing as other contracts and reflecting a general 
federal policy favoring arbitration); Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & 
Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U.S. 395 (1967) (holding the Federal Arbi- 
tration Act makes arbitration agreements “as enforceable as 
other contracts, but not more so”). 


16 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, the Petition for a Writ 
of Certiorari should be denied. 


Respectfully submitted, 

WruaM C. Warr 

Counsel of Record 

Sara J. JOHNSON 

MuLtLeNpore, Tawney & Wart, P.C. 


310 West Spruce 

Missoula, Montana 59802 

(406) 542-5000 

Counsel for Respondents 
Dated November 22, 1995. 


