Source: official 465 U.S.1,6–8, Southland Part II-A. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USREPORTS-465/pdf/USREPORTS-465-1.pdf
Scope: finality under then-1257(2) only; no current-case material. Modern retrieval October4,2026. The original whole PDF was downloaded; this bounded subsection was read fully.

   Jurisdiction of this Court is asserted under 28 U. S. C.
§ 1257(2), which provides for an appeal from a final judgment
of the highest court of a state when the validity of a chal-
lenged state statute is sustained as not in conflict with federal
law. Here Southland challenged the California Franchise
Investment Law as it was applied to invalidate a contract for
arbitration made pursuant to the Federal Arbitration Act.
Appellees argue that the action of the California Supreme
Court with respect to this claim is not a “final judgment or
decree” within the meaning of § 1257(2).
   Under Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U. S. 469,
482-483 (1975), judgments of state courts that finally decide
a federal issue are immediately appealable when “the party
seeking review here might prevail [in the state court] on the
merits on nonfederal grounds, thus rendering unnecessary
review of the federal issue by this Court, and where reversal
of the state court on the federal issue would be preclusive of
any further litigation on the relevant cause of action . . . .”
In these circumstances, we have resolved the federal issue
“if a refusal immediately to review the state-court decision
might seriously erode federal policy.” Id., at 483.
   The judgment of the California Supreme Court with re-
spect to this claim is reviewable under Cox Broadcasting,
supra. Without immediate review of the California holding
by this Court there may be no opportunity to pass on the fed-
eral issue and as a result “there would remain in effect the
unreviewed decision of the State Supreme Court” holding
that the California statute does not conflict with the Federal
Arbitration Act. Id., at 485. On the other hand, reversal
               SOUTHLAND CORP. v. KEATING                     7

1                     Opinion of the Court

of a state-court judgment in this setting will terminate liti-
gation of the merits of this dispute.
   Finally, the failure to accord immediate review of the deci-
sion of the California Supreme Court might “seriously erode
federal policy.” Plainly the effect of the judgment of the
California court is to nullify a valid contract made by private
parties under which they agreed to submit all contract dis-
putes to final, binding arbitration. The federal Act permits
“parties to an arbitrable dispute [to move] out of court and
into arbitration as quickly and easily as possible.” Moses
H. Cone Memorial Hospital n . Mercury Construction Corp.,
460 U. S. 1, 22 (1983).
   Contracts to arbitrate are not to be avoided by allowing
one party to ignore the contract and resort to the courts.
Such a course could lead to prolonged litigation, one of the
very risks the parties, by contracting for arbitration, sought
to eliminate. In The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 407
U. S. 1, 12 (1972), we noted that the contract fixing a particu-
lar forum for resolution of all disputes
    “was made in an arm’s-length negotiation by experienced
    and sophisticated businessmen, and absent some compel-
    ling and countervailing reason it should be honored by
    the parties and enforced by the courts.”
The Zapata Court also noted that
    “the forum clause was a vital part of the agreement, and
    it would be unrealistic to think that the parties did not
    conduct their negotiations, including fixing the monetary
    terms, with the consequences of the forum clause figur-
    ing prominently in their calculations.” Id., at 14 (foot-
    note omitted).
   For us to delay review of a state judicial decision denying
enforcement of the contract to arbitrate until the state-court
litigation has run its course would defeat the core purpose of
8                       OCTOBER TERM, 1983

                          Opinion of the Court                465 U. S.

a contract to arbitrate. We hold that the Court has jurisdic-
tion to decide whether the Federal Arbitration Act pre-
empts §31512 of the California Franchise Investment Law.
