No. 95-559 


In The -.< 
Supreme Court of the United States 
a 
October Term, 1995 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. and NICK LOMBARDI, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 
PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the Supreme Court of Montana 


BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE KAISER 
FOUNDATION HEALTH PLAN, INC. 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


KENNEDY P. RICHARDSON 
Counsel of Record 
YVONNE M. PIERROU 
MARION’S INN 
Attorneys for Amicus Curiae 
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. 
Latham Square 
1611 Telegraph, Suite 707 
Oakland, California 94612-2145 
(510) 451-6770 


8321 


(800) 3 APPEAL + (800) 5 APPEAL « (800) BRIEF 21 
S orvices, inc. 


> 


— Se + 


— _ 


> 
bal 


) 
1 
; 
4 
S| 
4 | 
: 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


Parties’ Consent for Filing This Brief as Amicus Curiae 


. Volt’s Confusing Legacy 


. The Interpretation of Choice of Law Provisions by 
Both Federal and State Judges is Subject to the FAA’s 


Conclusion 


TABLE OF CITATIONS 
Cases Cited: 


Ackerberg v. Johnson, 892 F.2d 1328 (8th Cir. 1989) ... 10 


Albright v. Edward D. Jones & Co., 571 S E.2d 1329 (Ind. 
App. 1991), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 818 (1992) 


American Physicians Service Group v. Port Lavaca Clinic 
Associates, 843 S.W.2d 675 (Tex. App. 1992) 


Armco Steel Co., L.P. v. CSX Corp., 790 F. Supp. 311 
(D.D.C. 1991) 


Dowd v. First Omaha Securities Corp., 495 N.W. 2d 36 
(Neb. 1993) 


ii 
Contents 
Page 
Madden y. Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, 17 Cal. 34 699, 

eo 8 
Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., __ U.S. 

i ne + doc 659 asceccecceecces 11,12 
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, etal. v. Shaddock, 822 F. Supp. 125 

En (i 4s disc's +s wenn ddees Gndedese ce 10 
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 

inn icine dpteendecsbacees 13 
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury 

Construction Corp., 460 U.S. 1 (1983) ............ 13 
Osteen v. T.E. Cuttino Constr. Co., 434 §.E. 2d 281 (S.C. 

DE <heehlGGUel eeeckbesevedesenetectesceces 10 
Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483 (1987) .... 2.6.66... 5 
Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U.S. 

PEE 606 bn Sueceobesdenuecatecsteoeeat ces 8,12 
Rhodes v. Consumers’ Buyline, Inc., 868 F. Supp. 368 (D. 

Pe EE conedéuvecencesecsnceesbkukoocesces 8,9 
Saturn Distribution Corp. v. Williams, 905 F.2d 719 (4th 

Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S.983(1990) ........... 5 
Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 417 U.S. 506(1974) .... 5 


iii 
Contents 
Page 
Securities Industry Ass'n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114 (ist 
Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (1990) ....... 11 
Seymour v. Gloria Jean's Coffee, 732 F. Supp. 988 (D. 
Rae Ra ae ee 10 
Southland Corporation v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1 (1984) 
benbnctensdbndedeoncndadédcedeseeéecascsne 10, 12,14 
Swarb v. Lennox, 405 U.S. 191 (1972) ..... 2.2.5.0... 13 
Todd Shipyards Corp. v. Cunard Line, 943 F.2d 1056 (9th 
TEE Dececuneciseciddsdtnededentuatinks 10 
Volt Info. Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees, 489 U.S. 468 
Ge dvosctmecctce 1,3, 5,6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,15 
Yates v. Doctor's Associates, Inc., 193 Il. App. 34 431,549 
N.E. 2d 1010 (Ill. App. 1990) .... 2... eee, 9,10,14 
Zwitserse Maatschappij v. ABN Int’! Capital Markets 
Corp., 996 F.2d 1478 (2nd Cir. 1993) ............. 10 
Statutes Cited: 
California Code of Civil Procedure: 
Dn  sedbuddastusdhacicsoddabdimsd aia 3 


PUREED Fd6nscéccccosibossessdeceuscsaneecnn 3 


@ CSSR.AGD ov ccc cccccccedéscccgoseeseccesccese 
ere 
DEED cccccccccccvcccessescevescestusteusde 
DES eccccccccvccdéccnccbetcsecessotvevewss 
DEED cccccocccesseecssassescenesousoeesees 
DEMERS ccnccecccesscvcseceseceéudeécedouedses 
DCR cc cccccccccocesccesdcébecuedsutecese 
DEED ccccctcccsdvec pesesobescececsodeenese 
POE  ccccccccosscccccéctessaceccodnsuonds 
PUM cccccccccccesesosvcndbbdcvettuuwedes 
GEC EEE, cccccccccvesedevééudotedes 
Rule Cited: 


Supreme Court Rule 37(3)(a) ........ 2... 2.62.02 ee 


l 


PARTIES’ CONSENT FOR FILING THIS BRIEF 
AS AMICUS CURIAE 


Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. (“Kaiser”) submits this 
brief in support of petitioners Doctor's Associates, Inc. and Nick 
Lombardi. Both petitioners and respondents have consented to 
the filing of this brief pursuant to Rule 37 (3)(a). 


I. AMICUS’ INTEREST AND PERSPECTIVE 


Kaiser’s interest in this case is twofold. First, the arbitration 
provision in Kaiser’s numerous contracts with employers, union 
welfare funds, and individuals is being challenged pursuant toa 
recently enacted California statute that requires a specialized 
arbitration notice similar to that imposed by the Montana statute 
in this case. Second, Kaiser’s contracts contain choice of 
California law clauses that allegedly remove the protection of 
the Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”) based on erroneous 
interpretations of this Court’s decision in Volt Info. Sciences, Inc. 
v. Board of Trustees, 489 U.S. 468 (1989). 


Kaiser, a non-profit corporation, and its affiliates operate 
health maintenance organizations (“HMOs”) in California and 
other parts of the United States. These HMOs arrange for health 
care services to millions of people under medical and hospital 
service agreements entered into with government agencies, 
private employers, union-management welfare funds, and 
individual subscribers. The basic terms of these service 
agreements are standard provisions that are subject to review and 
approval by state licensing agencies and the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Kaiser is regulated by the latter 
agency because Kaiser’s HMOs are federally qualified under the 
federal Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973,42 U.S.C. 
§ 300e, ef seq. 


2 


The service agreements of the Kaiser HMOs in California 
and in several other regions of the United States include standard 
arbitration provisions. Kaiser’s use of arbitration began in 
California more than twenty years ago. Kaiser’s California 
arbitration provision, which applies to more than 4 million 
members, encompasses medical malpractice claims and other 
claims that arise from or are incident to the service agreements. 
The arbitration provision is governed by the FAA because the 
service agreements evidence transactions involving interstate 
commerce within the meaning of 9 U.S.C. §§ 1 and 2. 


Kaiser's service agreements have for many years included 
two choice of law clauses that incorporate California law. The 
first clause (“the general clause”), which is one of several clauses 
under the heading “Miscellaneous Provisions,” states: 


I. Controlling Law. This Agreement 
shall be governed in accord with the laws of 
the State of California. 


The second clause (“the arbitration conduct clause”), which is 
found in the arbitration provision, provides: 


E. General Provisions. .. . 


With respect to any matter not herein 
expressly provided for, arbitration shall be 
governed by the California Code of Civil 
Procedure provisions relating to arbitration 
that are in effect at the time the statute is 
applied. 


In agreeing to these clauses, Kaiser never expected, much 


EE 


3 


less intended, that they would deprive Kaiser or the other 
contracting parties of the basic protection afforded by the pro- 
arbitration policies of the FAA. The purpose of the general clause 
has always been to have a predictable body of substantive law 
that would guide the parties in discerning their rights and 
obligations under the various provisions of the service 
agreements that pertain to the nature and scope of the health care 
services covered by the agreements, members’ eligibility for this 
coverage, and the monetary consideration that is paid in 
exchange for this health care coverage. 


The intended purpose of the arbitration conduct clause has 
been to adopt the body of procedural rules set forth in the 
California Arbitration Act, Calif. Code of Civ. Pro. § 1220, et 
seq., which address a number of matters not specifically covered 
by the terms of the arbitration provision. These matters include: 
the appointment of a neutral arbitrator by the court if the parties 
fail to agree on a neutral (§ 1281.6); disclosures of potential 
conflicts of interest by proposed neutral arbitrators ‘§ 1281.9): 
the arbitrability of requests for temporary restraining orders and 
preliminary injunctions (§ 1281.8); the coordination of 
arbitrations with overlapping litigation involving parties who 
are not bound by the arbitration agreement (§ 1281.2(c)); the 
powers of the neutral arbitrator with respect to the scheduling of 
the hearing, issuance of subpoenas, and the admission of 
evidence (§§ 1281.2 & 1282.6); and the right to conduct 
discovery (§§ 1283.05 & 1283.1). 


Since this Court’s decision in Volt, supra, attorneys for 
member/claimants who contest the scope or enforceability of 
Kaiser's arbitration provision have begun to argue that the 
foregoing choice of law clauses render the FAA inapplicable. 
Although Kaiser maintains that the clauses are not intended to 
exclude the basic policies of the FAA, the dispute has so far 
proven to be academic because California law has generally 


4 


embraced the FAA’s policies. However, the issue may soon cease 
to be academic in light of the California Legislature’s recent 
enactment of section 1363.1, Calif. Health & Safety Code. 


Section 1363.1, which became effective on January 1, 1995, 
requires that Kaiser and other California HMOs issue specified 
written notices of arbitration provisions in their service 
agreements. Aprescribed notice must now appear immediately 
above the signature line of every service agreement, whether it 
be with an employer or an individual subscriber, § 1363.1. A 
similar notice must be given above the signature line of every 
enrollment form signed by individual subscribers when they 
enroll themselves and family members under a service 
agreement. /d. 


While Kaiser has endeavored to comply with this new 
legislation, it is inevitable that the required notices will not be 
given in many instances due to circumstances beyond Kaiser’s 
control. In the context of group plans, the enrollment forms are 
administered by employers or union welfare funds. Some of 
these organizations insist on using their own “standard” 
enrollment forms that do not comply with the new statute. 
Furthermore, many employers and union welfare funds that have 
contracted with Kaiser for years may mistakenly use old editions 
of Kaiser’s own enrollment form rather than the new forms that 
contain the prescribed notice. 


Because of the implications of § 1363.1, this case will 
directly affect Kaiser’s reliance on arbitration as a means to 
achieve economical but fair resolutions of disputes with its 
members. For the reasons explained below, Kaiser hopes that 
this Court will unequivocally confirm that the FAA preempts any 
state law that imposes discriminatory notice burdens on the 
formation of valid arbitration agreements. In addition, because 
Kaiser prefers to continue to incorporate California law for the 


ee eT en ee 


5 


purposes stated above, Kaiser urges the Court to dispel the notion 
that Volt removes the protection of the FAA whenever acontract 
includes a clause that incorporates state law. 


i. INTRODUCTION 


There are really two facets to this casc. First, the Court now 
has a concrete opportunity to amplify the principle that the 
formation of arbitration agreements within the FAA’s sphere 
must be judged on the basis of the same standards that apply to 
other categories of legally favored contracts.' To date, the Court 
has only alluded to this principle in footnote 9 of its opinion in 
Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483, 492 n.9 (1987) and its general 
characterization of the FAA as a Congressional mandate that the 
courts place arbitration agreements “upon the same footing as 
other contracts.” Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 417 U.S. 506, 
511 (1974). 


The policy is straightforward: a state may not impose rules 
that discriminate against the enforcement of arbitration 
agreements. Congress favors arbitration agreements because 
they serve both the interests of the parties and the public. The 
FAA therefore enjoins courts to enforce these agreements “save 
upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation 
of any contract.” 9 U.S.C. § 2 (Emphasis added). The 
underscored words can only mean that the legal conditions that 
govern the creation of a valid arbitration agreement cannot be 
more onerous than those that govern other contracts that are 
favored by public policy. 


1. The parity of treatment mandated by the FAA is not judged by 
reference to the class of “suspect” contracts for which a state has established 
special disclosure requirements to protect against overreaching. Rather, 
arbitration agreements are to be enforced on the same terms as ordinary 
contracts that enjoy acomparable favored status. Saturn Distribution Corp. v. 
Williams, 905 F.2d 719, 725 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 983 (1990). 


6 


This basic non-discrimination policy does not impede the 
traditional power of a state to regulate contracts to ensure that 
parties with inferior bargaining power are adequately informed 
of what they are agreeing to. Indeed, the FAA does not even 
prevent a state from banning all standard form contracts if it 
wished todo so. The Act simply prohibits states from making an 
arbitration provision run a special gauntlet that does not apply to 
other provisions in similar contracts. 


The second challenge posed by this case is the need for 
clarification of the holding in Volt Info. Sciences, Inc. v. Board of 
Trustees, 489 U.S. 468 (1989). Volthas led to growing confusion 
regarding the impact of choice of law clauses on the core policies 
of the FAA. While some courts have been circumspect in their 
interpretation of Volt, other courts have viewed the decision as a 
license to ignore the FAA whenever acontract contains a clause 
that incorporates the law of a state jurisdiction. Asa result, these 
choice of law provisions have become loopholes by which state 
laws are permitted to eradicate arbitration agreements under the 
guise of honoring the parties’ intentions. 


As noted by petitioners’ brief, a growing number of states 
have enacted statutes, similar to the Montana statute now before 
the Court, that impose special disclosure requirements or other 
conditions on the formation of arbitration provisions. The FAA 
is the only legal shield that protects arbitration agreements from 
these discriminatory statutes. Unfortunately, this protection is 
being questioned at every turn because many arbitration 
agreements are coupled with common choice of law provisions 
that incorporate the law of the states that have legislated against 
arbitration. It is therefore imperative that this Court clarify Volt 
lest the benefits of arbitration become lost in a sea of litigation 
over whether choice of law clauses remove a contract entirely 
from the FAA’s protective sphere. 


7 


The franchise contract in this case, of course, does not 
contain a choice of law clause that incorporated Montana law. 
However, the Montana Supreme Court based its decision 
entirely on Volt, and this Court will therefore be required to 
explain Volt’s holding and the implications of this troublesome 
precedent. Kaiser submits that there is a right way and a wrong 
way to describe how Volt fits into the framework of federal 
arbitration law. 


The wrong way is to distinguish Volt merely on the ground 
that the contract here did not incorporate Montana law. This 
approach is fraught with danger because it will be widely 
construed as a signal that the non-discrimination policy of the 
FAA can be easily overridden by a choice of law clause. The 
federal policy would prevail in this case but only by becoming 
extinct in numerous other cases involving contracts that select 
the law of a state that enacts a discriminatory notice statute. 


Kaiser urges the Court to seize this opportunity to clarify 
that Volt stands for the proposition that a state court has wide 
latitude in determining whether a choice of law clause was 
intended to adopt state procedural rules that are designed to aid 
the practical implementation of arbitration agreements. The 
Court should also endorse the converse of this principle: if a state 
law would prevent the formation of a valid arbitration 
agreement, there must be very compelling evidence to overcome 
the presumption that the contracting parties did not intend to 
select any rule of law that would nullify their agreement. This 
presumption applies because the interpretation of achoice of law 
clause, insofar as it affects the parties’ arbitration agreement, is 
ultimately governed by the FAA’s standard that resolves all 
doubts in favor of arbitration. 


8 
Ill. VOLT’S CONFUSING LEGACY 


The result reached in Volt is difficult to criticize. A 
California court construed a general choice of law clause as 
incorporating the procedural rules of the California Arbitration 
Act, a statute that is animated by the same pro-arbitration policy 
as evinced by the FAA. See Madden v. Kaiser Foundation 
Hospitals, 17 Cal. 3d 699, 706-07, 131 Cal. Rptr. 882 (1976). 


The California rules did not invalidate the parties’ 
arbitration agreement. They simply supplied a procedural 
mechanism for resolving the practical problem of how to 
coordinate an arbitration with an overlapping lawsuit involving 
parties who are not subject to arbitration. Thus, the majority in 
Volt correctly observed that the state court’s interpretation of the 
choice of law clause was fully consistent with the core policies 
of the FAA. 


Avery different problem arises when achoice of law clause 
is deemed to incorporate a state law that nullifies the very 
arbitration agreement that the parties made, thereby jettisoning 
the FAAentirely. A growing number of courts have reached this 
conclusion on the mistaken belief that it is condoned, if not 
compelled, by Volt. 


In Rhodes v. Consumers’ Buyline, Inc., 868 F. Supp. 368, 
372-74 (D. Mass. 1993) and Armco Steel Co., L.P. v. CSX Corp., 
790 F. Supp. 311, 318-19 (D.D.C. 1991), the district courts 
concluded that defenses based on the alleged illegality of an 
entire commercial contract containing an arbitration provision 
were not arbitrable based on state rules of arbitrability. These 
rules, which reserve such issues for the courts, are directly 
contrary to this Court’s holding in Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & 
Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U.S. 395, 402-04 (1967), which requires 


9 


that arevocability defense directed at anentire contract, and not 
just the arbitration provision thereof, be referred to arbitration. 


The Rhodes and Armco courts discarded the FAA by a 
mechanical syllogism: (a) the contract contains achoice of state 
law clause as in Volt; (b) ergo, the parties must have agreed to 
abandon the FAA and its liberal policy of arbitrability. 


The decision of the Texas Court of Appeals in American 
Physicians Service Group v. Port Lavaca Clinic Associates, 843 
S.W. 2d 675 (Tex. App. 1992) is another illustration of how Volt 
has been transformed into an unwitting device for evading the 
FAA. The court held that an arbitration provision was void 
because it was not specially highlighted as required by a Texas 
statute that imposed this technical requirement only on 
arbitration agreements. Jd. at677-78. Paying no heed to the core 
policies of the FAA, the court reasoned that the parties chose this 
discriminatory rule over the FAA because of a choice of law 
Clause that stated: 


[A]ll controversies. . . shall be determined, 
to the extent consistent with federal and state 
law, by arbitration, to be held. . . pursuant to 
the arbitration laws of the State of Texas. . . . 


Id. at 676. Volt was the cited authority for this “consensual” 
destruction of the arbitration agreement. Accord, Albright v. 
Edward D. Jones & Co., 571 N.E. 2d 1329 (Ind. App. 1991), cert. 
denied, 506 U.S. 818 (1992). 


Perhaps the most extreme interpretation of Volt as an exit 
from the FAA is Yates v. Doctor's Associates, Inc., 193 Ill. App. 
3d 431,549 N.E. 2d 1010 (Ill. App. 1990). The court held that a 
franchisor had waived its right to arbitration by affirmatively 
seeking judicial relief on the merits in the state courts. Although 


10 


this conclusion could easily have been grounded on FAA 
precedents’, the court elected to rely on Illinois law because it 
found that the franchisor had impliedly consented thereto by 
basing its motion to compel arbitration on the Illinois Uniform 
Arbitration Act. This implied abandonment of the FAA was 
predicated on the court’s belief that Volt applied “with equal 
force” to the facts before it. Jd. at 1016. 


Yates is disturbing in that it demonstrates that Volt can be 
construed as calling for a forfeiture of FAA protection if the 
proponent of arbitration simply relies on a state arbitration 
statute as the procedural vehicle for compelling compliance with 
the arbitration agreement. This interpretation is irreconcilable 
with Southland Corporation v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1, 10-16 
(1984) in which the Court held that the core policies of the FAA 
are fully applicable to proceedings to enforce arbitration rights 
in state court. 


Not all courts have accepted the simplistic view that Volt 
allows courts to turn a deaf ear to the FAA whenever a contract 
contains a choice of state law clause. A number of courts have 
refused to construe ambiguous choice of law clauses as 
evidencing an intent to opt out of the FAA, especially when the 
allegedly “chosen” state law is inimical to arbitration.’ 
However, as shown by the foregoing, there is mounting evidence 


2. E.g., Zwitserse Maatschappij v. ABN Int'l Capital Markets Corp., 
996 F.2d 1478, 1480 (2nd Cir. 1993) (waiver by filing action to obtain 
discovery not available in arbitration). 


3. E.g., Todd Shipyards Corp. v. Cunard Line, 943 F.2d 1056, 1061-62 
(9th Cir. 1991); Ackerberg v. Johnson, 892 F.2d 1328, 1333-34 (8th Cir. 1989); 
Seymour v. Cis > “22n's Coffee, 732 F. Supp. 988, 992-95 (D. Minn. 1990); 
Merrill Lynch, >..~«<. ttal. v. Shaddock, 822 F. Supp. 125, 133-37 (S.D.N_Y. 
1993); Osteen v. T.E. Cuttino Constr. Co., 434 $.E. 24281, 283-84 (S.C. 1993); 
Dowd v. First Omaha Securities Corp., 495 N.W. 2d 36, 41 (Neb. 1993). 


that, contrary to the Court's intent, Volt is often used to turn 
contract interpretation into a means for reviving “the ancient 
suspicion of arbitration.” Securities Industry Ass'n v. Connolly, 
883 F.2d 1114, 1119 (1st Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 
(1990). 


IV. THE INTERPRETATION OF CHOICE OF LAW 
PROVISIONS BY BOTH FEDERAL AND STATE 
JUDGES IS SUBJECT TO THE FAA’S CORE 
POLICIES 


Because the FAA does not compel parties to enter into 
arbitration agreements, one cannoi rule out the possibility that 
the parties to an arbitration agreement might agree toremove the 
agreement entirely from the FAA’s protection. There are two key 
issues, however, that beg clarification. Is the interpretation of 
this intent a matter of federal law? If so, what is the federal rule 
of interpretation? 


Regarding the first issue, the Court has clearly indicated that 
the pro-arbitration policy of the FAA must be honored when a 
federal court construes the meaning of a choice of law clause in 
proceedings to compel arbitration or to vacate arbitral awards 
brought in federal court under the FAA. In Mastrobuono v. 
Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., __ U.S. —_., 115 S. Ct. 1212 
(1995), the Court rejected the argument that a general choice of 
New York law clause necessarily meant that the parties agreed 
that arbitrators could not award punitive damages. The Court 
resolved the obvious ambiguity of the choice of law clause in 
favor of allowing punitive damages because there was evidence 
that the arbitration provision was intended to confer full 
remedial authority on the arbitrator. In doing so, the Court relied 
primarily on the core policy of the FAA that requires that all 
doubts be resolved in favor of arbitration. /d. at 1218 & n.8. 


Although in Mastrobuono the Court examined the parties’ 


12 


intent as a matter of federal law, a footnote to the majority 
opinion suggests that in Volt the Court was constrained to accept 
the state court’s interpretation of the choice of law clause 
because “ ‘the interpretation of private contracts is ordinarily a 
question of state law, which this Court does not sit to review.’ ” 
Id. at 1217 n.4 (quoting from Volt, 489 U.S. at 474.) Insofar as 
this comment means that a state court may construe the parties’ 
intent without regard for the FAA, it is quite incorrect. 


The action in Mastrobuono was based on “a variety of state 
and federal law theories.” Jd. at 1214. Normally, a federal court 
decides a pendent state law claim based on the applicable state 
law. Yet, this Courtresolved the arbitrability issue as to both the 
federal and pendent state law claims as a matter of federal law. It 
logically follows that had the same arbitrability issue been raised 
in state court, the state court would likewise be subject to the 
overriding federal standard of interpretation because the 
agreement was within the purview of the FAA. 


That the FAA creates an overarching federal standard is also 
borne out by Prima Paint, supra. There, the Court held that ina 
pure diversity case, the FAA policy of arbitrability applies as a 
matter of federal law. 388 U.S. at 402-05. Later, in Southland 
Corporation v. Keating, supra, the Court confirmed that the FAA 
remains paramount even with respect to issues of arbitrability 
that arise in state court proceedings. 465 U.S. at 10-16. 


Thus, while the application of the premise of Justice 
Brennan’s dissent in Volt may be debatable ina given case, the 
premise itself is indisputable: a state court’s interpretation of a 
choice of law clause must comport with the core policies of the 
FAA. The Voit majority also embraced this premise since the 
majority emphasized that the state court’s interpretation of the 
choice of law clause did not offend the FAA. 489 U.S. at 476. The 
Court has followed the same principle when reviewing other 


13 


state court decisions concerning private contracts that are 
subject to overriding federal standards. E.g., Swarb v. Lennox, 
405 U.S. 191 (1972) (federal constitutional standard governs 
whether debtors agreed to confession of judgment procedure). 


In some cases, like Volt, in which the state court rules in 
question reflect a pro-arbitration policy, there ordinarily is no 
need to upset a state court's interpretation of the purpose and 
scope of a choice of law clause. However, when the allegedly 
chosen state rule precludes or impairs the formation or 
enforceability of an arbitration provision courts must construe 
the contract with a “healthy regard for the federal policy favoring 
arbitration.” Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler- 
Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614, 626 (1985), quoting Moses H. 
Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp., 460 
U.S. 1, 24-25 (1983). This rule of interpretation proceeds from 
the presumption that the parties did not intend to incorporate a 
state law that nullifies or impairs their arbitration agreement. If 
“any doubts concerning the scope of arbitrable issues should be 
resolved in favor of arbitration. . . .”, Moses H. Cone, supra, 460 
U.S. at 24-25, surely the same “all doubts” presumption must 
*pply when a claim is made that the parties to an arbitration 
agreement intended to adopt rules that challenge or defeat the 
very existence or validity of their agreement. 


By clearly declaring that choice of law issues are governed 
by the “all doubts” presumption, this Court will not on! y end the 
confusion surrounding Volt, but it will also encourage private 
parties to continue to rely on state arbitration rules to implement 
their arbitration agreements. Many states have arbitration 
Statutes that are not only favorable to arbitration but reflect 
refinements and innovations that address issues which Congress 
never contemplated when it enacted the FAA in 1925. See Volt, 
489 U.S. at 476 n.5. Furthermore, because the FAA does not 
prescribe rules concerning the conduct of an arbitration, 


14 


Southland Corporation, supra, 465 U.S. at 11 n.6, Congress 
undoubtedly expected that private parties would often lock to 
state law for guidance concerning the right toconduct discovery, 
the scheduling of arbitration hearings, the admissibility of 
evidence, and similar matters. See Part I above. 


On the other hand, if the Court does not disclaim the 
unbridled interpretations of Volt, business organizations and 
other parties will be forced to rewrite their contracts to omit any 
sentence that might be construed as an incorporation of all state 
laws relating to arbitration. Indeed, if decisions such as Yates, 
supra, are heeded, a party will not even dare to base an action to 
compel arbitration on the local jurisdiction’s arbitration Statute 
lest a citation to the statute be deemed an implied consent to the 
application of all state rules, including those that are aimed at 
defeating arbitration. Since most actions to compel arbitration 
must be brought in state court where the procedural provisions of 
the FAA probably do not apply*, this risk avoidance strategy can 
only lead the parties and state court judges into a procedural void. 
Thus, by affirming that choice of law clauses, as they affect 
arbitration, are governed by a federal rule of interpretation, the 
Court will ensure both a “healthy regard” for federal policy and 
a healthy use of the many state laws that assist the practical 
implementation of arbitration agreements. 


4. The FAA does not constitute an independent basis for federal question 
jurisdiction, e.g., Southland Corporation, supra, 465 U.S. at 15 n. 9, and 
sections 3 and 4 of the FAA appear to apply only to proceedings in federal 
court, Volt, 489 U.S. at 477 0.6. 


15 


Vv. CONCLUSION 


On the basis of the foregoing, Kaiser urges the Court to 
explain Volt in a manner that does not fuel the mistaken view that 
a choice of state law provision can be construed without 
obedience to the federal rule of interpretation under which 
reasonable doubts are resolved in favor of arbitration. In 
rejecting respondents’ Volt argument, the Court should 
emphasize that this case has a critical fact that was missing in 
Volt: viz. a state law that is plainly antithetical to arbitration. 
Given the strong presumption that the parties to an arbitration 
agreement intend their agreement to be enforced and not torn 
asunder, respondents bore the heavy burden of proving that the 
parties intended to incorporate a state statute that nullifies their 
arbitration agreement. Because this burden was not met, the 
decision should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


KENNEDY P. RICHARDSON 
Counsel of Record 

YVONNE M. PIERROU 
MARION’S INN 

Attorneys for Amicus Curiae 

Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. 
Latham Square 

1611 Telegraph, Suite 707 

Oakland, California 94612-2145 
(510) 451-6770 


