Supreme Court, US. | 
FILED 
(4) DEC 1 1995 

No. 95-559 : 


| 
IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. and NICK LOMBARDI, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 
PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 
Respondents. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF MONTANA 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


MARK R. KRAVITZ* 

JEFFREY R. BABBIN 

WIGGIN & DANA 

One Century Tower 

P.O. Box 1832 

New Haven, Connecticut 06508-1832 
(203) 498-4400 


H. BARTOW FARR, III 
FARR & TARANTO 

2445 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
(202) 775-0184 


* Counsel of Record 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


I. THE MONTANA NOTICE STATUTE IS 
PREEMPTED BY THE FEDERAL 
ARBITRATION ACT 


Il. 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 
Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies v. Dobson, 115 S. Ct. 
NEESER ENE: 2S ee ae 


David L. Threlkeld & Co. v. Metallgesellschaft Lid. 
(London), 923 F.2d 245 (2d Cir.), cert. dismissed, 


ETE ae 6 
Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 115 S. 

EE oe 2,3,4 
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Co., 

TE ee 5 
Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483 (1987) ......ccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeees 5 
Securities Industry Ass'n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114 (ist 

Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (1990).............. 6 
Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1 (1984)... 5 


Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of 
Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468 


a a el 2, 3,5 
STATUTES 
EC er 


Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-408 (1995) .....ccccccccsssssssssssssssssseseeee 2,3 


No. 95-559 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. and NICK LOMBARDI, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 
PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 


Respondents. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF MONTANA 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


I. THE MONTANA NOTICE STATUTE IS PRE- 
EMPTED BY THE FEDERAL ARBITRATION ACT. 


Respondents do not dispute either of the two points that are 
essential to answering the straightforward question presented 
by the petition. One, the parties entered into a written agree- 
ment to arbitrate involving interstate commerce that met all of 
the requirements of Section 2 of the Federal Arbitration Act 
(“FAA”), which makes written agreements to arbitrate “valid, 
irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist 
at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.” 9 
U.S.C. § 2. Two, the Montana Supreme Court refused to en- 
force the agreement to arbitrate on the ground that it did not 
comply with a notice requirement under Montana law that is 
applicable only to arbitration agreements and not to other 
types of agreements. Under the plain and unequivocal 


language of Section 2 and the decisions of this Court, those 
two points alone are sufficient to find preemption of the 
Montana notice statute. See Pet. 11-17. 


Rather than address those two central points, respondents 
instead attempt to justify the Montana Supreme Court’s deci- 
sion on the basis of a rationale not even relied upon by that 
court. According to respondents, the Montana court applied 
the Montana arbitration notice requirements because the par- 
ties had “expressly agreed to apply state law” to their fran- 
chise agreement. Br. in Opp. 7. Therefore, according to 
respondents, the Montana Supreme Court’s decision not to 
enforce the agreement to arbitrate on the basis of Montana 
law was appropriate under Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. 
Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 
U.S. 468 (1989), because the decision below purportedly was 
based on “a state court’s application of standard conflict-of- 
law principles and carefully calibrated state rules of arbitra- 
tion to a contract in which the parties agreed to abide by state 
law.” Br. in Opp. 9 (emphasis added). 


There are, however, several obvious problems with respon- 
dents’ argument. First, the parties did not agree to apply just 
any “state law” to their agreement; the choice-of-law clause in 
the franchise agreement expressly provided that the agreement 
“shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the 
laws of the State of Connecticut.” Pet. App. 15a. Respondents 
do not dispute that Connecticut law has no notice requirement 
comparable to Montana’s. Thus, it is undisputed that the par- 
ties’ agreement to arbitrate is enforceable under the state law 
chosen by the parties. See Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-408 (1995).' 


' As is common practice, the parties’ agreement to arbitrate also provided 
that any arbitration proceedings would be “in accordance with the Com- 
mercial Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association.” Pet. 
App. 13a. This Court has looked to the arbitration rules incorporated by 
reference in an arbitration agreement when determining the scope of the 
t. See Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., \15 

S. Ct. 1212, 1218 (1995). Respondents do not even address the parties’ 
(Footnote continued) 


Third, therefore, ’ reliance on Volt simply does 
not hold up. Unlike the situation in Volt where the state court 
applied the law chosen by the parties in their contract, the 
court in this case did just the opposite: it refused to enforce 
the state law that the parties had selected in their contract. In- 
from Volt by stating as follows: “While the Court in Volt 
applied state laws that had been chosen by the parties in their 


hardly be said that applying Montana law to invalidate the 
parties’ agreement to arbitrate enforces the intent of the par- 
ties, which was the rationale for the decision in Volt. See Volt, 
489 U.S. at 478; Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, 


agreement to abide by the rules of the American Arbitration Association, 
which--like Connecticut law--do not impose any arbitration notice re- 
quirement. 

* Respondents’ comment that it is within the power of Doctor’s Associ- 
ates, Inc. (“DAI”) to include in its franchise agreements a provision to 


Inc., 115 S. Ct. 1212, 1216 (1995). And, because respondents’ 
argument begins and ends with the decidedly false assump- 
tion that the parties here intended the Montana notice statute 
to govern their relationship--an assumption not even indulged 
in by the Montana Supreme Court--they are left with no de- 
fense of the decision below. 


What the Montana Supreme Court did decide is that Mon- 
tana law, even when not chosen by the parties (and, more 
particularly, even when the parties had chosen a different 
state’s law), could invalidate an agreement to arbitrate despite 
the fact that the Montana law was arbitration-specific and did 
not govern contracts generally. The sole basis of that decision 
was a misreading of Volt that the preemptive scope of Section 
2 is limited to laws that “undermine the goals and policies of 
the FAA” and that the notice statute does not fall within that 
category. Pet. App. 25a. That misreading of Volt has already 
been thoroughly addressed in the petition,” and respondents 


* Under the recent decision in Mastrobuono, Montana's notice statute 
would be preempted even if, hypothetically, the parties had agreed to let 
Montana law govern their franchise agreement. In Mastrobuono, the 
Court characterized a choice-of-law provision similar to the one here as 
merely serving as “a substitute for the conflict-of-laws analysis that oth- 
erwise would determine what law to apply to disputes arising out of the 
contractual relationship.” 115 S.Ct. at 1217. The Court found 
“untenable” an interpretation of the choice-of-law clause that would put 
the clause in conflict with the contract’s arbitration clause. /d. at 1219. It 
would be even more absurd, and in conflict with the federal policy favor- 
ing arbitration and construing ambiguities in favor of arbitration (see id at 
1218 & n.8), to rule on the basis of a choice-of-law clause that the parties 
agreed to an arbitration clause in their franchise agreement at the same 
time as they intended to incorporate Montana law invalidating that arbi- 
tration clause for failure to include the prescribed notice on the first page 
of the agreement. Certainly, Volt does not dictate such a bizarre result, 
and the Montana Supreme Court did not reach that result, as it applied 
Montana law contrary to the parties’ intent. 


* Briefly, Volt did not address whether an arbitration agreement should be 
enforced; it dealt only with whether a state law governing the timing of 
arbitration could be enforced by a state court when the parties had chosen 
that law to govern their agreement, and where the state law fostered the 

(Footnote continued) 


have said nothing to question petitioners’ analysis that state 
laws conditioning enforcement of arbitration agreements on 
compliance with particular state requirements are preempted 
unless they apply to contract provisions generaliy, and not 
just to arbitration provisions. 


While respondents baldly state that the Montana court’s 
decision is in harmony with Terminix, Br. in Opp. 7, 8, they 
do not and cannot reconcile the decision below with Ter- 
minix’s reaffirmation of the preemptive scope of Section 2 as 
recognized in this Court’s earlier decisions. See Terminix, 115 
S. Ct. at 838-39; Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483, 489-91 & 
492 n.9 (1987); Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1, 10- 
16 (1984); Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury 
Constr. Co., 460 U.S. 1, 24 (1983). Respondents do not even 
acknowledge the language in Terminix, quoted on page 13 of 
the petition, that “States may not . . . decide that a contract is 
fair enough to enforce all its basic terms (price, service, 
credit), but not fair enough to enforce its arbitration clause. 
The Act makes any such state policy unlawful . . . .” Terminix, 
115 S. Ct. at 843 (emphasis added). Instead, like the Montana 
court, respondents ignore the quoted passage and extol the 
virtues of a notice statute that sleninedly anol applies only to arbi- 
tration agreements and not to other contract terms. See Br. in 
Opp. 8-9. Respondents, therefore, cannot avoid the inescap- 
a conclusion that the notice statute is preempted by Section 


federal policy favoring arbitration by addressing a practical problem that 
the FAA failed to address. See 489 U.S. at 476 n.5, 478. It is still the case 
that Section 2 preempts state laws that place arbitration agreements on an 
unequal footing with other contracts, as such laws are “directly contrary to 
the Act’s language and Congress’s intent.” Allied-Bruce Terminix Com- 
panies v. Dobson, 115 S. Ct. 834, 843 (1995) (emphasis added). Respon- 
dents do not take issue with petitioners’ analysis of the Montana notice 
Statute as placing arbitration agreements on a different footing from other 
contracts. Nevertheless, even if respondents (and the Montana Supreme 
Court) were correct in their interpretation of Volt, the resulting tension 
between Volt and Terminix would itself warrant this Court's review. 


Il. THIS CASE IS APPROPRIATE FOR REVIEW. 


Respondents attempt to minimize the conflict between the 
decision below and the decisions of the U.S. Courts of Ap- 
peals for the First, Second and Eighth Circuits and the Mis- 
souri Supreme Court. See Br. in Opp. 9-13. They do so 
principally on the ground that the parties here “selected state 
law” but that the parties in the cases cited by petitioners did 
not so agree. See Br. in Opp. 12. Because, as we have dis- 
cussed, the parties did not agree to be bound by the Montana 
notice statute relied on by the court below, respondents’ effort 
to distinguish the contrary authority falls of its own weight. 
Moreover, as explained in the petition, both the Second and 
First Circuits found preemption of notice provisions after 
Volt, with the latter expressly distinguishing Volt in finding 
preemption under Section 2. See David L. Threlkeld & Co. v. 
Metallgesellschaft Ltd. (London), 923 F.2d 245, 249-50 (2d 
Cir.), cert. dismissed, 501 U.S. 1267 (1991); Securities Indus. 
Ass'n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114, 1119 n.3 (ist Cir. 1989), 
cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (1990). 


Thus, the conflict between the courts below is real and 
substantial. Moreover, the issue is of considerable importance. 
If the decision of the Montana Supreme Court is allowed to 
stand, other jurisdictions hostile to arbitration may feel free to 
follow Montana’s erroneous interpretation and application of 
Volt and refuse to enforce arbitration agreements on the basis 
of state-law requirements that are not applicable to contracts 
generally. Indeed, having previously vacated the judgment 
below and remanded the case for reconsideration in light of 
Terminix, a decision now by this Court not to review the de- 
cision reinstated below could mistakenly be seen as a signal 
to other courts that the Montana court was correct in its inter- 
pretation of the preemptive scope of Section 2. Such a result 
would inevitably disrupt the national uniformity that Con- 
gress sought to achieve in enacting the FAA. 


Respondents argue that the Court should deny review and 
wait for a future case that “may provide a more straightfor- 
ward vehicle, without the need for this Court to engage in a 


conflict-of-law analysis.” Br. in Opp. 13-14. But this Court 
need not engage in any conflict-of-law analysis to resolve the 
straightforward question presented by the petition. While, as 
stated in the petition, petitioners believe that the Montana 
court erred in its conflicts analysis, it is unnecessary for this 
Court to reach out and decide that issue because the Montana 
notice statute, which concededly applies only to agreements 
to arbitrate and not to contracts generally, is in any event pre- 
empted by Section 2. See Pet. 14 n.10.° 


Respondents finally contend that review by this Court is 
unnecessary because the Montana legislature and high court 
have not demonstrated “hostility” toward arbitration. Br. in 
Opp. 14-15. But the court below itself acknowledged that the 
notice statute embodies Montana public policy that is suspi- 
cious of arbitration as inconvenient, expensive and devoid of 
the procedural safeguards of a judicial proceeding. Pet. App. 
19a-20a. That attitude seems “hostile” in any normal sense of 
that term. In any event, the fact remains that the notice statute 
places agreements to arbitrate on a different footing from 
other agreements, and for that reason may not be applied to 
agreements to arbitrate that, like the one here, meet all of the 
requirements for enforceability under the FAA. See Terminix, 
115 S. Ct. at 838. 


* Respondents also argue that this case is an inappropriate vehicle for 
reaching the issue presented in the petition because the Court will be re- 
quired to decide whether petitioner Nick Lombardi, who was not a signa- 
tory to the agreement to arbitrate, may enforce the agreement as DAI’s 
agent. Br. in Opp. 14; see also id. at 1 n.1. The Montana trial court, how- 
ever, ruled that the claims against Lombardi were encompassed by the 
arbitration agreement and that the claims against Lombardi shou!d be 
stayed pending arbitration. Pet. App. 50a. The Montana Supreme Court 
did not reach that specific issue. See Pet. App. 15a. This Court can there- 
fore decide the issue presented in the petition without concerning itself 
with whether the Montana trial court erred by staying the claims against 
Lombardi. That issue can be raised by respondents on remand if still ap- 
propriate. In any event, respondents’ arguments regarding Lombardi have 
no bearing on the petition of DAI. 


CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted, 


MARK R. KRAVITZ" 
JEFFREY R. BABBIN 
WIGGIN & DANA 
One Century Tower 
P.O. Box 1832 
New Haven, CT 06508-1832 
(203) 498-4400 


H. BARTOW FARR, III 
FARR & TARANTO 
2445 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
(202) 775-0184 


* Counsel of Record 


Dated: December 1, 1995 


ee 


