Y 


(R 


iv 
if 
” 


No. 95-559 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. 
and NICK LOMBARDI, 


Petitioners, 
Vv. 


PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of Montana 


BRIEF FOR THE INTERNATIONAL 
FRANCHISE ASSOCIATION AND THE SECURITIES 
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION, AS AMICI CURIAE 
SUPPORTING PETITIONERS 


JOHN F. VERHEY MATTHEW R. SHAY 
Counsel of Record THE INTERNATIONAL 
Lewis G. RUDNICK FRANCHISE ASSOCIATION 
RUDNICK & WOLFE 1350 New York Avenue, N.W. 
203 North LaSalle Street Suite 900 
Suite 1800 Washi n, D.C. 20005 
Chicago, Illinois 60601 (202) 5000 
(312) 368-4000 WILLIAM J. FITZPATRICK 
Counsel for Amici Curiae SECURITIES INDUSTRY 
ASSOCIATION 
120 Broadwa 
New York, 10271 
(212) 608-1500 


Midwest Law Printing Co., Chicago 60610, (312) 321-0220 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I 


MONTANA’S STATUTORY NOTICE PROVI- 
SION FOR ARBITRATION IS PREEMPTED 
BY THE FEDERAL ARBITRATION ACT .... 


A. The Montana Supreme Court’s Decision 
Prior Decisions Of This Court 
And Other Lower Federal Courts .... 


B. The Montana Supreme Court’s Decision 
Distorts This Court’s Reasoning In Volt . 


Il. 


THE MONTANA SUPREME COURT’S DE- 
CISION REPRESENTS UNSOUND PUBLIC 
PUEME cccccccccccconcccsccccccccovecees 


15 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES 


Albright v. Edward D. Jones & Co., 571 N.E.2d 
1329 (Ind. Ct. App. 1991), cert. denied, 113 S. 
Ce. GR CRORE .. cccccctcvecccossénenunnnee 


Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies, Inc. v. Dobson, 


115 S. Ct. 834 (1995) .............. 4, 10, 11, 


American Physicians Service Group, Inc. v. Port 
Lavaca Clinic Assoc., 843 S.W.2d 675 (Tex. Ct. 
App. 1992) (en banc), writ of error denied (Tex. 
Ape. Bl, TGR) <ccccccccpccccocuveuseapmecs 


Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. Shute, 111 S. Ct. 
MEER CBD E). x0 000 cankécnteanssh eee 


Collins Radio Co. v. Ex-Cell-O Corp., 467 F.2d 995 
th Cir. ITD) .. cocccccccccccvcnaseesepess 


David L. Threlkeld & Co., Inc. v. M 
schaft, Ltd. (London), 923 F.2d 245 (2d Cir,), 
cert. dismissed, 501 U.S. 1267 (1991)....... 


Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 111 S. Ct. 
IOGT CIBDE) 2.0 occccccecenseceseunaneenee 


Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 
115 &. O%. BBRB GED occ ccccsssacesensuees 


Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, 
Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985) .........cceeeeees 


Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483 (1987) ... 6, 9, 10, 


Securities Indus. Ass’n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114 
(1st Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (19990) . 


Shearson/American Express, Inc. v. McMahon, 482 
US. SD (ORF) oc ccccscevcsssscueunaneeueee 


PAGE 


15, 16 


16 
12, 14 


11 


16 


Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1 (1984) ... 
SORSSCSOseeecerecoccccccocccoeccees 6, 9, 10, 12, 14 


Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees 
of Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 


tT Siete eecedeceeedocee 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 
Webd v. R. Rowland & Co., 800 F.2d 808 (8th Cir. 

EE EEE LE LESS ll 
STATUTES 
LEE 6, 9, 10 


No. 95-559 


In THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToBerR Term, 1995 


DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATES, INC. 
and NICK LOMBARDI, 


Petitioners, 


v. 


PAUL CASAROTTO and PAMELA CASAROTTO, 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of Montana 


BRIEF FOR THE INTERNATIONAL 
FRANCHISE ASSOCIATION AND THE SECURITIES 
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION, AS AMICI CURIAE 
SUPPORTING PETITIONERS 


INTEREST OF THE AMICI CURIAE 


The International Franchise Association (“IF A”), founded 
in 1960, is the oldest and largest trade association in the 
world representing the interests of franchising. IFA has 
more than 750 franchisor members and, since first inviting 
franchisees to join in 1993, has already attracted more 
than 27,000 franchisee members. IFA serves as a resource 
center for current and prospective franchisors and fran- 


—2— 


chisees, state and federal government agencies, and the 
public. IFA also represents the interests of franchising 
before legislatures, the courts, and the public. The Asso- 
ciation has been instrumental in promoting balanced leg- 
islation to regulate franchising practices in the United 
States. 


A franchise is a contractual relationship in which the 
franchisor, the owner of a business concept and associated 
trademarks or service marks, authorizes a franchisee to 
conduct a business that is identified by the franchisor’s 
marks and uses the franchisor’s format and operating sys- 
tem. The contractual relationship is defined by a franchise 
or license agreement, which sets forth the respective 
obligations of the franchisor and franchisee. To promote 
uniformity in their franchise networks, franchisors utilize 
standardized agreements. However, such “form” agree- 
ments are frequently subject to negotiation. An increas- 
ing number of franchising companies, in an effort to 
resolve disputes with their franchisees in the least costly, 
least disruptive and most expeditious manner possible, in- 
clude in their franchise agreements an undertaking to re- 
solve disputes by arbitration, binding on both the fran- 
chisor and the franchisee. Such agreements obligate the 
parties to arbitrate disputes, usually under the auspices 
of the American Arbitration Association or similar organ- 
ization, and often in the home state of the franchisor. In 
the past year alone, almost 400 arbitrations involving fran- 
chise relationships were initiated with the American Ar- 
bitration Association. 


The Securities Industry Association (“SIA”) is a not-for- 
profit corporation formed under the laws of Delaware. 
SIA is the securities industry trade association represent- 
ing the interests of more than 700 securities firms in 


== 


North America, which collectively account for 90% of se- 
curities firms’ revenue in the United States. 


The relationship between SIA members and their cus- 
tomers, particularly those who borrow money from mem- 
ber , or who trade in options, is sometimes governed by 
a written agreement which contains a clause requiring the 
arbitration of disputes. Most of these agreements also con- 
tain a choice-of-law provision. SIA has a deep concern that 
these agreements be enforced in accordance with the terms 
of the Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”). SIA has been 
a successful plaintiff against the Commonwealth of Massa- 
chusetts and the State of Florida in cases to enforce arbi- 
tration clauses despite restrictive state laws or regula- 
tions. Consistent enforcement of arbitration agreements 
is important to both SIA members and their customers 
since inconsistent enforcement of the FAA will lead to 
uncertainty and confusion for both parties to the contract. 


Historically, many state courts and state legislatures 
have looked with disfavor on arbitration, especially when 
it occurred as the result of a pre-dispute agreement to 
arbitrate. Whether this reluctance to honor agreements 
to arbitrate stemmed from the belief that arbitration did 
not afford the same procedural or substantive safeguards 
as litigation, or whether it grew out of the states’ desire 
to preserve in-state forums for their citizens, the end 
result was that arbitration agreements were routinely dis- 
regarded. With the passage of the FAA and rigorous en- 
forcement of arbitration agreements under the FAA, espe- 
cially by federal courts, most state courts and legislatures 
grudgingly accepted arbitration as a legitimate means of 
resolving disputes. In the past several years, however, 
a backlash has occurred. A number of states, including 
Montana and most recently California, have enacted stat- 
utes that, under the guise of ensuring that arbitration 


Supreme Court is but the latest example, have held other- 


ments for unfavorable treatment. 


Amici are vitally concerned about this case because per- 
mitting the most recent decision of the Montana Supreme 
Court to stand, particularly after this Court’s summary 
vacatur and remand of the case for consideration in light 
of Allied-Bruce Terminix Companies, Inc. v. Dobson, 115 
S. Ct. 834 (1995), will encourage other state courts and 
legislatures to undertake similar steps to undercut the en- 


= 


the strong federal policy favoring arbitration. Legislatures 
will continue to enact statutes that impose burdensome 
conditions on the formation or performance of arbitration 
agreements. And courts will continue to invoke these stat- 
utes to overturn arbitration agreements either by disre- 
garding parties’ choice-of-law clauses or, what is worse, 
by applying these clauses ostensibly to honor the parties’ 
“intention” to forgo arbitration in the face of an unam- 
biguous agreement to arbitrate. As a result, franchisors 
and securities firms that include arbitration provisions in 
their form agreements will either be forced to tailor their 
agreements to the laws of 50 different states or forgo the 
many advantages inherent in the arbitration process. Even 
now, the inconsistent treatment of arbitration agreements 
caused by state notice provisions introduces great uncer- 
tainty into the enforcement of those agreements and 
spawns satellite litigation over the enforceability of the 
notice provisions thai threatens to erase the benefits of 
economy and efficiency that arbitration was originally in- 
tended to produce. 


Pursuant to Rule 37.3 of the Rules of this Court, IFA 
and SIA, respectfully submit this brief as amici curiae 
in support of petitioners. Because many IFA members, 
both franchisors and franchisees, and many securities 
firms, utilize arbitration as a means of resolving disputes, 
IFA and SIA have a substantial interest in the outcome 
of this case and are able to provide an additional and 
broader prospective on the issues presented. IFA and SIA 
believe this brief will assist the Court in analyzing and 
resolving these issues. The parties have consented to the 
filing of this brief, and their written consents have been 
filed with the Clerk of Court. 


_* 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


In the decision below, the Montana Supreme Court per- 
sists in underestimating the preemptive reach of Section 
2 of the FAA by holding that Montana’s notice require- 
ment for arbitration agreements does not violate the Su- 
premacy Clause. In doing so, the Montana Supreme Court 
continues to disregard two controlling decisions of this 
Court, Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1 (1984), and 
Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483 (1987), both of which held 
that states may not restrict the enforceability of agree- 
ments to arbitrate except on “grounds as exist at law or 
in equity for the revocation of any contract.” 9 U.S.C. § 2. 
Since Montana’s notice requirement is directed exclusively 
at arbitration provisions and not at any other contractual 
terms, it is preempted by the FAA. In addition to conflict- 
ing with Southland and Perry, the Montana Supreme 
Court’s decision also runs directly contrary to the deci- 
sions of the three federal courts of appeals that have ad- 
dressed the issue, all of which held that state arbitration 
notice requirements are preempted by the FAA. Instead 
of following these decisions, the court below in its initial 
opinion relied on two intermediate state courts in Indiana 
and Texas that upheld similar notice provisions. Reversal 
of the decision below is necessary to signal to state courts 
and legislatures that, for purposes of preemption under 
the FAA, burdening the enforceability of arbitration agree- 
ments with a notice provision is no different than declaring 
those agreements unenforceable per se. 


By maintaining that Montana’s notice provision does not 
undermine the goals and policies of the FAA because it 
ensures consensual arbitration, the Montana Supreme 
Court also continues to distort this Court’s holding in Volt 
Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland 
Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468 (1989). The deci- 


= ™ 


sion in Volt was premised on the notion that the primary 
purpose of the FAA is to enforce privately negotiated 
agreements to arbitrate, even where those agreements 
allow for arbitration to be stayed pending the resolution 
of related litigation. Because the parties here chose the 
AAA’s Commercial Arbitration Rules and Connecticut 
law, not Montana law, to govern their arbitration agree- 
ment, Volt requires that their choice be upheld and not, 
as the Montana Supreme Court reasoned, that another 
state’s law be substituted that would invalidate the parties’ 
agreement to arbitrate. In addition, although in Volt this 
Court observed that the FAA does not entirely preempt 
state arbitration laws, and in particular state laws govern- 
ing the procedures under which arbitration is conducted, 
the Montana Supreme Court perverted this holding into 
a license to enforce a state arbitration law that went to 
the very substance of the right to arbitrate, prohibiting 
arbitration from occurring altogether. The Montana Su- 
preme Court’s conclusion that the FAA mandates the en- 
forcement only of those arbitration agreements that are 
entered into “knowingly,” which Montana’s notice provi- 
sion is purportedly designed to promote, flies in the face 
of the FAA’s insistence that arbitration agreements be 
placed on the same footing as other agreements. Because 
of the purported solicitude for arbitration of the major- 
ity of the Montana Supreme Court, when in fact its deci- 
sion and the statute it enforced are based on hostility to 
arbitration agreements, it is crucial that this Court re- 
verse the Montana Supreme Court’s most recent decision 
in this case to discourage similar attempts by state courts 
and legislatures to undermine the FAA on the pretext 
of furthering its goals and policies. 

The Montana Supreme Court’s decisions below are also 
premised on judicial and legislative hostility to arbitra- 


$= 


tion, which has long been discredited by this Court in 
view of the many advantages that arbitration affords over 
traditional litigation. These advantages include speed, 
economy, adjudicative expertise and the capacity to pre- 
serve long-term relationships once the dispute is resolved. 
To enforce statutes like Montana’s either would deprive 
the parties to a franchise relationship of these advantages 
altogether, or would seriously impede the use of arbitra- 
tion in the franchise relationship by forcing franchisors 
to tailor their contract documents to meet the arbitration 
requirements of 50 different states. Moreover, the Montana 
Supreme Court’s reasoning is based on unsupported and 
unfounded assumptions regarding the negotiability of arbi- 
tration agreements and the role of forum-selection clauses 
in those agreements. 


ARGUMENT 


MONTANA’S STATUTORY NOTICE PROVISION FOR 
ARBITRATION IS PREEMPTED BY THE FEDERAL 
ARBITRATION ACT 


In maintaining that the FAA does not preempt Montana’s 
statute requiring that a contract containing an arbitration 
agreement include a conspicuous notice to that effect on 
the face of the contract, the Montana Supreme Court con- 
tinues to disregard two of this Court’s controlling prece- 
dents and a substantial number of lower federal court de- 
cisions that flatly refute the Montana Supreme Court’s 
holding. In so doing, the Montana Supreme Court has 
severely restricted the preemptive reach of the FAA. 
Moreover, to justify its hostility to arbitration, the Montana 
Supreme Court persists in distorting this Court’s holding 
in Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees 


_- 


7 


of Leland Stanford Junior University, 489 U.S. 468 (1989), 
into a license to disregard arbitration agreements on the 
pretext of honoring the parties’ intentions. 


A. The Montana Supreme Court’s Decision Disregards Prior 
Decisions Of This Court And Other Lower Federal Courts 


In the decision below, the Montana Supreme Court “re- 
affirm[ed] and reinstate{d]” its prior holding that the 
Montana notice provision is not preempted by Section 2 
of the FAA because the notice requirement does not un- 
dermine the goals and policies of the FAA. App. A at 
7a. In so doing, however, the Montana Supreme Court 
continues to disregard this Court’s controlling decisions 
in Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U.S. 1 (1984), and 
Perry v. Thomas, 482 U.S. 483 (1987). In holding that a 
provision of the California Franchise Investment Law re- 
quiring judicial consideration of claims brought under the 
statute was preempted by the FAA, this Court in South- 
land declared that state law may limit the enforceability 
of agreements to arbitrate only upon “ ‘grounds as exist 
at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.’ ” 
465 U.S. at 11 (quoting 9 U.S.C. § 2) (emphasis added). 
Likewise, in Perry, this Court struck down a provision 
of the California Labor Code, which precluded arbitration 
of wage collection claims, on the ground that the Califor- 
nia law did not “{arise] to govern issues concerning the 
validity, revocability, and enforceability of contracts gen- 
erally,” but rather “(took] its meaning precisely from the 
fact that a contract to arbitrate is at issue.” 482 U.S. at 
492 n. 9. 


The Montana statute at issue here is preempted by the 
FAA because it clearly “takes its meaning precisely from 
the fact that a contract to arbitrate is at issue.”” Montana 
does not require that any other contractual provision be 


—10— 


flagged with a conspicuous notice provision on the first 
page of the contract. Arbitration agreements alone are 
burdened with this requirement in Montana—burdened, 
in that the absence of such a notice renders the agree- 
ment to arbitrate unenforceable. Under this Court’s deci- 
sions in Southland and Perry, therefore, the Montana 
statute is preempted by the FAA. -— 


Indeed, in a recent pronouncement on the FAA, this 
Court reaffirmed that, under its holdings in Southland and 
Perry, the FAA preempts state laws that seek to invali- 
date arbitration agreements. See Allied-Bruce Terminix 
Companies, Inc. v. Dobson, 115 S. Ct. 834 (1995); accord 
Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 115 S. 
Ct. 1212, 1215-16 (1995). In Terminix, this Court decisively 
rejected a request to overrule Southland and permit state 
courts to apply their own anti-arbitration laws regardless 
of whether interstate commerce was involved, holding that 
Southland was well-established law and that, consequent- 
ly, Alabama could not apply its statute barring pre-dispute 
arbitration agreements to invalidate an arbitration pro- 
vision. Terminix, 115 S. Ct. at 838-39. After observing 
that the “basic purpose of the Federal Arbitration Act 
is to overcome courts’ refusal to enforce agreements to 
arbitrate” and to place those agreements “ ‘upon the same 
footing as other contracts,’ ” id. at 838 (quoting Volt, 489 
U.S. at 474), Justice Breyer, writing for this Court, con- 
cluded that while “States may regulate contracts, includ- 
ing arbitration clauses, under general contract law prin- 
ciples and they may invalidate an arbitration clause ‘upon 
such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revoca- 
tion of any contract’[,] . . . [wJhat States may not do is 
decide that a contract is fair enough to enforce all its basic 
terms (price, service, credit), but not fair enough to en- 
force its arbitration clause,” Terminix, 115 S. Ct. at 843 
(quoting 9 U.S.C. § 2) (emphasis in original). 


= = 


Montana has done precisely what this Court and numer- 
ous other federal and state courts over the past decade 
have held that it cannot do: It has decided that contracts 
are fair enough to enforce all their basic terms, even ab- 
sent a special notice designed to bring the existence of 
those terms to the parties’ attention, but that arbitration 
agreements are not fair enough to enforce without such 
a notice. Since this Court in Terminix made clear that 
state laws that place arbitration agreements “on an un- 
equal footing” by definition undermine the goals and poli- 
cies of the FAA, Terminiz, 115 S. Ct. at 843, the Montana 
Supreme Court’s refusal on remand to the principles 
reaffirmed in Terminix requires out r 


The Montana Supreme Court’s holding also disregards 
the contrary decisions from the three federal courts of 
appeals that have addressed the issue, all of which have 
invalidated arbitration notice provisions similar to the 
Montana statute. See, e.g., David L. Threlkeld & Co., Inc. 
v. Metallgesellschaft, Ltd. (London), 923 F.2d 245, 249-50 
(2d Cir.), cert. dismissed, 501 U.S. 1267 (1991) (invalidating 
a Vermont statute that required agreements to arbitrate 
to be “prominently displayed” in contracts and signed by 
the parties); Securities Indus. Ass’n v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 
1114, 1120 (1st Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 956 (1990) 
(invalidating a state regulation requiring full written dis- 
closure of “the legal effect of the pre-dispute arbitration 
contract or clause’’); Webb v. R. Rowland & Co., 800 F.2d 
803, 806-07 (8th Cir. 1986) (invalidating a requirement that 
contracts highlight the existence of arbitration clauses in 
10-point capital letters); Collins Radio Co. v. Ex-Cell-O 
Corp., 467 F.2d 995, 997-99 (8th Cir. 1972) (invalidating 
a requirement that arbitration agreements bear an attor- 
ney’s acknowledgement that all parties have been advised 
of the agreement’s effects). Instead, the Montana Supreme 


atin 


Court has joined a growing number of state courts that 
have reinvigorated the former hostility to arbitration by 
concluding that arbitration notice provisions do not run 
afoul of the FAA. See, e.g., American Physicians Service 
Group, Inc. v. Port Lavaca Clinic Assoc., 843 S.W.2d 675, 
678 (Tex. Ct. App. 1992) (en banc), writ of error denied 
(Tex. Apr. 21, 1998); Albright v. Edward D. Jones & Co., 
571 N.E.2d 1329, 1332-38 (Ind. Ct. App. 1991), cert. denied, 
113 S. Ct. 61 (1992). In addition, a number of states have 
similar laws that single out arbitration agreements for un- 
favorable treatment by regulating the placement and ac- 
knowledgment of arbitration agreements in certain types 
of contracts.2 Courts in those states could well be en- 
couraged by the Montana Supreme Court’s decision below 
to uphold similar anti-arbitration statutes against pre- 
emption attacks. Thus, there is a compelling need for this 
Court to reverse the decision of the Montana Supreme 
Court in order to signal to state courts and legislatures 
that, for purposes of preemption under the FAA, statu- 
tory notice provisions for arbitration are no less hostile 
to arbitration than were the statutes at issue in Southland 


and Perry. 


B. The Montana Supreme Court’s Decision Distorts This 
Court’s Reasoning In Volt 


In sustaining the Montana statute against a preemption 
attack, the Montana Supreme Court persists in its dis- 
tortion of this Court’s reasoning in Volt in several re- 
spects. First, the decision below completely disregards 
the parties’ arbitration agreement. As this Court observed 
in Volt, the primary purpose of the FAA is to enforce 


2 See Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, at 23 nn. 20 & 21 (citing 
statutes). 


=}— 


“privately negotiated arbitration agreements”; thus, par- 
ties to an arbitration agreement should be “‘at liberty to 
choose the terms under which they will arbitrate.” 489 
U.S. at 472. Here, the parties chose the AAA’s Commer- 
ee ant camedian tow, ast Montene 

, to govern arbitration agreement. Since neither 
Connecticut law nor the AAA’s rules nor the FAA condi- 


the existence of a notice provision, Volt cannot support 
ae ree nee ty Oe Caren Syyseme- Cont. On 


Second, the Montana Supreme Court’s unduly narrow 
interpretation of the scope of federal preemption of state 


FAA” because Congress never intended to preempt the 
entire field of aryitration and because the FAA does not 
require parties to arbitrate when they have not agreed 
to do so. App. B at 26a. The Montana Supreme Court re- 
affirmed that holding in its most recent opinion, finding 


in its earlier opinion. However, this Court’s statement in 
Volt that the FAA does not entirely preempt state arbi- 
tration law was made in reference to a California pro- 
cedural statute that merely had the effect of delaying an 
arbitration until after litigation of related claims had 


—— 


occurred—and under circumstances where the parties had 
chosen that law to govern their arbitration. Thus, the 
California law affected only the timing of arbitration, and 
did not purport to prohibit arbitratx n altogether. Here, 
however, the Montana Supreme Court has 
Volt to permit a state to ban arbitration in its entirety, 
the existence of an arbitration agreement 
enforceable under the laws of the parties’ own choosing. 
Even if the parties had chosen Montana law to govern 
their franchise agreement, the Montana Supreme Court’s 
holding would still be indefensible, because choice-of-law 
clauses, like arbitration agreements generally, must be 
construed in light of the federal presumption that resolves 
all doubts in favor of arbitrability. See Mastrobuono, 115 
S. Ct. at 1218 & n. 8. 


Nor does the justification offered by the Montana Su- 
preme Court for its holding—that the FAA mandates the 
enforcement only of those arbitration agreements that are 
“knowingly” entered into—survive scrutiny. Since the 
“knowing” requirement applies only to arbitration agree- 
ments and not to contracts generally in Montana, it is pre- 
empted under Southland and Perry. Although Montana 
could ban all standard form contracts in an effort to en- 
sure that parties with inferior bargaining power “know” 
what they are agreeing to, it cannot impose this require- 
ment only on arbitration agreements. Behind Montana’s 
preoccupation with ensuring that arbitration agreements 
are “knowingly” entered into lies considerable legislative 
and judicial hostility toward arbitration. Because the Mon- 


tana Supreme Court’s purported solicitude for arbitration — 


may encourage other state courts or legislatures to em- 
ploy similar artifices to turn the FAA on its head, it is 
critical that this Court reverse decision below. 


in non-negotiated form contracts between parties of un- 
equal bargaining power. These anti-arbitration sentiments, 
barely concealed in the initial majority opinion of the Mon- 
tana Supreme Court, came to the surface in the special 
concurring opinion of Justice Trieweiler filed with the in- 
itial majority opinion. App. B at 28a-32a. Although the 
Montana Supreme Court has since attempted to distance 
itself from those sentiments as the basis for its holding, 
especially in light of the language in Terminiz “extolling 
the virtues of arbitration,” App. A at 7a (citing Terminiz, 
115 3. Ct. at 843), its continuing animosity to arbitration 
is apparent when it attributes this Court’s recognition of 
the benefits of arbitration to partisan “input” from the 
AAA. App. A at 7a. There is little question that the Mon- 
tana Supreme Court’s holding continues to be motivated 
by a distrust of arbitration and the benefits it affords. 


i Hy He Hat SH tiee 
ia a 
TAR Hy 
7 ayetgiye ih ut Rit 
nu THEE bt ay 

Ih deed is EL 
aS THT He 
LUAU INE ER 
Hae Ht ae 
! Fertil a Hal 
ig a 
aibeelai AU alaiel 
HEREU Le i eae 


=ii— 


For largely similar reasons, the informality and often 
less adversarial nature of arbitration are important be- 
cause they enhance the prospect that a franchisor and its 
franchisee will be able to honor their contractual obliga- 
tions while the arbitration is pending and put aside their 
differences once the arbitration has concluded, keeping 
their relationship intact. Franchise relationships are unique 
in today’s business world because they typically run for 
a period of ten to twenty years. Since disputes are more 
likely to arise in a relationship of that length, arbitration 
offers a method for resolving those disputes while preserv- 
ing the long-term nature of the relationship. Moreover, 
because arbitration is more flexible with regard to sched- 
uling times and places of hearings, it tends to be less 
disruptive of the day-to-day operations of franchisors and 
franchisees alike, an important consideration in light of 
the fact that many franchisors and franchisees are small 
businesses with limited personnel. Finally, arbitration also 
offers the parties to a franchise relationship the option 
of having an individual experienced in franchising adjudi- 
cate their dispute. Because franchising is a unique form 
of business organization and is subject to a wide array 
of registration, disclosure and relationship laws, franchis- 
ing expertise is often a sought-after qualification of ar- 
bitrators chosen to decide franchise disputes. 


Moreover, there is nothing inherent in the arbitration 
process itself that favors franchisors over franchisees. Con- 
trary to the anti-arbitration sentiments expressed in the 
initial special concurring opinion of Justice Trieweiler, 
App. B at 28a-32a, franchisees are often sophisticated, 
multi-unit operators who, on their own behalf or through 
counsel, negotiate the terms of their franchise agreements, 
including whether and under what circumstances arbitra- 
tion of disputes will occur. Although arbitration agree- 


forum where it can resolve them as cost-effectively as pos- 
sible. It is certainly no more burdensome for an individual 
franchisee to arbitrate once in the franchisor’s home state 


dispute subject to arbitration is instead resolved in a 
judicial forum but also when parties, encouraged by anti- 
arbitration decisions like those of the Montana Supreme 
Court in this case, initiate satellite litigation such as this 
to challenge the enforceability of agreements to arbitrate. 
Even if the franchisor ultimately succeeds on appeal in 
enforcing the agreement to arbitrate, significant judicial 
resources will often have been spent on both the trial and 


appellate level in reaching that result. 


However, these benefits of arbitration will be realized 
by franchisors (and franchisees), as well as the judicial 
system as a whole, only if state courts and state legisla- 
tures are reminded that attempts to undermine the en- 


—20— 


forceability of agreements to arbitrate, like Montana’s, will 
not go unnoticed by this Court. Otherwise, state legisla- 
tures will be unleashed to formulate all manner of require- 
ments for, and obstacles to, arbitration agreements, and 
the sound public policy that underlies the FAA will be 
subverted. Although it may seem theoretically possible 
for a national franchisor to track such rules and adjust 
the arbitration provisions of its contracts to meet their 
requirements, in practice this would prove extremely bur- 
densome and probably impossible. 


Even if national franchisors undertook the burdensome 
task of tailoring their contract documents to meet the 
varying and often conflicting arbitration laws of 50 differ- 
ent states, they would not be assured of having their ar- 
bitration agreements enforced, as this case itself demon- 
strates. A court—like the Montana Supreme Court in this 
case—may simpiy choose to disregard the parties’ choice- 
of-law clause out of hostility toward arbitration and apply 
a state notice requirement or other state anti-arbitration 
law that the parties never expected, much less intended, 
would be applied to their relationship. Since a nationwide 
franchisor cannot anticipate in what state it might be sued 
or what state’s arbitration statute might apply, it has no 
effective means of assuring that it can partake of the 
benefits of arbitration that Congress sought to promote 
by enacting the FAA. 


What has been written above concerning franchisors is 
equally true for securities firms. Most of SIA’s members 
do business in multiple states, some in all states. Firms 
use a universal agreement for all customers and expect 
them to be enforced equally in all jurisdictions. Montana, 
by singling out arbitration clauses for special notices not re- 
quired for any other type of contract or clause, has created 


wali 


costly obstacles to the ability to use universal agreements 
in the securities industry while also violating the purpose 
and intent of Section 2 of the FAA. 

Furthermore, once a franchise agreement or securities 
customer agreement containing an arbitration clause is 
signed, it cannot be amended to comply with a subse- 
quently enacted precondition to the validity and enforce- 
ability of the arbitration clause. It is far from clear under 
current law that such a legislative enactment would not 
be applied to a preexisting contract on the basis that it 
changed substantive rights, since a court could construe 
a dispute resolution provision as purely procedural in 
nature. Thus, the validity of tens of thousands of arbitra- 
tion agreements may be made uncertain retroactively by 
the enactment of such legislation, resulting in extensive 
litigation to determine whether particular state-imposed 
requirements for arbitration agreements are preempted 
by the FAA. It is far sounder public policy to reiterate 
the long-standing and well understood rule that the FAA 
preempts any state requirement that segregates arbitra- 
tion agreements from other contracts and imposes precon- 
ditions to their validity and enforceability that are not 
applicable to contracts generally. This Court should defini- 
tively and finally close the door to such state efforts to 
undermine arbitration agreements governed by the FAA. 


—22— 


CONCLUSION 


IFA and SIA respectfully request that this Court 
reverse the decision of the Montana Supreme Court and 
remand the case to that court with instructions to enforce 
the arbitration clause at issue. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JOHN F. VERHEY MATTHEW R. SHAY 
Counsel of Record THE INTERNATIONAL 
Lewis G. RUDNICK FRANCHISE ASSOCIATION 
RUDNICK & WOLFE 1350 New York Avenue, N.W. 
203 North LaSalle Street Suite 900 
Suite 1800 Washi n, D.C. 20005 
Chicago, Illinois 60601 (202) 
(312) 368-4000 WILLIAM J. FITZPATRICK 
Counsel for Amici Curiae SECURITIES INDUSTRY 
ASSOCIATION 
120 Broadwa 
New York, 10271 
(212) 608-1500 


Dated: February 16, 1996 


