                PUBLIC LAW 97-462—JAN. 12, 1983                                    96 STAT. 2527

Public Law 97-462
97th Congress
                                   An Act
To amend the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure with respect to certain service of        "'—'-
                   process by mail, and for other purposes.                            [H.R. 7154]
  Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled. That this Act may Federal Rules of
be cited as the "Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Amendments Act civil Procedure
nf 10QO"                                                                            Amendments
OI VSOb .                                                                           p^Q^ (jf 1982
  SEC. 2. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are amended as                       28 use 2071
follows:                                                                            note.
       (1) Rule 4(a) of such Rules is amended by striking out "it for 28 use app.
     service to the marshal or to any other person authorized by
     Rule 4(c) to serve it" and inserting in lieu thereof "the summons
     to the plaintifTor the plaintiffs attorney, who shall be responsi-
     ble for prompt service of the summons and a copy of the
     complaint".
       (2) Subsection (c) of Rule 4 of such Rules is amended to read as
     follows:
  "(c) SiaiviCE.
       "(1) Process, other than a subpoena or a summons and com-
     plaint, shall be served by a United States marshal or deputy
     United States marshal, or by a person specially appointed for
     that purpose.
       "(2XA) A sunmions and complaint shall, except as provided in
     subparagraphs (B) and (O of this paragraph, be served by any
     person who is not a party and is not less than 18 years of age.
       "(B) A summons and complaint shall, at the request of the
     party seeking service or such party's attorney, be served by a
     United States marshal or deputy United States marshal, or by a
     person specially appointed by the court for that purpose, only—
             "(i) on behalf of a party authorized to proceed in forma
          pauperis pursuant to Title 28, U.S.C. § 1915, or of a seaman
          authorized to proceed under Title 28, U.S.C. § 1916,
             "(ii) on behalf of the United States or an officer or agency
          of the United States, or
             "(iii) pursuant to an order issued by the court stating that
          a United States marshal or deputy United States marshal,
          or a person specially appointed for that purpose, is required
          to serve the summons and complaint in order that service
          be properly effected in that particular action.
       "(C) A summons and complaint may be served upon a defend-
     ant of any class referred to in paragraph (1) or (3) of subdivision
     (d) of this rule—
             "(i) pursuant to the law of the State in which the district
          court is held for the service of summons or other like
          process upon such defendant in an action brought in the
          courts of general jurisdiction of that State, or
             "(ii) by mailing a copy of the summons and of the com-
          plaint (by first-class mail, postage prepaid) to the person to
96 STAT. 2528              PUBLIC LAW 97-462—JAN. 12, 1983

                         be served, together with two copies of a notice and acknowl-
                         edgment conforming substantially to form 18-A and a
                         return envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the sender.
                         If no acknowle(|gment of service under this subdivision of
                         this rule is received b^ the sender within 20 davs after the
                         date of mailing, service of such summons and complaint
                         shall be made under subparagraph (A) or (B) of this para-
                         graph in the manner prescribed by subdivision (dXD or
                         (dX3).
                      "(D) Unless good cause is shown for not doing so the court
                   shall order the payment of the costs of personal service by the
                   person served u such person does not complete and return
                   within 20 days after mailing, the notice and acknowledgment of
                   receipt of summons.
                      "(E) The notice and acknowledgment of receipt of summons
                   and complaint shall be executed under oath or afilrmation.
                      "(3) The court shall freely make special appointments to serve
                   summonses and complaints under paragraph (2)(B) of this subdi-
                   vision of this rule and all other process under paragraph (1) of
                   this subdivision of this rule.".
                      (3) Rule 4(d) of such Rules is amended—
                           (A) by striking out "SUMMONS: PERSONAL SERVICE" and
                         inserting "SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT: PERSON TO BE
                         SERVED in lieu thereof; and
                           (B) bv striking out paragraph 7.
                      (4) Rule 4(dX5) of such Rules is amended—
                           (A) by striking out "delivering" and inserting "sending"
                         in lieu thereof, and
                           (B) by inserting "by registered or certified mail" after
                         "complaint".
                      (5) Rule 4(e) of such Rules is amended by striking out "SAME"
                   and inserting "SUMMONS" in lieu thereof
                      (6) Subdivision (g) of Rule 4 of such Rules is amended to read
                   as follows:
                "(g) RETURN. The person serving the process shall make proof of
              service thereof to the court promptly and in any event within the
              time during which the person served must respond to the process. If
              service is made by a person other than a United States marshal or
              deputy United States marshal, such person shall make affidavit
              thereof If service is made under subdivision (cX2XCXii) of this rule,
              return shall be made by the sender's filing with the court the
              acknowledgment received pursuant to such subdivision. Failure to
              make proof of service does not affect the validity of the service.".
                      (7) Rule 4 of such Rules is amended by adding at the end the
                   following:
                "0") SUMMONS: TIME LIMIT FOR SERVICE. If a service of the sum-
              mons and complaint is not made upon a defendant within 120 days
              £ ^ r the filing of the complaint and the party on whose behalf such
              service was required cannot show good cause why such service was
              not made within that period, the action shall be (Usmissed as to that
              defendant without prejudice upon the court's own initiative with
              notice to such party or upon motion. This subdivision shall not apply
              to service in a foreign country pursuant to subdivision (i) of this
              rule.".
28 use app.      SEC. 3. The Appendix of Forms at the end of the Federal Rules of
              Civil Procedure is amended by inserting after Form 18 the following:
                    PUBLIC LAW 97-462—JAN. 12, 1983                         96 STAT. 2529
        "FORM 18-A.—NOTICE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR SERVICE BY MAIL.
"United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
                        "CSvil Action, File Number
"A. B., Plaintiff
  V.                      Notice and Acknowledgment of Receipt of Summons and
"C. D., Defendant          Complaint

                                    "NOTICE
  "To: (insert the name and address of the person to be served.)
  "The enclosed summons and complamt are served pursuant to
Rule 4(cX2XCXii) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
  "You must complete the acknowledgment part of this form and
return one copy of the completed form to the sender within 20 days.
  "You must sign and date the acknowledgment. If you are served
on behalf of a corporation, unincorporated association (including a
partnership), or other entity, you must indicate under your signa-
ture your relationship to that entity. If you are served on behalf of
another person and you are authonized to receive process, you must
indicate under your signature your authority.
   "If you do not complete and return the form to the sender within
20 days, you (or the party on whose behalf you are being served) may
be required to pay any expenses incurred in serving a summons and
complaint in any other manner permitted by law.
   "If you do complete and return this form, you (or the party on
whose behalf you are being served) must answer the complaint
within 20 days. If you fail to do so, judgment by default will be taken
against you for the relief demanded in the complaint.
   "I declare, under penalty of perjury, that this Notice and Ac-
knowledgment of Receipt of Summons and Complaint was mailed on
(insert date).
                                           Signature

                                           Date of Signature
96 STAT. 2530                   PUBLIC LAW 97-462—JAN. 12, 1983
                      "ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RECEIPT OF SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT

                     "I declare, under penalty of perjury, that I received a copy of the
                  summons and of the complaint in the above-captioned manner at
                  (insert address).
                                                        Signature

                                                        Relationship to Entity/Authority   to
                                                         Receive Service of Process

                                                        Date of Signature".
Effective date.      SEC. 4. The amendments made by this Act shall take effect 45 days
28 use 2071        after the enactment of this Act.
28 use 2071          SEC. 5. The amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,
note.             the effective date of which was delayed by the Act entitled "An Act
                  to delay the effective date of proposed amendments to rule 4 of the
                  Federal Rules of Civil Procedure", approved August 2,1982 (96 Stat.
                  246), shall not take effect.
                     SEC. 6. Section 951 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by
                  striking out "$5,000" and inserting in lieu thereof "$75,000".
                     Approved January 12, 1983.




                  LEGISLATIVE HISTORY—H.R. 7154:
                  CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 128 (1982):
                      Dec. 15, considered and passed House.
                      Dec. 19, considered and passed Senate, amended.
                      Dec. 20, House agreed to Senate amendment with an amendment.
                      Dec. 21, Senate concurred in House amendment.
