No. 95-5257 


In The © 


Supreme Court of the United States — 
October Term, 1995 


+ 
SAUL ORNELAS and ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA, 
Petitioners, 
v. 
UNITED STATES, 
Respondent. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 
. 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 
° 


Rosert G. LeBewt* 
Stryter, Kosticu, LeBett, 
Dosroski & McGuire 
100 East Wisconsin 
Suite 1700 
Milwaukee, WI 53202-4114 
(414) 276-1233 
Counsel for Petitioner 
Saul Ornelas 


Brian W. GLEASON 

230 W. Wells Street 

Suite 702 

Milwaukee, WI 53203 

(414) 277-5076 

Counsel for Petitioner 
Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma 


*Counsel of Record 
—— a ———————————————E— 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO. (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


ss 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
Se ee SPE od be cheb ecccccccccecnsess ii 
EE Aah nd Ve ewbdins ceded abides seccucceses 1 


THE COURT OF APPEALS WAS INCORRECT IN 
APPLYING THE CLEARLY ERRONEOUS STAN- 
DARD OF REVIEW TO THE DISTRICT COURT'S 
RULING REGARDING REASONABLE SUSPI- 
CION AND PROBABLE CAUSE................. 1 


A. No matter how fact-intensive, all warrantless 
Fourth Amendment cases should be reviewed 


B. All Fourth Amendment cases have preceden- 
ee WI ad iSsecvccesscccccoccesscoccesesess 7 


C. De novo review furthers the appellate objective 
Oe GT Go obese es cesccctccsveczcce: 12 


D. De novo review of warrantless Fourth Amend- 
ment cases is required to avoid inconsistent 
RO GD GE civ eccccsnccsccsctvasscciess 13 


SE cprebcckeesdepeccsccsecccenrecsceces 18 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 (1985) ..... 5, 12 
Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of U.S., Inc., 466 U.S. 

GBB (E9BE ..0. cv ocoscscuscccvetecsncnveqeestaneennat 13 
Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387 (1977) ........6.0005: 4 
Commissioner v. Duberstein, 363 U.S. 278 (1960) ..... 4,5 
Cooter & Gell v. Hartmarx Corp., 496 U.S. 384 (1990) ..... 8 
Davis v. North Carolina, 384 U.S. 737 (1966)........ 4, 13 
Dow Chemical Corporation v. United States, 476 U.S. 

TAF CIOGED . wv cccccccvesncacevunssaneluaunne eens 6 
Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445 (1989)...........- eee. 6 
Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton, 491 

US. GF (ISGP) . ooo ccocesdvedsceesssceuunuueuens 2, 13 
Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983) ....... 9, 10, 14, 15 
Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307 (1979)............ 14, 15 
Maryland v. Garrison, 480 U.S. 79 (1987)............. 14 
Miller v. Fenton, 474 U.S. 104 (1985). ....... 0.0000 eee 1 
Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552 (1988)............. 10 
Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273 (1982)........ 2 
Salve Regina College v. Russell, 499 U.S. 225 (1991) ..... 2 
Silberman v. United States, 365 U.S. 505 (1961)........ 6 
Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969) ......... 10 


Stone v. Powell, 428 U.S. 465 (1976)............... 16, 17 


me 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Sumner v. Mata, 455 U.S. 591 (1982).................. 4 
Thompson v. Keohane, 116 S.Ct. 457 (1995)....7, 8, 9, 10, 13 


United States v. Gypsum Company, 333 U.S. 364 
EEE ELLIE EEE EE PE 12 


United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897 (1984)........... 14 


CONSTITUTION, STATUTES AND RULES 


U.S. Const.: 
EEG Cr iccdeecdsesecceccceccceces 13 
DE Es we ccccccccccsccccceccccecs passim 
EEE ELE ED 13 
ELE ES PEE 13 
IEEE SESE 7 


Equal Access to Justice Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2412(d)..... 10 


MISCELLANEOUS 


Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure, A Treatise 
on the Fourth Amendment, Third Ed., (1966) ........ 11 


ARGUMENT 


THE COURT OF APPEALS WAS INCORRECT IN 
APPLYING THE CLEARLY ERRONEOUS STANDARD 
OF REVIEW TO THE DISTRicT COURT’S RULING 
REGARDING REASONABLE SUSPICION AND PROB- 
ABLE CAUSE. 


A. No matter how fact-intensive, all warrantless 
Fourth Amendment cases should be reviewed de 
novo. 


Amicus counsel’ correctly notes that under either 
standard, the expenditure of effort by the reviewing tri- 
bunal, in considering warrantless Fourth Amendment 
claims, will remain essentially the same. Amicus brief, at 
11. The sole difference resulting from a de novo review, as 
opposed to one conducted under the clearly erroneous 
standard, is the degree of deference which is accorded the 
lower court. Accordingly, the conservation of judicial 
resources cannot be deemed an adequate justification for 
requiring one standard, over and above the other. 


Amicus argues that because historical facts and ques- 
tions of law are somewhat difficult to clearly distinguish, 
they should be reviewed with deference to the judicial 
officer who is “ . . . better positioned than another to 
decide the issue in question.” Miller v. Fenton, 474 US. 
104 at 114 (1985). Since the trial court is, according to the 
claim of amicus counsel, closest to the facts themselves, 
the reviewing court should defer to the judgment below. 


1 All references to “amicus” refer to the independent 
amicus, Peter D. Isakoff. 


The fundamental error in counsel's argument is the prem- 
ise that the trial court is somehow better positioned to 
apply the law to the facts. 


Petitioners maintain that reviewing tribunals have 
two main objectives in performing their duties; to correct 
errors and to develop the law. It is well recognized that 
federal appeals courts are, by their very nature, better 
positioned to consider, analyze, and apply developing 
legal principles. Trial courts are hampered with their 
crowded calendars which often preclude protracted and 
exhaustive research of legal issues. Such courts are not 
permitted, by virtue of the practical limitations of their 
ever increasing caseloads, to explore at length the com- 
plexities presented in Fourth Amendment issues. Courts 
of appeal routinely engage in a more protracted and 
reflective analysis of the legal underpinnings of Fourth 
Amendment issues. Additionally, as was stated earlier, an 
appellate tribunal is ever mindful of its obligation to 
develop the law. It is the trial court's responsibility to 
conduct a fair airing of the facts in order that it may 
determine whether an established right has been abro- 
gated. It cannot therefor be said that a trial court is better 
positioned to decide mixed questions of fact and law. 


Amicus, at 14, cites this Court’s decisions as founda- 
tion for the proposition that, “Where no statute or rule 
expressly governs the matter,” the determining factor 
should be to examine the characteristics of the question 
under review and the institutional advantage of a federal 
trial and appellate court in deciding it. Salve Regina Col- 
lege v. Russell, 499 U.S. 225, at 231-239 (1991); Harte-Hanks 
Communications v. Connaughton, 491 U.S. 657, 686-87 
(1989); Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 287-288 


(1982). In short, it is premised that where the issue is fact 
dependent or fact laden, the mixed question of fact and 
law which results should be reviewed with the deference 
permitted under the clearly erroneous standard. 


The petitioners maintain that mixed questions of fact 
and law have three component parts; historical findings 
of fact, the principle of law to be applied to the factual 
underpinnings, and the placement or structuring of the 
facts within the legal framework. Unquestionably, find- 
ings of historical facts are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard.? Whether the correct legal principle 
was utilized is reviewed de novo. Petitioners argue that 
with regard to issues concerning reasonable suspicion to 
stop and probable cause to search, the actual utilization 
of the legal principle within the context of the historical 
facts must be reviewed de novo. 


By their very nature, in every suppression issue, 
whether a challenge to the admissibility of a statement, to 
physical evidence, or to an identification, the circum- 
stances giving rise to the challenged evidence are of 
crucial import. Each of the suppression issues described 
herein are fact intensive because they arise from circum- 
stances in which a <itizcn has been searched, has been 
interrogated, has been placed in custody, or has been 
identified as the perpetrator of a criminal offense. It 
cannot be said therefore, that the application of the 


2 Petitioners have always conceded that the judicial officer 
below is in a better position to decide historical facts. As such, 
findings of fact and only findings of fact should be reviewed 
through utilization of the clearly erroneous standard. 


appropriate reviewing standard turns on the quantum or 
intensity of historical facts. 


This Court has continuously reviewed de novo sup- 
pression issues based in different constitutional contexts 
other than that at bar. Davis v. North Carolina, 384 U.S. 737 
(1966) (voluntariness of confession); Sumner v. Mata, 455 
U.S. 591 (1982) (pretrial identification); Brewer v. Williams, 
430 U.S. 387 (1977) (waiver of Sixth Amendment right to 
counsel). This Court has never opined that the applica- 
tion of the de novo standard is determined by the quan- 
tum of facts at issue. Accordingly, there can be no 
justification for this Court to deviate in warrantless 
Fourth Amendment cases from the recognized de novo 
review standard which has been heretofore applied to 
non-Fourth Amendment suppression issues. 


Amicus counsel posits that a warrantless Fourth 
Amendment determination is non-technical and therefore 
better suited to an “application of the fact-finding tribu- 
nal’s experience with the mainsprings of human conduct 
to the totality of the facts of each case,” citing Commis- 
sioner v. Duberstein, 363 U.S. 278, 289 (1960). Amicus Brief 
at 15. In Duberstein, a civil and non-constitutional 
framed action, the Court determined that because the 
statutory standard which is to be applied to the factual 
scenario was “non-technical in nature”, the results 
are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. The 
Fourth Amendment enshrines a multitude of principles 
which are subject to constant metamorphosis and analysis 
of competing values and policies. The application of 
these sophisticated developing principles to a given 
fact situation is not the simple task described in 


Duberstein. Similarly, this process requires a careful and 
in-depth examination of the fundamental concepts, 
together with the subtle nuances which have been created 
by the precedents announced in this Court. A trial court 
does not engage in an exercise which results in the appli- 
cation of an unerringly static principle to case specific 
facts. Rather, the application of Fourth Amendment law 
to a fact situation requires consideration of how the prin- 
ciple developed, in what direction the principle is head- 
ing, and by what means it is likely to evolve. The trial 


court does not merely slap a legal label on the factual 
model. 


It is premised by opposition counsel that de novo 
review should be employed for those questions which 
will “produce a decision of precedential significance.” 
Amicus brief at 16. Warrantless Fourth Amendment cases, 
it is urged, are focused on the specific facts and circum- 
stances which surround the search and seizure. Those 
issues, amicus suggests at 16, “utterly resist generaliza- 
tion.” Therefore, it is argued, that questions arising from 
such case specific facts should be left to the determina- 
tion of the district court with deferential review on 
appeal. Warrantless Fourth Amendment cases, according 
to amicus counsel, will not serve to establish clear guide- 
lines for lower courts, nor will they clarify underlying 
principles of law. Such determinations, “would very 
likely contribute only negligibly to the accuracy ... at a 
huge cost in diversion of judicial resources”. Amicus brief 
at 17, citing Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 at 575 
(1985). Amicus counsel suggests that “de novo review by 
the Court of Appeals in this case could produce little of 
real precedential value, at least now that decades of 


intense Fourth Amendment litigation have settled the 
basic principles of probable cause determination.” 
Amicus brief at 22. It is with these propositions that 
petitioners wholly disagree. 


Fourth Amendment law has, to the contrary, been 
evolving through the decisions announced in this Court, 
the rulings of lower appellate tribunals, and through the 
analysis of recognized legal scholars. The Fourth Amend- 
ment provides only the framework within which many 
principles of application have developed. Some of the 
concepts which have emanated from the Fourth Amend- 
ment have gradually eroded with the passage of time. 
Some have slowly evolved and some wax and wane as 
societal interests and values change. 


The evolution of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence is 
often in response to technological changes in law enforce- 
ment. Thirty five years ago the Court considered whether 
Fourth Amendment rights were violated when evidence 
was obtained through sophisticated electronic eavesdrop- 
ping. Silberman v. United States, 365 U.S. 505 (1961). Ten 
years ago this Court addressed whether the EPA could 
use aerial photography to enforce environmental laws. 
Dow Chemical Corporation v. United States, 476 U.S. 227 
(1986). More recently, this Court faced the issue whether a 
helicopter hovering 400 feet over a residence in an 
attempt to spot marijuana growing in the greenhouse was 
a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. 
Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445 (1989). It should be assumed 
that appellate courts will soon be asked to consider 
Fourth Amendment claims arising in the context of the 
Internet, DNA and gene harvesting seizures. While one 
specific Fourth Amendment case is clearly of most import 


to the individual litigants, the evolution of Fourth 
Amendment law takes place incrementally with varying 
facts in common situations which present on a daily 
basis. 


The Fourth Amendment must remain flexible. So too, 
must appellate courts have the independence to exercise 
de novo review concerning decisions of lower courts 
which arise within the context of technological changes. 


B. All Fourth Amendment cases have precedential 
value. 


The amicus suggests that because Fourth Amend- 
ment principles derive from fact dependent determina- 
tions, precedential significance is diminished and 
appellate courts should not devote their resources which 
de novo review would require. Amicus brief at 17-21. A 
similar argument was recently rejected in Thompson v. 
Keohane, 116 S.Ct. 457 (1995) in the Fifth Amendment 
context. There, this Court recently rejected the argument 
that the “in-custody” determination should be accorded a 
presumption of correctness under 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d). In 
so doing, the majority could not agree with the dissent’s 
argument that the trial court was in a better position to 
“decide the relatively straightforward and fact-laden 
question of Miranda custody.” Justice Thomas and Chief 
Justice Rehnquist dissent at 468. The dissent argued that 
such custody inquiries often require the trial court to 
make any number of “fact-intensive, close calls” which 
often involve assessments of credibility and demeanor. 
Further, the trial court “must consider a complex of div- 
erse and case-specific factors” to understand the position 


of the defendant at the time of interrogation. Dissent at 
468. 


The Keohane court stated that there were two lines of 
cases. In the first line it agreed that there are instances 
where the trial court is called upon to make determina- 
tions concerning primary or historic facts which 
“depends heavily on the trial court’s appraisal of witness 
credibility and demeanor.” Keohane, at 465. The majority 
reasoned that even in those instances where an objective 
legal standard was employed, as in determining juror 
bias, the “predominate function . . . involves credibility 
findings whose basis cannot be easily discerned from an 
appellate record.” In such cases the trial court is better 
positioned to make the legal conclusion, and the judg- 
ment of the “jurist-observer” is accorded presumptive 
weight. Id. at 465. The resolution of the issue in the first 
line of cases often has little precedential value. Whether a 
particular juror is biased, or a particular defendant is 
competent does not easily lend itself to general rule mak- 


ing. 


The second line of cases, as typified in Keohane, 
involves often fact-intensive scenarios, which may or may 
not involve credibility issues. The trial court, however, is 
not called upon to make credibility determinations con- 
cerning events which occurred in the courtroom, nor is 
the trial court in a uniquely superior position concerning 
knowledge of local practices, as in Cooter & Gell v. Hart- 
marx Corp., 496 U.S. 384 (1990). 


In this second line of cases the trial court makes the 
determinations of historical fact, resolves credibility 
issues if they arise, and then applies an objective test to 


resolve the ultimate inquiry. “This ultimate determina- 
tion, we hold, presents a mixed question of law and fact 
qualifying for independent review.” Keohane, at 465. In 
resolution of the issue in Keohane, the court noted 
“[jJudges alone make the ‘in custody’ assessments for 
Miranda purposes, and they do so with a view to identify- 
ing recurrent patterns, and advancing uniform outcomes. 
If they cannot supply a definite rule, they nonetheless can 
reduce the area of uncertainty.” Keohane, n. 13. 


In this second line of cases the resolution of the issue 
has precedential value. The resolution of fact-intensive 
issues concerning reasonable suspicion to stop and prob- 
able cause to search, just as the “in custody” issue in 
Keohane, are not dependent upon a jurist-observer’s supe- 
rior position to make credibility determinations concern- 
ing events which occur in the courtroom. The events of 
the stop and search, like the retelling of the events of the 
custodial interrogation, often occurred weeks or months 
prior to the evidentiary hearing. Although there may be 
credibility questions to resolve, once the trial court makes 
those determinations, it applies an objective legal stan- 
dard, considering the totality of the circumstances, and 
arrives at a “uniquely legal” determination. Keohane at 
465. 


As will be discussed below, the development of 
Fourth Amendment jurisprudence arises from the appli- 
cation of varying fact situations to an objective legal test 
and to precedentially developed principles. 


Amicus counsel suggests that Illinois v. Gates, 462 
U.S. 213 (1983) represents a withdrawal from concrete 


10 


and specific guidelines in favor of a “totality of the cir- 
cumstances” approach. Such standard, it is maintained, is 
consistent with the more deferential clearly erroneous 
test. Brief at 20-21. But, as this Court noted in Thompson v. 
Keohane, n. 11, the “totality of the circumstances cast of 
the ‘in custody’ determination, contrary to respondent's 
suggestions, does not mean deferential review is in 
order.” 


Amicus counsel at 20, notes dicta from Gates at n. 11 
that there are “so many variables in the probable cause 
equation that one determination will seldom be useful 
‘precedent’ for another”. The context of this dicta was 
whether or not the allegations submitted to the Magis- 
trate in Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969), under 
the totality of the circumstances test, would support a 
present finding of probable cause. The court declined to 
speculate, deeming the result to be of little precedential 
value. 


The amicus brief, at 20-21, states that “most probable 
cause and reasonable suspicion decisions involve ‘multi- 
farious, fleeting, special, narrow facts that utterly resist 
generalization.” Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552 at 562 
(1988). Pierce was not a Fourth Amendment case but was 
concerned with whether the Secretary was substantially 
justified within the meaning of the Equal Access to Jus- 
tice Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2412 (d). 


The Pierce Court stated that where the question of the 
appropriate standard of appellate review is not answered 
by statutory command, “the answer is provided by a long 
history of appellate practice.” As petitioners have noted 
above, the long history of appellate practice mandates 


11 


continued use of the de novo standard in warrantless 
Fourth Amendment issues. 


Contrary to the argument of amicus counsel, trial 
courts do indeed preside over warrantless Fourth 
Amendment suppression matters which contribute to the 
development of the law. These decisions result in a com- 
pendium of fact situations which, over the passage of 
time, will reflect changes, evolution and retrenchment 
from previous applications. Deference to the trial court, 
as a legal construct, would inhibit both the development 
of the law and the error correcting function of the inter- 
mediary appellate courts. 


Amicus argues that because the factual variables are 
infinite, “Attempts to draw bright lines would be futile.” 
Brief at 22. If this were true, various Attorneys General 
and local District Attorneys would not write detailed 
newsletters to law enforcement agencies involving Fourth 
Amendment issues. If search and seizure law was with- 
out precedential value, Wayne LaFave and others would 
not write volumes on this aspect of Fourth Amendment 
jurisprudence. Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure, A 
Treatise on the Fourth Amendment, Third Ed., (1966). Fur- 
ther, this Court and lower courts would not have pub- 
lished thousands of decisions concerning search and 
seizure issues. As this Court recognizes, the brighter the 
line, the easier it will be for law enforcement agencies to 
anticipate Fourth Amendment problems and respond 
appropriately. It is the development of this body of 
Fourth Amendment law which prevents arbitrary and ad 
hoc enforcement. 


12 


C. De novo review furthers the appellate objective of 
error correcting. 


The clearly erroneous/de novo review dichotomy, in its 
practical application, creates an anomaly which is in conflict 
with the overall appellate objective of correcting errors. If an 
appellate court were to conduct a review and disagree with 
the conclusions of law of the trial court, it would be free to 
reverse under the de novo standard. If the same appellate 
tribunal were to review the same conclusions, by the clearly 
erroneous standard, it would affirm unless the decision was 
“clearly erroneous”. “When the clearly erroneous standard 
applies, the reviewing court may not reverse the trial court 
‘simply because it is convinced that it would have decided 
the case differently.’ ” United States v. Gypsum Company, 333 
U.S. 364 (1948). Thus, a reviewing court which disagrees 
with the trial court’s legal conclusion will find its hands tied 
and will be required to affirm the finding below. Very little 
guidance has been given by this Court, other than in Ander- 
son v. Bessemer City, in defining what errors are clear enough 
to justify reversal.? Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 
(1985). 


It is certainly reasonable to anticipate that appeilate 
courts will differ in their assessment of when the clearly 
erroneous standard has been satisfied. Two appellate courts, 
in construing similar fact-law determinations could come to 
diametrically opposed results; one requiring reversal and the 


3” ‘A finding is “clearly erroneous” when although there is 
evidence to support it, the reviewing court on the entire 
evidence is left with the definite and firm conviction that a 
mistake has been committed.’ ” Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 
U.S. 564, 573 (1985). , 


13 


other supporting affirmance. Clearly such inconsistency can 
hardly be said to further the policy of advancing uniform 
outcomes and promoting the error correcting function of a 
reviewing court. Additionally, such an anomaly is an impedi- 
ment to the second overall objective of appellate tribunals; to 
develop the law. Courts of appeal must maintain autonomy 
in application of their legal principles in order to further 


Amicus counsel, in urging this Court to adopt a clearly 
erroneous standard for review of warrantless Fourth 
Amendment issues, inferentially suggests that the Fourth 
Amendment should not be accorded the same status as other 
constitutionally enshrouded issues. In First Amendment 
cases the Court has historically conducted fully independent 
review, Harte-Hanks and Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of 
U.S., Inc., 466 U.S. 485 (1984). Except in cases involving 
issues of limited precedential value, such as individual juror 
bias, the Court has consistently accorded de novo review to 
issues which arise as a result of either Fifth or Sixth Amend- 
ment challenges. See, Thompson v. Keohane, Davis v. North 
Carolina, 384 U.S. 737 (1966). Amicus counsel states no recog- 
nized proposition for differentiating Fourth Amendment 
based issues from those whose origins are founded in other 
constitutional rights. 


D. De novo review of warrantless Fourth Amendment 
cases is required to avoid inconsistent results on 


appeal. 


Amicus counsel's insistence that the clearly erro- 
neous standard for appellate review of probable cause 
decisions would not denigrate the warrant requirement is 


14 


insupportable. Petitioners maintain that the clearly erro- 
neous standard ignores the fundamental precept of Gates, 
to encourage reliance by police officers on use of a war- 
rant. The Court announced in Gates that its new substan- 
tial basis test, to be utilized in assessing the magistrate’s 
determination of probable cause, was prewns:d upon a 
practical objective. The Court anticipated that if defer- 
ence was accorded the magistrate’s probable cause find- 
ing, police officers would thereby rely upon the implicit 
security from such deference, and obtain warrants. To 
accord similar appellate deference in warrantless reviews 
would announce to law enforcement officials that there is 
no added benefit in obtaining a warrant. They can, there- 
fore, pursue warrantless searches with the same level of 
comfort as for those seizures conducted with a warrant. 


It is interesting to note that while the Gates Court 
announced the substantial basis standard of review, for 
the issuance of a warrant, other sub-issues which ema- 
nate from the warrant’s execution have been reviewed de 
novo; i.e. whether exclusion is mandated where an officer 
exercises good faith in reliance upon the warrant, United 
States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897 (1984); and whether the police 
exercised good faith in their investigation concerning the 
warrant application, their duty to fully disclose to the 
magistrate what information they possessed, and the rea- 
sonableness of the manner of its execution, Maryland v. 
Garrison, 480 U.S. 79 (1987). 


It is argued that to require de novo review for proba- 
ble cause and reasonable suspicion determinations would 
create incongruous results. Counsel claims that Jackson v. 


15 


Virginia, 443 U.S. 307 (1979) is supportive of the proposi- 
tion that appellate review of the sufficiency of the evi- 
dence for criminal convictions is clearly erroneous. 
Amicus brief, at 32. Therefore, to require the stricter de 
novo standard for Fourth Amendment issues is illogical. 
Counsel's analysis of Jackson is incorrect. Reviews of suf- 
ficiency of the evidence require a consideration of the 
facts below and whether any rational trier of fact could 
find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Such a review does 
not address or take into account pretrial determinations 
of admissibility of evidence for which there has been a 
claimed constitutional violation. Once a criminal action 
has been submitted to the trier of fact, pretrial determina- 
tions have been made outside of the presence of the jury. 


Of further import to petitioners’ challenge to coun- 
sel’s analysis of Jackson, is the fact that the standard of 
review for a judgement of conviction is wholly different 
and completely distinguishable from the clearly erro- 
neous standard. The Jackson court announced that the 
appropriate standard for sufficiency of evidence is 
whether upon the record evidence adduced at the trial no 
rational trier of fact could have found proof of guilt 
beyond a reasonable doubt. The clearly erroneous stan- 
dard is not whether there is no trier of fact who could 
have made the same legal conclusion as the tribunal 
below. A comparison of the standard for appellate review 
of federal criminal convictions to the clearly erroneous 
standard is simply mixing apples and oranges. 


Amicus counsel further argues that an inconsistency 
results from the juxtaposition of the Gates substantial 
basis test for warrant reviews and the de novo standard 
for warrantless issues. In theory, the review of a warrant 


16 


probable cause determination made by a magistrate, 
without a full adversary hearing, would require more 
deference than that accorded legal conclusions drawn by 
the trier of fact after a full-blown testimonial hearing. 
Counsel correctly surmises that such variance, while 
seemingly incongruous, is in fact, “an unavoidable by 
product of a desire to encourage warrants.” Amicus brief, 
at 31. 


The last claimed inconsistency which would emanate 
from application of de novo review to warrantless Fourth 
Amendment issues arises from consideration of Stone v. 
Powell, 428 U.S. 465 (1976). The Powell court determined 
that in those matters where there has been a full and fair 
opportunity to litigate suppression issues in the state 
court, the remedy of federal habeas would be foreclosed. 
The habeas limitation announced in Stone v. Powell was 
founded exclusively in a policy decision emanating from 
a consideration of the exclusionary rule. The Powell deci- 
sion holds only that the limited contribution to the exclu- 
sionary rule permitting collateral review of Fourth 
Amendment claims is outweighed by the substantial soci- 
etal costs. Powell, at 494-495. 


Counsel suggests that this Court should not distin- 
guish between habeas review of state suppression issues 
and those considered through direct federal appeal. The 
proscription announced in Stone v. Powell is conditioned 
upon a full and fair consideration of a defendant's Fourth 
Amendment claims at the state level. Petitioners maintain 
that such full and fair litigation includes complete appel- 
late review. This Court agreed with such proposition in 
its decision in Powell; “the force of this justification [pre- 
serving the integrity of the judicial process] becomes 


17 


minimal where federal habeas corpus relief is sought by a 
prisoner who previously has been afforded the oppor- 
tunity for full and fair consideration of his search-and- 
seizure claim at trial and on direct review.” Stone v. 
Powell, at 486. 


A federal litigant, in order to be accorded full and 
fair litigation must, similarly, be permitted access to 
meaningful, fair and complete appellate review. Oppo- 
sing counsel erroneously equates the Powell Fourth 
Amendment habeas prohibition with the deference 
required by the clearly erroneous standard. If this Court 
is to be consistent in its application of appellate and 
Fourth Amendment rights, and mindful of the policy 
limitations which it has carved out to the exclusionary 
rule, federal appeal litigants must have their Fourth 
Amendment claims reviewed de novo. 


e 


18 


CONCLUSION 


Petitioners maintain that de novo review should be 
granted in all warrantless Fourth Amendment cases. To 
do so will maintain continuity in the development of the 
law, will further the appellate objective of error correct- 
ing, and will prevent inconsistent results on appeal. The 
judgment of conviction should be reversed and the mat- 
ter remanded. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Rosert G. LeBewt* 

Sryter, Kosticn, LeBet, 
Dosrosx!: & McGuire 

100 East Wisconsin 

Suite 1700 

Milwaukee, WI 53202-4114 
(414) 276-1233 


Counsel for Petitioner 
Saul Ornelas 


Brian W. GLEASON 
230 W. Wells Street 
Suite 702 

Milwaukee, WI 53203 
(414) 277-5076 


Counsel for Petitioner 
Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma 


*Counsel of Record 
March 19, 1996 


a 


we ee ee 


