EDITOR'S NOTE 


THE FOLLOWING PAGES WERE POOR HARD COPY 
AT THE TIME OF FILMING, IF AND WHEN A 


BETTER COPY CAN BE OBTAINED, A NEW FICHE 
WILL BE ISSUED, 


——_ . 


No.95 | > 


IN THE Bi. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA, AND SAUL ORNELAS, 
Petitioners. 


Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent, 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Brian W. Gleason, Esq. 

230 W. Wells Street 

Suite 702 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53203 
(414) 277-5076 


Counsel of Record for 
Petitioner Ismael Ornelas- 
Ledesma 


Robert G. LeBell, Esq. 
Styler, Kostich, LeBell, 
Dobroski & McGuire 

100 East Wisconsin 


Suite 1700 
Court, U.S. Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202-4114 
we {LED (414) 276-1233 
‘JUL 14 7 1995 Counsel of record for Petitioner 
Saul Ornelas 
| OFFICE OF THE CLEA / 


PARTIES TO THE ACTION BELOW 


The parties in the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Seventh Circuit include petitioners Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma and 
Saul Ornelas and the United States of America. The causes 
below in the second appeal are listed as 94-3349 and 94-3350. 
Both cases were joined for appeal by order of the Seventh 
Circuit. In the first appeal, both petitioners’ cases were 
numbered as 92-CR-243. 

OPINIONS BELOW 

This petition seeks review of a published opinion by the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, United 
States of America v. Ismael Ornelas~Ledesma and Saul Ornelas, 
16 F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 1994), decided February 10, 1994, and 
United States of America v. Saul Ornelas, Ismael Ornelas 
Ledesma, an unpublished decision and order dated April 18, 
1995. 

The first magistrate-judge’s recommended order is dated 
February 12, 1993. The original decision of the district 
court denying the motions to suppress is dated March 9, 1993. 
The published opinion of the court of appeals is dated 
February 10, 1994. In the first appeal, the circuit court of 
appeals vacated the judgments of conviction and remanded the 
case to the United States District Court for the Eastern 
District of Wisconsin for further findings. 

Upon remand, the magistrate-judge recommended suppression 


of the seized drugs. The magistrate-judge’s post remand 


recommended order is dated March 29, 1994. The district 
court’s decision after remand is dated September 20, 1994. 
The district court disagreed and reinstated the 
convictions. A timely appeal followed and the circuit court 
of appeals affirmed the convictions in an unpublished decision 
and order dated April 18, 1995. This appeal follows. All 
decisions are appended. 
JURISDICTION 
The statutory provision conferring jurisdiction of this 
Court to review the judgment below by writ of certiorari ina 
federal criminal case is 28 U.S.C. §1254. The court of 
appeals has appellate jurisdiction based on 28 U.S.C. §1291. 
The jurisdiction of the district court is based on 18 U.S.C. 


§3231. 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


FOURTH AMENDMENT TO THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION: 

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and 
seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, 
but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the 
persons or things to be seized. 

FIFTH AMENDMENT TO THE UNITED STATED CONSTITUTION: 

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or 
otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or 
indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the 
land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual 


2 


. er au 


service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person 
be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of 
life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to 
be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall 
private property be taken for public use, without just 
compensation. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

Milwaukee County Sheriff’s detective, Michael Pautz, was 
conducting drug interdiction activities at 8:30 a.m. in the 
morning of December 11, 1992 (R.49:29). He observed a 1981 
Oldsmobile bearing California plates parked in front of Room 
4 of the Suburban Motel, 4600 S. 27th St., Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin. Upon checking the motel registry, (R. 49:26) he 
learned that Ismael Ornelas, from California, was registered 
in Room 4 (R.49:31). 

Pautz radioed his dispatcher and requested him to “run” 
the California plates to determine the car’s owner (R.49:28). 
The dispatcher reported that the car was registered to “Miguel 
Ornelas” with either a middle or second last name of 
“Ledesma.” He was unsure if the “Ledesma” was before or after 
the “Ornelas.” (R.49:29). The address for the owner was 830 
N. 16th Street, San Jose, California (R.49:5). 

Approximately 20 minutes later Det. Don Hurrle met Pautz 
across the street from the motel (R.49:33). A Drug 
Enforcement Administration Narcotics and Dangerous Information 


Systems check (hereinafter referred to as NADDIS) was then 
made for the names “Miguel Ledesma Ornelas” from San Jose, 
California and “Ismael Ornelas". (R.49:33). 

The NADDIS computer check showed a “hit,” (an indication 
of some prior contact) for "Miguel Ledesma Ornelas” AKA Lemus- 
Ledesma, Miguel, with a DOB of 09/29/45, 150 lbs., Hispanic 
male from El Centro, California as being a heroin dealer 
(R.49:39). The NADDIS check also showed that an Ismael 
Ornelas, Jr., from Tucson, Arizona was a 1000-kilo a month 
cocaine dealer (R.49:35-36). A wanted check was made on both 
names and neither were wanted. 

The computer information given to Pautz regarding the 
owner of the car did not include a date of birth (R.49:35-36). 
Pautz did not ask for a check on the car’s registered owner to 
determine if the two persons listed in the DMV (California 
Department of Motor Vehicles) and NADDIS checks were one and 
the same, nor did he attempt to determine the age of the DEA 
information or to further obtain identifying information such 
as height and weight (R.49:56,60,61). 

Pautz’s suspicions were raised because the car was from 
a “drug source” state, the persons were of Hispanic descent, 
no advance reservations were made for the motel, and because 
the NADDIS check showed that a person bearing the name Ismael 
Ornelas was a drug dealer (R.49:54). Pautz and Hurrle called 
for and obtained a “drug sniffer” dog (R.49:37). 


After moving across the street to a lot next to the 


motel, the officers observed two people exit the motel. One 
individual loaded the trunk with luggage (R.50:331). One of 
the individuals entered the car on the passenger side and the 
other went into the motel office (R.50:371). The second 
individual returned to the car and entered on the driver’s 
side (R.50:305). At that point, the officers moved their own 
vehicles to both sides of the suspect vehicle (R.50:306). 

Hurrle asked if there were any drugs in the car. Both 
purportedly, (almost simultaneously) stated, "No". (R.50:307). 
It is claimed that both gave Hurrle permission to look through 
the car (R.50:307). Before conducting the search of the 
vehicle, the appellants were asked to produce identification. 
Ismael Ornelas Ledesma produced a California identification 
showing his residence as Martinez, California (R.50:306-307). 

Det. Luedke arrived at the scene with his drug dog. He 
checked the interior of the car without use of the dog and 
felt a “somewhat loose” area near the arm rest of the rear 
passenger side. He suspected the possibility of drugs behind 
the panel. Luedke testified that he then went to the vertical 
area of the car body where the passenger door closes, (the 
door jam), and observed a plastic vent cover, held in place 
with one “rusted” Phillips screw (R.50:214-221). 

Luedke believed that the presence of rust on the screw 
was evidence that it had been recently removed. (The other 
screws appeared rust-free). 

Luedke removed the Phillips screw and the vent cover and 


discovered a paper bag containing suspected cocaine (R.49:156- 
157). Unable to remove the bag through the vent, he popped 
open the “somewhat loose” panel, toward the interior of the 
car, and removed the drugs through this opening. 

After the arrest, custodial statements were made in which 
Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma made inculpatory statements. 

The petitioners were charged in a one-count indictment 
with possession with intent to distribute approximately 2,000 
grams of cocaine in violation of §21 U.S.C. §841 (a)(1) and 
$18 U.S.C. §2. (R.4.) 

Three days of evidentiary hearings were held, wherein the 
petitioners challenged the stop, the search and the 
statements. The magistrate judge entered an order denying the 
appellants’ pre-trial motions to suppress. The order of the 
magistrate judge entered on the 12th day of February, 1993, 
(R. 34) was affirmed on different grounds by the trial court 
in an order entered on the 9th day of March, 1993, (R. 40). 
Additionally, the magistrate judge denied the appellants’ 
motion to compel discovery in an order dated January 15, 1993, 
(R. 23). 

The petitioners pled guilty to count one of the 
indictment. This was a conditional plea pursuant to Rule 11 
(a)(2) F.R.Crim.P. (R. 41). 

On March 11, 1993, the petitioners filed a motion for 
reconsideration before the trial court, requesting a review of 
its decision and order of 3/9/93, (R.42) referred to above, 


and to further consider an inspection of the suspect vehicle. 
The trial court orally denied the motion on March 11, 1993, 
(R. 52). 

A judgment of conviction was entered on March 11, 1993 
(R. 41). Saul Ornelas was sentenced on the 28th day of May, 
1993, to 63 months for count one, (R.45). A notice of appeal 
was filed on the 7th day of June, 1993, (R.47). Ismael 
Ornelas-Ledesma was sentenced to 60 months, on May 20, 1993, 
(R. 38) and filed a notice of appeal on May 27, 1993. (Ismael 
Ornelas’s Docket, R. 41). 

In the petitioners’ first appeal, the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed the judgment of 
the district court in a decision and order dated February 10, 
1994. The order remanded the matter to the trial court for 
further proceedings to determine whether the inside panel 
secreting the drugs was indeed loose. 

The court of appeals reversed because the district court 
ignored disputed testimony regarding the credibility of the 
arresting officer. 

The district court had not personally heard the 
challenged testimony, had not personally inspected the car, as 
requested by petitioners, and did not order the officer, whose 
credibility was challenged, to appear before him to testify as 
to the challenged matters. 

The magistrate judge disbelieved a closely related 
portion of the testimony of the arresting officer concerning 


whether the vent cover in the doorjamb of the car was held in 
place with a “rusty” screw. 

After the evidentiary hearing concerning the “rusty” 
screw, petitioners requested that the screw be produced for 
examination. The screw was produced by the officer and 
examined by the magistrate judge and later by the court of 
appeals. The court of appeals, echoing the magistrate judge, 
stated, "The screw is in the appellate record and we have 
looked at it ourselves. There is not the slightest trace of 
rust or of anything that looks like rust.” 16 F.3rd at 719. 

Nonetheless, the magistrate judge upheld the search on 
the basis of inevitable discovery. The district court, while 
not relying on the inevitable discovery theory, upheld the 
search on the basis of the confluence of three factors; 

The first was the closely related testimony by this same 
officer concerning the “somewhat loose” panel. The second was 
the fact that the car in question fit a “drug courier 
profile.” It was an older two-door GM car registered in 
California, driven by two people who checked into a motel. The 
individual did not make reservations. The third was the 
comparison of the name of the person registered in the motel 
and the registered owner of the car. The last name supposedly 
(erroneously), was the same as names found in the government’s 
NADDIS (Narcotics And Dangerous Drugs System) computer. 

The court of appeals rejected the inevitable discovery 
theory because the government failed to defend it on appeal. 


It stated that the drug courier profile “seems only a little 
better than a dragnet for Hispanics,” and it noted that the 
secondary literature “depicts NADDIS as an unselective, 
unweeded repository of unsubstantiated allegations, often 
dated.” Ornelas, 16 F.3d at 717. 

It likened the NADDIS information to that of an informant 
not known to be reliable. Ornelas, 16 F.3d at 718. The court 
acknowledged that the dispatcher reversed the two last names 
but thought that that was just the sort of error one might 
expect. It was impressed, however, by the fact that there 
were not one but two hits, notwithstanding the one hit showed 
an Ismael Ornelas from Arizona and the petitioner was from 
California. 

It also noted that the other name was from El Centro, 
California, a location, hundreds of miles from the address of 
the registered owner of the car. (The record shows it to be 
six hundred miles). The court remanded for a determination 
concerning whether the panel was indeed loose as testified to 
by the officer. 

That determination was to be made by one of three ways; 
the district court judge himself hearing the testimony of the 
officer, an inspection of the automobile, or the magistrate 
judge making a finding of credibility as to that portion of 
the testimony concerning the “loose panel.” 

Upon remand, the matter was referred back to the 
magistrate judge. He found that “"NADDIS reports are so 


convoluted and mismatched that they are of little probative 
value in the probable cause determination.” (A-103). He 
similarly was unimpressed by the “questionable drug courier 
profile,” (A-103). He made the finding “except for the rule 
of Falsus in Uno Falsus In Omnibus, I have no reason not to 
believe the panel was loose. However, the loose panel alone, 
given the age of the Oldsmobile is not probative evidence of 
the fact it necessarily had been recently removed.” (A-102). 
It was a 1981 car. 

His recommended order of March 29, 1994 granted 
petitioners’ motions to suppress the cocaine. On September 
20, 1994, the district court issued an order not adopting the 
recommended suppression by the magistrate judge. 

The case was again appealed. The same panel, Chief Judge 
Richard Posner writing for the court, this time affirmed the 
decision of the district court denying petitioners’ motions to 
suppress. 

The brief opinion, (App:147-48), less than two pages, 
states, 

Our review is deferential. The district judge’s 

finding of probable cause may be set aside only if 

clearly erroneous. We no not find clear error. 

The district judge’s opinion, although brief, 

ae reviews the circumstances on which the 

decision to search the car was based and explains 

why taken as a totality they gave the officers 

probable cause to conduct the search. The judgment 


of the district court must therefore be, and it is 
affirmed. 


10 


ARGUMENT I. IN NON-WARRANT CASES, AN APPELLATE 

COURT SHOULD CONDUCT A DE NOVO REVIEW CONCERNING 

REASONABLE SUSPICION TO STOP AND PROBABLE CAUSE TO 

SEARCH. 

Certiorari should be granted to end the conflict among 
the circuits regarding the appropriate appellate standard of 
review of the ultimate legal conclusion in non-warrant cases. 
Most circuits continue to adhere to a de novo standard of 
review for conclusions of law and the clearly erroneous 
standard for findings of fact. Since 1992 the Seventh Circuit 
has applied a clearly erroneous standard for both findings of 
fact and conclusions of law in non-warrant cases. 

Petitioners had argued in each appeal to the Seventh 
Circuit that a de novo standard of review for the ultimate 
legal determination is required. 

In the first appeal, the court of appeals reversed 
because it had serious concerns about the propriety of the 
district court making credibility determinations in the 
absence of specific findings by the magistrate judge. The 
magistrate judge found the related testimony concerning the 
“rusty screw” incredible, because of the condition and 
appearance of the screw later produced in court. He had not 
made a specific finding of fact about the credibility of the 
testimony regarding the “somewhat loose” panel. 

The district court, having only read the testimony of one 
officer, made the finding, "This reasonable suspicion became 
probable cause when Officer Luedke found that the right door 


ll 


panel of the car was loose, leading him to suspect that the 
panel had been recently removed and that contraband was hidden 
inside. (Id. at 6-7; Transcript of Off. Luedke’s Testimony at 
15-16." (App.117). 

One of petitioners’ counsel had personally inspected the 
panel but found that it was not unlike the other panels and 
requested the district court, together with all counsel, to 
conduct a personal inspection of the panel. The district 
court rejected this suggestion, later made by the court of 
appeals in its remand order (48:4-5): 


The magistrate judge initially concluded, “the 
records disclosed no evidence from which Luedke 
could conclude that a hidden panel contained 
contraband (App.136)." The Court finds that it can 
and did rely upon what Officer Luedke stated. The 
fact that there had been a request in this motion 
for reconsideration for an inspection of the 
automobile by the Court and counsels--Mr. LeBell 
having done so and found that his inspection 
disclosed that there wasn’t the loose panel, or 
that none of the panels--or that the particular 
panel, the specific panel, that was testified to by 
Officer Luedke as being loose was not loose and not 
apparently somewhat loose upon being physically 
felt. That examination the Court finds is not 
necessary because regardless of what the Court 
would find at the --any subsequent inspection, the 
fact of the matter is that the records reviewed by 
the Court and the testimony of Officer Luedke is 
one which discloses that in his estimation and his 
opinion and by his calculation and his view and his 
belief when--as he testified he felt the panel or 
observed the panel and engaged the panel, that it 
appeared, quote, to be--or didn’t appear but 
physically felt like it was somewhat loose, close 
quote. 

The court of appeals vacated and reversed because “we do 


not know whether Luedke’s testimony about the door panel 
should be believed.” (App-156). The remand was for the 


12 


purpose of making the factual determination of whether it was 
in fact loose, and then the legal determination whether a 
loose panel, the NADDIS information, and the drug courier 
profile add up to probable cause to believe there were drugs 
secreted in the car’s body, such as to allow the officers to 
dismantle the car. (App-157). 

The court of appeals had serious concerns about the 
propriety of a district court rejecting the credibility 
determinations of a magistrate judge under 28 U.S.C. 636 
(b)(1) and substituting its own dispositive findings. "“[T]Jo 
do so without seeing and hearing the witness or witnesses 
whose credibility is in question could well give rise to 
serious questions which we do not reach." N.7. See United 
States v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667 (1980). 

Upon remand, the trial court was directed to inspect the 
car, have the officer testify again before the district court, 
or refer the matter to the magistrate judge for his 
credibility determination of Officer Luedke’s testimony 
concerning the “somewhat loose panel.” (App.156-57). 

The district court choose the last option. The 
magistrate judge made the credibility determination in favor 
of the officer. It was less than a sterling endorsement. The 
magistrate judge did not articulate why he found the officer 
credible. 

The totality of the magistrate judge’s credibility 


determination is as follows: 


13 


Officer Luedke’s testimony as to the screw was 
found by this Court to be incredible, in light of 
the undisputable condition of the screw itself. 
Nonetheless, except for the rule of Falsus In Uno 


Falsus In Omnibus, I have no reason not to believe 


the panel was loose. Thus, I accept as credible 

Luedke’s testimony that the panel was loose. 

(App.102). 

The magistrate judge then went through a detailed 
analysis of seven other decisions concerning door panels and 
cavities used to secret drugs. He made a determination that 
probable cause was lacking to reasonably suspect the presence 
of drugs in the body cavity. 

Not deterred, the trial court merely referred to the 
cases cited by the magistrate. The trial judge did not examine 
the cases. Instead, he came to a contrary legal conclusion 
concerning the existence of probable cause. "The Court 
acknowledges that the issue is a close one, but weighing the 
evidence “not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but as 
understood by those versed in the field of law enforcement,” 
See Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 742 (1983), the Court is 
compelled to reach the same conclusion.” (App.97) (The same 
conclusion it had reached a year earlier). 

In the first appeal, the court of appeals rejected 
petitioners’ argument that a de novo standard of appellate 
review was the appropriate standard of review (App.154): 

Although the question is close, we conclude 

that the district court did not commit clear error 

in holding that there was a lawful stop. And clear 

error is the test; the proposition that review of a 

district court’s determination of reasonable 

suspicion (if it is a Terry stop) or probable cause 


(if it is an arrest, search, of seizure) is 


14 


plenary, embraced in such cases as United States v. 

Jaramillo, 891 F.2d 620,626 (7th Cir.1989), is no 

longer tenable after United States v. Spears, 965 

F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1992), where, overruling 

inconsistent precedents, this court held that the 

standard for judicial review of determinations of 
probable cause was clear error. There is no basis 

for distinguishing in this regard between probable 

cause and reasonable suspicion. They are adjacent 

points on a continuum. 

In the post remand appeal, petitioners once again argued 
that they were entitled to a de novo standard of review 
concerning the ultimate legal determinations of the district 
court. That argument will be reproduced here. 

Two years ago year, this circuit formulated a uniform 
standard of review of "clear error” for Fourth Amendment 
probable cause cases, to put an end to the “complete 
confusion” which then existed in this circuit by virtue of the 
varying standards announced by different panels. United 
States v. Spears, 965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1992). Four active 
judges voted to rehear the case, but a majority voted not to 
rehear the case pursuant to Circuit Rule 40 (f). 

Spears announced that the new rule would apply to both 


warrant and non-warrant cases. Id. at 269. As a starting 
point, the Spears court looked at Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 


213 (1983) and Massachusetts v. Upton, 466 U.S. 727 (1984) (per 
curium) for its rationale. Upton, at 733, stated, "A 


deferential standard of review is appropriate to further the 

Fourth Amendment’s strong preference for searches conducted 

pursuant to a warrant.” The test would be if the evidence 

produced “a substantial basis” for the issuance of the 
15 


warrant. Id. at 733. 


Spears, however, refused to acknowledge a standard 
between clearly erroneous and de novo, stating that in warrant 
cases, review would be for clear error. Id. at 270. Having 
said that, it went on to state: 


Because there is little to distinguish a 
magistrate’s probable cause determination 
in a warrant case and a district court’s 
probable cause determination in a non- 
warrant case, appellate review should be 
the same for both. In warrant cases, the 
magistrate is the 8 ee mere pag 
officer making the initial determination. 
In non-warrant cases, it is the district 
judge who makes the initial 
determination, who asks the same question 
the magistrate asks in a warrant case: is 
there probable cause...It is the 
frontline officer in both cases who 
conducts the initial inquiry, who 
concludes there is or there is not 
probable cause, and an appellate panel 
should not substitute its judgment in 
either case. Id. at 270. 


Thus, the genesis of the rule stemmed, in part, from the 
Supreme Court who wanted to encourage police to get warrants 
by making it more difficult to reverse the magistrate who 
issued the warrant. Gates at 237. 

The standard of review, however, which a reviewing court 
was to accord a magistrate in a warrant case, was whether the 
magistrate had a “substantial basis for..concluding that a 
search would uncover evidence of wrongdoing." Id. at 236. 
There is no justification for the more deferential “clearly 
erroneous” standard, given the Supreme Court’s clearly 


articulated standard of review. 


16 


The rationale asserted in Spears is that under 
Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983), reviewing courts are 
to give deferential review of the findings of fact made by 
the frontline magistrate who heard the affiant. 

The Spears court rationale that there is little 
difference between a warrant and non warrant case is erroneous 
for two reasons. In a non-warrant case the rationale 
expressed in Gates, to encourage warrants, is not applicable. 
In non-warrant cases the reviewing court’s decision should be 
subject to plenary review to encourage the use of warrants in 
the first instance. 

In non-warrant cases the district judge who makes the 
decision is generally not the person who heard the testimony 
of the witnesses. In most criminal cases that person is the 
magistrate judge, who is delegated the responsibility of 
conducting the evidentiary hearing and making recommended 
findings of fact and conclusions of law. As this case 
demonstrates, the district court frequently makes a 
determination of probable cause in non-warrant cases without 
having heard a single witness or reviewed the transcripts of 
the proceedings. 

Under 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1), the court may “accept, 
reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the (magistrate 
judge’s}) findings or recommendations. The district court is 
required to “make a de novo determination of those portions of 
the [magistrate judge’s] report or specified proposed findings 


17 


or recommendations to which objection is made." The problem 
is that the statute does not spell out the means by which to 
conduct a de review. Is it a new evidentiary hearing, a 
review of the transcripts, or a resend to the magistrate for 
the purpose of getting specific credibility determinations if 
that is the subject of the filed objections? 

The front-line judge who, is clearly in the best position 
to make findings of fact, is the magistrate, in the non- 
warrant case in which an evidentiary hearing is conducted. In 
this instance, the magistrate judge who heard all of the 
testimony, recommended suppression of evidence. The district 
judge ruled against suppression. Here, the district court 
heard none of the testimony and reviewed the transcript of 
only one of the officers’ testimony. There were five law 
enforcement officers who gave testimony, but the court did not 
order transcripts of their testimony. 

Even upon remand, the district court’s decision makes no 
reference to the testimony of the other officers, some of whom 
were called by the defense. As an example, Sgt. Wiggins, a 
defense witness, testified that he could get the date of birth 
of the registered owner of the target automobile via his 
computer. Accessing this information has been done routinely 
for the last ten to twenty years (R.45:357-361). 

Two officers, including one of the arresting officers, 
stated they did not attempt to get this information for 
identification purposes because they did not believe they 


18 


could access the material (R.45:327)(R.44:59). 

Thus, in the typical non-warrant case, the Gates’ 
rationale of encouraging the use of warrants is inapplicable. 
The rationale in Spears at 271, is that: “It is the front-line 
judicial officer in both cases who conducts the initial 
inquiry, who concludes there is or is not probable cause, and 
an appellate panel should not substitute its judgment in 
either case." That rationale is similarly non-existent in 
most non-warrant cases where, as here, the front line officer 
is the magistrate judge. 

The Spears rationale is seriously eroded, as this case 
demonstrates, where the district court’s decision concerning 
the ultimate legal issue of suppression is at a variance with 
that of the magistrate judge. 

There is good reason for a reviewing appellate court to 
exercise plenary review. Appellate courts are far more likely 
to have a keener appreciation for the more subtle aspects of 
fairly complicated Fourth Amendment jurisprudence by virtue of 
the fact that legal reviews are their principle function. 

The district courts spend a good part of their calendars 
conducting trials. They are often overworked and understaffed, 
and have very short and rigid time-frames in which to make 
decisions. In a case in which objections to recommended 
findings are filed, the district court often has but a few 
days to make its decision prior to the scheduled jury trial 
date. 


19 


In its second response to petitioners challenge to the warrant. 
With the more deferential standard in warrant cases, the 


Spears clearly erroneous standard, the Seventh Circuit was 
again brief. close call, and many are close calls, went to the officer who 


The defendants appeal. Our review is deferential. took the time to get the warrant. In United States v. Leon, 


The district judge’s finding of probable cause may 


be set aside only if clearly erroneous. We do not 468 U.S. 897, 914 (1984), this Court stated: 
find ° district judge’ i 
sitheos brief, ee J a reed Because a search warrant provides the detached 
circumstances on which the decision to search the scrutiny of a neutral magistrate, which is a 
car was based and explains why taken as a totality more reliable safeguard against oe 
they gave the officers probable cause to conduct searches than the hurried judgment of a law 
the search. enforcement officer ‘engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out 
(App. 147-48). crime,’ (cite omitted), we have expressed a 


strong pre erence for warrants and declared 
that ‘in a doubtful or marginal case a search 
under a warrant may be sustainable where 


Illinois v Gates Ss. without one it would fall.’ United States v. 
in warrant cases, stated in , 462 U.S. 213, O00 0.5., o& hi. 


In the Seventh and Eighth Circuits, eliminating the incentive 


This Court, in rejecting the de novo standard of review 


236-37 (1983): 


"A grudging or negative attitude by reviewing 
court toward warrants,” Ventresca, 380 U.S., 
at 108, is inconsistent with the Fourth 
Amendment’s strong preference for searches 
conducted pursuant to a warrant;...Reflecting 
this preference for the warrant process, the 
traditional standard of review of an issuing 
magistrate’s probable-cause determination has 
been that so long as the magistrate had a 


to getting a warrant can only mean that more and more searches and 


seizures will be conducted without the prior judicial scrutiny 


which the Fourth Amendment favors. 
As this Court has observed in Gates, at 236: 


"substantial basis for ... conclud[{ing]” that 
a search would uncover evidence of wrongdoing, 
the Fourth Amendment requires no more. (Cites 


+++the possession of a warrant by officers 
conducting an arrest or search greatly reduces 
the perception of unlawful or intrusive police 


omitted). conduct, by assuring the individual whose 
property is searched or seized of the lawful 
authority of the executing officer, his need 


By announcing the more deferential clearly erroneous to ~ oo and the limits of his power to 


standard of review in non-warrant cases, the Seventh Circuit . 
When Spears was decided in 1992, three other circuits had 


seriously erodes the incentives which this Court in Gates 

hoped to foster. 

When the standard of review in warrant and non-warrant cases 

is the same, there is no incentive for the officer or 

prosecuting attorney to go through the trouble of getting a 
20 21 


ruled that the correct standard of review of a district court’s 


determination of probable cause in a warrantless case was clearly 


erroneous. Spears cites to United States v. Fox, 902 F.2d 
1509,1513 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, -U.S.-,111 S.Ct.199 (1990); 


United States v. Williams, 897 F.2d 1430,1435 (8th Cir. 1999); and 
United States v. Santana, 895 F.2d 850, 852 (lst Cir. 1990). 

It noted that the balance of the circuits review either 
exigent circumstances or consent for clear error. N.4. Two months 
after Spears was decided, the Tenth Circuit, in United States v. 
Bloom, 975 F.2d 1447, 1456 (10th Cir. 1992), muddied the waters 
considerably when it stated: 

We review a district court’s findings of 
reasonable suspicion under a clearly erroneous 
standard...However, the question of reasonable 
articulable suspicion...should not be confused 
with the ultimate determination of 
reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment, 
which we review de novo. (Cite omitted). 
Thus, while the district court’s factual 
findings concerning the agents’ suspicion of 
criminal activity are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review, (cite omitted), 
the question of whether such suspicion was 
reasonable under the Fourth Ame nt is a 
question of law which we review de novo. 

More recently, however, the Tenth Circuit while, upholding the 
clearly erroneous standard for findings of fact noted, “However, 
the ultimate determination of reasonableness under the Fourth 


Amendment is a question of law which we review de novo.” United 
States v. Fernandez, 18 F.3d 874,876 (10th Cir. 1994). 

In a subsequent First Circuit case, United States v. 
Rodriguez-Morales, 929 F.2d 780,783-84 (lst Cir. 1991), the court 
held that it would review mixed fact/law findings under the clearly 
erroneous test. No deference would attach if the lower court 
applied the wrong legal standard. Determinations of a “legal” kind 
would be subject to de novo review. 


The Third Circuit stated in United States v. McGlory, 968 
22 


' 
' 
' 


F.2d 309,342 (3rd Cir. 1992): 

We review the district court’s finding of 
probable cause under the clearly erroneous 
standard. If the district court’s ruling is 
plausible in light of the record viewed in its 
entirety, we must accept it, even if we would 
have evaluated the evidence differently in the 
first instance. 

In a more recent third circuit opinion, the court stated it 
would review factual finding for clear error, but would "exercise 
plenary review over whether these facts create a reasonable 
inference that the suspect is dangerous and the protective frisk 
was reasonably calculated to discover a weapon." United States v. 
Edwards, 53 F.3d 616,618 (3rd Cir. 1995). 

The Fourth Circuit applies the traditional clear error test 
for review of factual findings and an "independent determination on 
the legality of the arrest.” United States v. McCraw, 920 F.2d 
224,227 (4th Cir. 1990). 

The Fifth Circuit has the same stated standard as the fourth 


circuit, that of independent review of the district court’s 


conclusions of law. United States v. Richardson, 943 F.2d 547,549 


(Sth Cir. 1991). Accord, United States v. Martinez-Perez, 941 F.2d 
295,297 (5th Cir. 1991). The court would “review de novo the 


ultimate conclusions of whether the fourth amendment was violated.” 

The Eighth Circuit stands solidly in line with the post Spears 
Seventh Circuit. "We review the District Court’s findings of 
probable cause (to arrest) for clear error.” United States v. 
Travis, 993 F.2d 1316,1324 (8th Cir. 1993). However, another 


panel in United States v. Saffeels, 982 F.2d 1199,1205 (8th Cir. 


23 


1992) would review a stop under the clearly erroneous test. 
However, “We would review de novo the issue of whether a seizure 
exceeded the permissible scope of an investigative stop.” There 
was no discussion concerning the varying standards. 

More recently, in United States v. Bobo, 994 F.2d 524,527 (8th 
Cir. 1993) the Eighth Circuit stated: 

We review a district court’s determination of 
probable cause under the clearly erroneous 
standard and will affirm the court’s decision 
unless it is not supported by substantial 
evidence or is based on an _ erroneous 
conception of applicable law, or if, after we 
consider the entire record, we are left with 
the firm and definite conviction that a 
mistake was made. 

In the most recent advance sheet in West’s Federal Reporter 
Third Series, dated July 3, 1995, the Eighth Circuit announced, 
"We may reverse the district court’s ultimate ruling on the 
suppression motion, however, if the ruling reflects an erroneous 
view of the applicable law.’”" United States v. Bell, 54 F.2d 502 
(8th Cir. 1995). This suggests a backing away from the clearly 
erroneous standard stated in Bobo. What constitutes an erroneous 
view of applicable law is not stated. The Bell court analysis 
certainly has a ring of “clearly erroneous", but sounds less 
deferential. 

The Ninth Circuit stated that it would review de novo the 


trial court’s determination of the validity of a warrantless entry 


or arrest. United States v. Huguez-Ibarra, 954 F.2d 546 (9th Cir. 


1992) and United States v. Puerta, 982 F.2d 1297,1300 (9th Cir. 
1992). 


24 


_~—w 


— — 


The Tenth Circuit’s decision in United States v. Fernandez, 18 
F.3d 874,876 (10th Cir. 1994) is at variance with the earlier Tenth 


Circuit decision cited in Spears. In Fernandez, the court stated 
the “ultimate determination of reasonableness under the Fourth 
amendment is a question of law which we review de novo.” 

The Eleventh Circuit would apply the clearly erroneous 
standard to findings of fact; “but the application of law to those 
facts is reviewed de novo.” United States _ v. Adams, 1 F.3d 
1566,1577 (llth Cir. 1993). 

Given the varying and contradictory standards of review among 
the circuits, some with their own tangents, this Court should 
announce a uniform standard of review of a trial court’s ultimate 
legal conclusions in non-warrant cases. Petitioners believe the 
traditional de novo standard adhered to by the majority of circuits 
is the appropriate standard for a number of reasons. Historically, 
that has been the standard of review by appellate courts of 
conclusions of law, both in federal courts and among the states. 

Wisconsin adheres to this standard in its state court 
decisions. See, State v. Swanson, 159 Wis.2d 431,445, 464 N.W.2d 
680 (1991) (court will review “ab initio” whether defendant was 
under arrest at a particular time) and State v. Murdock, 155 Wis.2d 
217,226, 455 N.W.2d 618 (1990) ("independent” review of circuit 
court’s determination of proper scope of search incident to 
arrest). 

Appellate courts traditionally owe their allegiance not to 


lower courts, but to the law. Their role has been to interpret and 


25 


occasionally develop new legal concepts, while at the same time 
offering lower courts and practitioners a unifying hand among 
divergent views in the lower courts. De novo review assumes that 
appellate courts are in at least as good if not better position to 
correctly interpret a given set of facts as applied to a legal 
concept. 

State trial courts, in particular, frequently make on the spot 
decisions in the midst of evidentiary hearings without the benefit 
of briefs, the assistance of law clerks, or the luxury of time to 
research and reflect. They are often called upon to make crucial 
decisions in sometimes complex and emerging areas of Fourth 
Amendment law. 

In Wisconsin, circuit courts are often required to rotate into 
different areas of the law, with the least experienced judges 
starting out handling misdemeanor and the felony criminal 
calendars. It is not at all uncommon that appellate courts, staffed 
by seasoned judges, review decisions made by judges who have 
frequently had very little criminal law experience. 

With rotation forced upon circuit courts, more experienced 
judges who have spent years handling civil cases, are suddenly 
thrust into handling criminal cases. It is only logical then, that 
appellate courts should not defer to the legal conclusions of lower 
courts. This is particularly true especially in constitutional 
areas where substantial liberty interests area at shits. 

Most of these same arguments apply to federal courts. Trial 


courts are overworked, understaffed, and often have precious little 


26 


time to decide complex issues. With criminal cases taking an ever 
greater percentage of the courts’ docket, the likelihood increases 
that there will be divergent and conflicting views emerging from 
different trial courts. 

The clearly erroneous standard exalts mediocrity. Why should 
and appellate court defer to a lower court when it would have 
decided the case differently in the first instance? If this is the 
case, the very function of the appellate court is seriously eroded. 

The clearly erroneous standard should not be the standard of 
appellate review in those instances where vital constitutional 
rights are at stake. Persons facing extended loss of liberty have 
the right to expect that appellate courts should hold trial courts 
to the highest standards. Appellate courts should be free to 
independently review the ultimate legal conclusions of law. Since 
the Fourth Amendment is national in character, one uniform standard 
of review should apply for all Fourth Amendment non-warrant cases. 

Analytically, the clearly erroneous standard is illogical. 
Either the defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights were violated, or 
they weren’t. Those rights should not have to be clearly violated 
for an appellate court to reverse. Under a common definition of 
clearly erroneous, the appellate court would even be able to 
disagree with the lower court, if it were the court of first 
instance, and still not reverse. This defies logic. 

It is petitioners belief that a Fourth Amendment incursion 
should result in remedial action by the courts. It shouldn’t 


matter whether the trial court’s decision is clearly wrong or just 


27 


plain wrong. What matters is the conduct of the police, not the 
judiciary. 

Until and unless the remedial purposes of the exclusionary 
rule are scrapped, appellate courts should continue to analyze 
cases with those purposes in mind. That is, were the officer’s 
actions reasonable, or did the officer violate the defendant’s 
Fourth Amendment rights? If the later is true, then appellate 
courts should exclude evidence secured in violation of the Fourth 
Amendment. 

Appellate courts should continue to provide incentives to the 
police to get a warrant. The clearly erroneous standard destroys 
these incentives by making the standard of appellate review the 
same, whether a warrant is secured or not. 

In the case at bar, the appellate court gave deference to a 
trial court which heard none of the testimony at the evidentiary 
hearing, which reviewed only the transcript of one of six law 
enforcement officers, and which reviewed none of the tape 
recordings of the evidentiary hearing. 

Five other officers testified about either the events on the 
day of the arrest, or police and DEA procedures, as part of the 
defense’s attack upon the reasonable conduct of the police. 
Interestingly, the trial held that there was reasonable suspicion 
for the stop. However, the district court neither heard nor read 
the testimony, nor listened to the recording of the evidentiary 
hearing of the two officers who were initially at the scene and who 


ran the NADDIS and motor vehicle checks. The only transcript which 


28 


the trial court read was that of Officer Luedke (App. 113). The 
trial court, therefore, had not reviewed all of the testimony 
relating to the stop. 

Petitioners filed objections to the magistrate judge’s 
recommendations on February 17, 1993, objecting to the findings 
concerning the initial stop, search of the car, and the 
stationhouse statements. Luedke did not testify at all about the 
NADDIS information because he arrived at the seen after the NADDIS 
check. Similarly, he did not have any information concerning the 
running of the license plate nor about whether the owner of the car 
was the same person described in the NADDIS check. 

Twenty days later, on March 9, 1993, the trial court issued 
its decision on the motions to suppress. The balance of the 
transcripts had not been transcribed and filed until June 6, 1993, 
almost three months after the trial court’s decision. The only 
transcript available was that ordered by the government of Officer 
Luedke’s testimony. The transcript was prepared on February 4, 
1993 and filed February 9, 1993. 

The trial court is obligated to conduct a de novo review of 
those parts of the record for which there are challenges to the 
magistrate’s recommendations. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B). 

The trial court utterly failed in its obligation to conduct a de 
novo review. Moreover, the Seventh Circuit failed in its 
obligation to ensure that such review was performed on remand. 

There is nothing in the record or the trial court’s opinion which 


even suggests that the trial court reviewed these transcripts after 


29 


Nae 


remand. Yet, the trial court made findings of fact concerning 
NADDIS, the NADDIS check by the other arresting officer, and the 
license plate check. Further, the trial court’s findings served as 
the basis for the court’s legal conclusions that reasonable 
suspicion and probable cause to search existed. 

In their two appeals to the Seventh Circuit, petitioners urged 
the Seventh Circuit to review de novo the legal determinations of 
the trial court. “As this case demonstrates, the district court 
frequently makes a determination of probable cause in non-warrant 
cases without having heard a single witness or reviewed the 
transcripts of the proceedings." (Main brief on post remand 
appeal, p.4). 

Under 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1) the court may “accept, reject, or 
modify, in whole or in part, the [magistrate judge’s] findings or 
recommendations.” The district court is required to “make a de 
novo determination of those portions of the [magistrate judge’s] 
report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which 
objection is made.” 

Petitioners stated in their initial main brief at 2: 

Because the district court read only a portion 
of the transcript generated from the 
Magistrate Judge’s hearing, the trial court’s 
factual determinations shall be reviewed by 
the "no deference standard.” United States v. 
McConny, 728 F.2d 1195 (9th Cir. 1984)... In 
this instance the ‘differing roles’ of this 
appellate court is to review the record de 
novo to afford proper oversight. 
Even the Eighth Circuit, which is solidly in accord with the 


Seventh Circuit’s clearly erroneous standard of review, has 


30 


reversed cases where the trial court failed conduct a de novo 
review when objections were filed. In a post Raddatz case, Taylor 
v. Farrier, 910 F.2d 518,520 (8th Cir. 1990), the court stated, "In 
Branch v. Martin, 886 F.2d 1043 (8th Cir. 1989), we remanded a case 
to the district court because the absence of a transcript or, 
alternatively, a tape recording, of the evidentiary hearing made de 
novo review impossible.” 

Here, the Seventh Circuit reversed and remanded the case 
initially because the trial court made credibility findings not in 
accord with his magistrate judge. Once again, the trial court made 
ultimate legal conclusions without reviewing the transcripts of the 
testimony of other police witnesses. If the Eighth Circuit 
reverses for failure of the trial court to review the transcripts, 
what possible justification is there for the Seventh Circuit to 
accord the trial court the most deferential standard of review? 

Under the clearly erroneous standard for legal conclusions, 
the exclusionary rule comes into play only where the judge’s 
determination is believed to be clearly wrong. This concept 
misplaces the focus of the inquiry, upon the judges when it should 
be on the police conduct. This Court has stated in United States v. 
Leon, 468 U.S. 897,916 (1984): 

First, the exclusionary rule is designed to 
deter police misconduct rather than to punish 
the errors of judges and magistrates. Second, 
there exists no evidence suggesting that 
judges and magistrates are inclined to ignore 
or subvert the Fourth Amendment or that 
lawlessness among these actors requires 


application of the extreme sanction of 
exclusion. 


31 


Petitioners urge this Court to reject the Seventh Circuit’s 
clearly erroneous test, affirm the de novo review standard adhered 
to by the majority of circuits, and remand the case to the Seventh 


Circuit. 


During pretrial discovery, petitioners requested that the 
government supply them with the raw data which comprised the NADDIS 
files on the two individuals who the government asserted were the 
subject of two NADDIS “hits.” While conducting drug surveillance, 
Detective Pautz requested of the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) 
that a NADDIS check be conducted. 

The DEA was given two names. Detective Pautz testified 
(R.44:34): 

I gave them the name i had received from the 
license plate listing, which was Miguel 
Ledesma Ornelas, and I gave them that address 
that I had received, I think it was San Jose, 
and I also ve them the name of the person 
that had sagletesed. which was Ismael Ornelas, 
and the address that he had put down. 

The DEA reported that NADDIS showed a “hit on Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas, also known as Lemus-Ledesma, Miguel. Date of birth 
9/29/45, 5°6’’, 150 pounds, Hispanic male. Listed in their files 
as being a heroin dealer out of El Centro, California.” 
(R.49:35,105). Pautz relayed this information to Detective Hurrle 


The NADDIS showed that “Ismael Ornelas Jr, from Tucson, 


32 


Arizona was a one thousand kilo a month cocaine dealer". (R.49:35). 
“And these were just the names that we received. Not necessarily 
the people that could have been in the [motel] room.” (R.49:35). 

In Detective Pautz’s experience, the NADDIS response would 
typically have identifying information, height, weight, date of 
birth (49:110-111). He testified the extent of such information 
varied depending on the information in their files. 

The errors committed by the officers were numerous. First, 
because the dispatcher misread the California Department of Motor 
Vehicles registration, he relayed to Pautz a name, reversing the 
two last names of the car’s owner. The registered owner of the car 
was not Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, the name in the NADDIS computer, 
but Miguel Ornelas Ledesma. Detective Hurrle, Pautz’s partner, 
wrote the name down in his offense report as Miguel Ledesma Ornelas 
of 830 North 16th St., San Jose, California (R.49:102). 

Pautz was asked if he understood that persons of Hispanic 
decent frequently use two family names. He responded, “I know 
that it was my understanding that they oftentimes use their 
mother’s maiden name. However, I could be wrong on that...I guess 
i don’t have a good understanding of it, is what I am telling you.” 
(R.49:98). 

Officer Pagan, of Hispanic decent, who acted as the translator 
for Saul Ornelas’ interrogation, testified that persons of Hispanic 
decent who use both last names use their father’s last name first, 
and their mother’s last name second. This is how the “vast 
majority” of the people use the last names, although he has 


33 


occasionally observed a situation in which the mother’s name would 
be used first (R.50:290). 

The resident alien card and California drivers license of 
Miguel Ornelas-Ledesma, were attached to the affidavit of Ismael 
Ornelas-Ledesma, which was attached to the Motion to Supplement 
Brief, filed January 15, 1993 (R.18). That affidavit states that 
the petitioner’s name is Ismael Ornelas Ledesma. §1. His father’s 
last name is Ornelas, and his mother’s last name is Ledesma, §1. 
It further states: 

Neither I nor my siblings would ever be 
correctly called Ledesma Ornelas, as the 
government has stated in the Indictment. 
Someone else might be Ledesma Ornelas, but 
that person would have a father whose family 
name is Ledesma and a mother whose last name 
is Ornelas. 

My brother’s name is Miguel Ornelas 
Ledesma...I have never lived in Tucson, 
Arizona. Nor am Ia junior. As stated above, 
my father’s name is Guadalupe, not Ismael. 

Before leaving on another assignment, Pautz told Hurrle that 
the NADDIS response showed that Ismael Ornelas was from Tucson, 
Arizona (R.49:122-123). 

The second error was in not seeking to verify whether the 
registered owner of the car was the same person as the NADDIS hit. 
Pautz could have easily inquired as to the date of birth of the 
owner of the car, to confirm whether the car owner was also the 
subject of the NADDIS hit, whose DOB was given. 

Pautz said he didn’t ask his dispatcher to get a DOB from 


California, “because I didn’t think that they could get that 


34 


information from California, and I don’t know that they could 
today.” (R.49:58). 

Sergeant Wiggins, of the Milwaukee County Sheriff’s Department 
is in charge of communications on the second shift. He affirmed 
that an “integral part of the communications bureau is to provide 
a link between officers on the street and other information which 
may be available from other law enforcement agencies via computer 
or otherwise.” (R.50:356). 

He testified his office can interface with computers from the 
departments of motor vehicles of all 50 states, including Canada. 
"We can get back in a given amount of time any record, motor 
vehicle record, driving record, registration." (R.50:357). 

His office has been able to do this interface with other 
states’ DMV records for a long time, possibly 10 or 15 years, maybe 
even 20 years (R.50:358). Contrary to Pautz’s assertions, he not 
only was able to get a date of birth for the person who registered 
the car, but affirmed, “All the officers on the street know about 
the [regular DMV] system and how it’s used, and use it on a regular 
basis.” (R.50:358). 

In fact, the government stipulated “that Detective Pautz could 
have determined the date of birth of Mr. Miguel Ornelas Ledesma by 
making administrative inguiry, via dispatcher, at the California 
Department of Motor Vehicles". (R.49:16). Certainly a police 
detective of nine years and 20 years on the force would know that 
this identifying information is readily available. His explanation 
for not doing this cross-check, given the differing residences, is 


35 


incredible. 

Wiggins was asked to run a check on the California car in 
question. His initial response gave a name, address and make of 
car. This was the same information which Pautz had received. 
(R.50:360, Exhibit F). To receive further identifying information, 
he had to make a second, “administrative” request via computer. The 
administrative response showed the registered owner as, “L-e-d-e- 
s-m-a, Miguel Ornelas. Sex is male. Date of birth of 09/19/63, 
height of 5’6’’, weight of 145 pounds, hair brown, eyes brown." 
(R.50:362, Exhibit G). 

Wiggins was asked to compare this identifying information 
with a resident alien card and California drivers license supplied 
to him by the defense. The drivers license name was, “M-i-g-u-e-l, 
O-r-n-e-l-a-s." The dates of birth were the same. On the resident 
alien card, “his last name is spelled O-r-n-e-l-a-s, middle name of 
L-e-d-e-s-m-a, and Miguel, M-i-g-u-e-l." There is a hyphen between 
Ornelas and Ledesma on the resident alien card. (R.50:363). 

On cross examination Pautz said it didn’t cause him concern 
that the person on the NADDIS hit had a completely different 
address than the person who was the purported owner of the car 
(R.49:58). He said this, notwithstanding the fact that he had no 
idea where El Centro or San Jose were, other than he believed that 
both were in “southern California.” 

Pautz testified that he didn’t think the person who registered 
at the motel was a "“Jr.," as was shown on the NADDIS response. He 
further stated that he thought the motel registrant listed himself 


36 


as being from California, not Tucson, Arizona, as was shown by 
NADDIS (R.49:60). 

When making the NADDIS request, he did not know if he asked 
for a date of birth for Ismael Ornelas. He did not recall asking 
for a description of the person. He further did not recall asking 
for additional information surrounding the alleged cocaine 
trafficking (R.49:61). 

There were no wants or warrants for the car’s owner in any 
state. Similarly, there were no wants or warrants for the person 
whose name was on the motel register anywhere in the country. 
(R.49:61). Pautz did not know of any wants or warrants for the two 
persons listed in the NADDIS response (R.49:61). 

In his drug profile factors, Pautz testified that the major 
source states for cocaine were, “Arizona, California, Florida, 
Texas, maybe New York. Some of the minor would be maybe New 
Jersey, Louisiana, a few others...maybe five others.” (R.49:62). 
The magistrate judge took judicial notice that the combined 
population of those major states according to the 1990 Census was 
81,340,130. California had a population of 29,760,021. 

Petitioners sought the information which was stored in the 
DEA’s computers, and which constituted the basis for the NADDIS 
hits. The government refused to provide such information and 
accordingly, petitioners filed a motion to compel (R.16,11). 
Petitioners requested the entire file of the DEA concerning the 
individuals named in the hits. Both the magistrate judge and the 
trial court refused to compel production (App. C-110) and (App. E- 


37 


120). Petitioners argued that the denial of access resulted in an 
infringement of due process rights. 

The initial Seventh Circuit decision did not address the 
petitioners’ due process arguments. On the second appeal, the 
Seventh Circuit again did not address the argument. In the first 
appeal, Chief Judge Richard Posner remarked at App.152, "It would 
be nice to know something about NADDIS, but the government 
successfully opposed the defendants’ efforts to obtain discovery 
aimed at determining the character and reliability of the 
information in the NADDIS data base, and as a result the record is 


bare of evidence about it.” 


In Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 110 S.Ct. 2412, 110 L.Ed. 
2d 301 (1990), this Court was similarly faced with the question of 


the worth of an anonymous tip in the context of a Terry stop. This 
Court stated, 110 S. Ct. at 2416: 


Reasonable suspicion, like probable cause, is 
dependent upon both the content of the 
information possessed by the police and its 
degree of reliability. Both factors-quantity 
and quality-are considered in the "totality of 
the circumstances-the whole picture," 
States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417 101 S.Ct. 
690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981), that must be 
taken into account when evaluating whether 
there is reasonable suspicion.” Thus if a tip 
has a relatively low degree of reliability, 
more information will be required to establish 
the requisite tum of suspicion than would 
be required if the tip were more reliable. 
(Emphasis added). 


Both the district court and Seventh Circuit utilized the 
NADDIS information as a necessary component in its determination 


that the police had reasonable suspicion to stop petitioners and 
38 


probable cause to dismantle the car. 

The Seventh Circuit’s first decision, (App.151), states, 
"Clearly, were it not for the NADDIS hits, the officers would not 
have had grounds for reasonable suspicion that the defendants were 
drug traffickers.” Although the appellate court relied upon the 
NADDIS hits, it questioned the reliability of such information, “we 
have found no considered judicial assessment of its reliability, 
although we have found occasional judicial expressions of concern 


about that reliability.” (App.152-53). 


Maybe NADDIS is no better that a vast compendium of 
rumors, errors, and libels: garbage in, garbage out. 
That seems unlikely. It would not be heavily used by 
drug enforcement authorities if it were merely a random 
sample of the American population. Which is not to say, 
however, that it is highly reliable; concern that it may 
not be is heightened by the (scanty) secondary 
literature, which depicts NADDIS as an unselective, 
unweeded repository of unsubstantiated allegations, often 
dated. See UPI Release, “VIP names in Drug Agency’s 
Computer Files.” July 3, 1984; Vanessa Jo Grimm, 
“Behemoth DEA Database Tracks Drug Smugglers,” Government 
Computer News, July 8, 1991, p.85. According to the UPI 
Release, as of 1984 NADDIS contained 1.5 million names, 
obtained from debriefings of informants and suspects and 
from surveillance and intelligence reports of various law 
enforcement agencies. 


As an example of NADDIS’s possible unreliability, we 
note that according to it Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, 
a 1000 kilogram a month dealer-a large dealer is not 
wanted by any law enforcement authority in the country. 
Maybe that Ornelas (who is neither Saul Ornelas nor 
Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma nor the registered owner of the 
Olds) died years ago or is some practical joker’s or 
desperate informant’s fictional creation or is an honest 
man falsely accused by an enemy. 


The court of appeals continued at (App.153): 
Because the reliability of information stored in 
NADDIS is unknown, that information must, on the record 


before us, be reckoned no more reliable than that of an 
informant not known to be reliable. Therefore, since an 


39 


Ne 


uncorroborated tip from such an informant cannot by 
itself furnish probable cause for an arrest or search, 
, 462 U.S. 213, 227, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 

2326, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983), an unverified, 

uncorroborated entry in NADDIS cannot do so either. 

The court of appeals determined however: 

Standing alone, the drug courtier profile that first 
aroused Pautz’s suspicions was very little. Standing 
alone, one NADDIS “hit” could not, in the absence of any 
evaluation of NADDIS’s reliability, be thought much 
either, The second "hit" however, added to the 
credibility of the first; and together the profile and 
the “hits,” though still not enough evidence of crime to 
furnish probable cause to search the car, could satisfy 
the lesser showing required for a Terry stop. (App.154). 

It is petitioners’ contention that the NADDIS information 
which the officers possessed at the time of the stop was not shown 
to be sufficiently reliable so as to have allowed its use in the 
determination of reasonable suspicion, as outlined in Alabama v. 
White, 496 U.S. 325 (1990) and Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 
(1983). 

Under the Gates totality-of-the-circumstances test, “a 
deficiency in one factor [the informant’s veracity or reliability], 
may be compensated for, in determining the overall reliability of 
a tip, by a strong showing as to the other, or by some other 
indicia of reliability.” 462 U.S. at 233. Even if the NADDIS 
information was deemed sufficiently reliable to be a part of the 
Gates formula, there was lacking a “strong showing” in the other 
components; the drug courier profile, and the somewhat loose panel 
in a twelve year old car. 


When petitioners sought the underlying data comprising the 
NADDIS information which had been supplied to the officers, they 


40 


~~ 


repeatedly asserted the need to know what information was contained 
in the NADDIS records, i.e.; the age of the information, and the 
reliability of the information (R.46:395,398,403). They were 
looking for concrete facts for a reviewing magistrate to be able to 
assess the reliability of the information. The government refused 
to turn over this information claiming that no hard copy of the 
data was ever generated when the officers requested it, and thus 
there was nothing to give petitioners (R. 14:3). 

The information sought and denied was relevant to a 
determination whether there was reasonable suspicion to justify the 
investigative stop and subsequent search. It’s relevance can be 
seen by the decisions of the magistrate judge, the trial court, and 
the court of appeals, each of which relied upon the NADDIS 
information to justify the Fourth Amendment incursions. 

The NADDIS information might have revealed pertinent facts 
such as whether these two individuals were dead or in prison, 
(which is not an unlikely scenario for drug dealers). The 
information, and the raw files comprising the basis of the NADDIS 
hit would, in all probability, have had dates necessary to 
establish whether the information was current, stale and/or 
unreliable. DEA agent Allen, called as a defense witness, stated, 
"If there was information or intelligence, many times that has a 
date behind it.” (referring to NADDIS information) (R.46:396). 

Identifying information from NADDIS, if it existed, would have 
conclusively shown that the petitioners were not the NADDIS 


individuals. Moreover, general intelligence information may well 


41 


have been dated. This would have allowed both the police officers 
and the courts to subsequently evaluate the probative value of the 
information. 

It should be noted that on 12-30-92 Ismael Ornelas asked not 
only for the NADDIS information on both individuals, but also the 
“entire” file of the DEA concerning both individuals (R. 11:2, §4 
and §5). Petitioners filed a joint objection to the magistrate’s 
ruling. The district court summarily upheld the magistrate’s order 
(Appendix 110-111). 

There is no question that the “Miguel,” referred to by NADDIS, 
and Miguel Ornelas, owner of the car, were two separate persons. 
Their dates of birth were off by 18 years (R.45:362)(R.44:35). 
Similarly, Ismael Ornelas, by affidavit, in his objections to the 
magistrate’s order concerning discovery, asserted that he never 
lived in Tucson and that his father’s name is Guadalupe, not 
Ismael. As such, he is not a junior (26:App.109). Clearly, 
petitioners had made a showing that the information sought was 
relevant. 

The DEA agent was subpoenaed to provide the NADDIS information 
for the evidentiary hearing. The agent did not bring the material 
subject of the subpoena. The magistrate judge denied petitioners 
repeated requests for this information while DEA agent Allen was on 
the stand (R.51:398,403). 

The material was retrievable within minutes, as the DEA office 
was located on the same floor as the magistrate judge’s courtroom. 


Agent Allen testified that some of this material may reflect the 


42 


day on which it was received by NADDIS. The age of the information 
was crucial in an examination of whether it was stale for Fourth 
Amendment purposes (R.51:398). 

In United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667 (1985), this Court 


stated that prosecutors must, “disclose evidence that the defense 
might have used to impeach the Government witnesses. ..Impeachment 
evidence, however, as well as exculpatory evidence, falls within 
the Brady rule. See Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 154 
(1972)." 

In denying petitioners’ requested discovery, the magistrate 
judge merely stated that the petitioners failed to establish that 
they were entitled to the information under Brady v. Maryland, 373 
U.S. 83 (1963), or under Fed.R.Crim.P. 16. (A-120-21). In so 
doing, there was no discussion or factual or legal analysis. 

In responding to the objections that the magistrate judge’s 
ruling, the trial court merely stated the order denying the motion 
to compel “was not clearly erroneous or contrary to law, and 
further adopts and incorporates here by reference the reasoning 
contained in that Order...” (A-111). 

Petitioners maintain that the refusal to grant access to the 
NADDIS raw data precluded the presentation of a defense. Moreover, 
had they had access to such information, they would have defeated 
the assertion that the arresting officers had reasonable suspicion 
to stop and probable cause to search the car. The trial court’s 
refusal to compel constituted an impingement upon fundamental due 


process rights. 


43 


A defendant has the constitutional right to present witnesses 
to establish a defense. This right has been termed “a fundamental 
element of due process of law." Taylor v. Illinois, 484 U.S. 400 
(1987). Taylor, at 409, instructs, "To ensure that justice is 
done, it is imperative to the function of courts that compulsory 
process be available for the production of evidence needed either 
by the prosecution or by the defense.” 

The asserted reason of the government for not providing the 
NADDIS information was that since the officer received the 
information verbally from the DEA, there was not a hardcopy of the 
information to give. This argument did not address whether the 
requested raw data information sought did, in fact, exist. 
Petitioners considered this response pretextual and moved to 
compel. 

The magistrate judge ruled: 

In response the government has indicated that neither 

NADDIS nor the motor vehicle license plate information 

were ever printed out from the computer and has proffered 

affidavits in support of this response. Since the 
materials which the defendants seek do not exist, they 
obviously cannot be disclosed. (App.120). 

The trial court summarily affirmed the magistrate judge, 
ruling the order “was not clearly erroneous or contrary to law, and 
further adopts and incorporates here by reference the reasoning 
contained in that Order..." (App.111). The court of appeals twice 
“did not rule on this due process argument. 

Issue No. I. in petitioners’ second appeal to the Seventh 
Circuit states, “Whether the Trial Court’s refusal to allow 
appellants access to the raw data comprising the NADDIS information 


44 


ey es 


oT 


deprived appellants of due process rights." Issue No. II. in the 
original appeal states, “Whether appellants’ due process rights 
were abridged by the trial court’s refusal to allow access to the 
NADDIS information?” 

The court of appeals’ initial response was, “The other grounds 
raised by the appellants have too little merit to warrant 
discussion.” (App.157). No response was had in the second appeal. 

United States v. Hensley, 469 U.S. 221, 232 (1985) provides 
that police may stop persons who are the subject of a police 
broadcast by other police agencies sco long as the broadcasting 
agency can articulate facts establishing reasonable suspicion. 
Thus, what information the other agency actually possesses is not 
only relevant but necessary when a defendant later challenges the 
stop. 

Since all reviewing courts relied on the NADDIS information to 
provide the essential facts to justify the stop and later search, 
petitioners were entitled to know the basis of the information in 
the original agency’s files. How old was this material? Who 
supplied the information? Was this person reliable or credible? 
What is the current status of these persons? How frequently does 
NADDIS material get purged? Were these dealers engaged in selling 
drugs in the 1970’s, 1980’s or 1990's. 

We know absolutely nothing about this age or quality of the 
NADDIS information. We do know that had the dispatcher not 
reversed the last names of one of these persons, one of the NADDIS 


"hits" would not exist. 


Had the officer made the most basic attempt to corroborate the 
identity given by NADDIS with the identifying information from the 
California DMV, he would have known that the DOB’s were 18 years 
apart. His failure to do this basic cross-check resulted in an 
investigation which was improperly conducted. 

As this Court has held in Maryland v. Garrison, 480 U.S. 79,85 
(1978), “The validity of the warrant must be assessed on the basis 
of the information the officers disclosed, or had a duty to 
discover and disclose, to the issuing magistrate.” In Garrison, 
at 81, the search of the wrong apartment was sustained because the 
police conducted a reasonable investigation, including 
“verification of information obtained froma reliable informant, an 
exterior examination of the three story building...and an inquiry 
of the utility company.” 

Here, the police failed to conduct a cross check about 
information from NADDIS about which he knew nothing; in terms of 
age, reliability, or quality. A simple check with the California 
DMV at least would have verified whether the NADDIS Miguel Ornelas 
was the registered owner of the car. Had he merely done this, he 
would have learned that they were not the same persons. Further, 
we do know that at the time of the stop, the officers learned that 
the other person, Ismael Ornelas was from California, and not 
Tucson, Arizona. They further learned, prior to the search, that 
neither petitioners nor the NADDIS individuals were currently 
“wanted” by police authorities. 

The Seventh Circuit relied on the fact that there were two 


46 


hits. The second hit tipped the scale in favor of affirming the 
district court on a clearly erroneous basis. This reliance was, 
however, misplaced. The first hit was a result of the police’s 
bungling and unreasonable investigation. The second hit, with no 
identifying data, provided a similar name but differing state of 
residence, thereby casting doubt on its reliability. 

The ultimate Fourth Amendment question is whether the police 
action was reasonable. The government must comply not only with 
the Fourth Amendment, but also with the Fifth Amendment’s Due 
Process Clause. The police knew absolutely nothing about the 
reliability of the NADDIS information, and the government refused 
to disclose whst information it knew. 

Pautz was asked whether, if there was “identifying” 
information, it would necessarily be on the NADDIS computer. The 
government objected to such inquiry, arguing that Pautz could only 
testify to what he was told (R.44:111). The magistrate judge 
correctly responded, “You mean he’s using some information he 
doesn’t know how they go about getting it, doesn’t know about the 
reliability of it? Is that what you are telling me about this 
officer, that he’s using information that he doesn’t know anything 
about?" (R. 44:111). 

The government responded, “He’s told the information. It’s my 
understanding they are not allowed to view the [NADDIS] screen. 
That they are told the information.” 

THE COURT: But the point is, Ms. Fleming, doesn’t it go to 
reasonable suspicion? If he doesn’t know whether or not it’s 


47 


reliable or not, doesn’t that go to whether or not the officer can 
have reasonable suspicion?” (R.49:111). 

Without NADDIS, neither the stop nor the search were legal. 
The Seventh Circuit stated, “The fact that a door panel is loose 
does not by itself create a reasonable likelihood that the panel 
conceals a secret compartment containing contraband. (Cite 
omitted). Here as in most cases there was more, but not much more: 
mainly the NADDIS “hits” of unproven reliability.” (App.155-56). 

We have come far too close to George Orwell’s scenario in 1984 
when the government can justify a stop and dismantling of a car on 
the basis of a drug courier profile, a somewhat loose panel on a 
twelve year old Oldsmobile, and secret information which the 
government refuses to disclose, about which we know nothing. 

Further, due process is offended when two persons can be 
sentenced to long prison terms on the basis of secret information 
from a government computer which fellow law enforcement officers 
are not allowed to view. If the police officer who requests this 
information cannot view the screen to independently assess its 
reliability, and the information is subsequently withheld from 
defense counsel and the courts how can this information possibly 
tip the scale to satisfy the “reasonable” requirement of the Fourth 
Amendment or the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment? 

This decision is offensive to the ideals of an open, 
democratic country. As this Court states in Gates, 462 U.S. at 
238, “And the duty of a reviewing court is simply to ensure that 
the magistrate had a substantial basis for...conclud{ing) that 


48 


probable cause existed.” If we hold magistrates to that standard 
when the officer requests a warrant, certainly reviewing courts 
should hold themselves to at least that standard when the officer 
acts without prior judicial authority. 

We cannot say that the officer possessed a substantial basis 
for concluding he had probable cause to search the car because we 
know nothing about the NADDIS information. 

If in 1984 there existed 1.5 million names in NADDIS computer, 
one can only speculate on its current size. If the increase in 
drug cases handled in federal court in the last eleven years is any 
indication, the list probably now contains millions of names. Each 
of these persons is at risk by this decision. Thousands of people 
whose names are in the NADDIS files may well be “honest mi(e)n 
falsely accused by an enemy,” or persons who happen to share 
similar names. This is precisely the reason why greater scrutiny 
should be required by this Court, than that which the Seventh 
Circuit has required. 


49 


Conclusion and Prayer for Relief. 

Petitioners respectfully submit that this petition for 
certiorari should be granted and a writ of certiorari issued to 
review the judgment and opinions of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit and the United States District 


Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin. 


Respectfully submitted, 


‘kee a ge . SiG hh 


Brian W. Gleason, Counsel of Record for Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma 


230 W. Wells Street, Suite 702 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53203 
(414) 279-5076 


| ? 

a 4 f ae 7 
4 sh 4. “— yi ‘7 

ae 4 “4 is A 


/ WAS G. LeBell, Counsel of Record for Saul Ornelas 


100 East Wisconsin Avenue 
Suite 1700 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202 
(414) 276-1233 


50 


Decision and Order of the trial court, 
September 20, Try TT TT TTT rTTrTrrrrrrrrrryry?S:=So, . es, 


Magistrate Judge’s Post-Remand Recommendation 
to the Honorable Rudolph T. Randa, March 29, 1994.....B-100-109 


Order of Rudolph Randa —. motion to compel 
discovery, dated February ’ L993. cee cccecesesesseeeescChlIOK-lll 


Decision and Order of Rudolph Randa, denying motions 
to suppress statements and evidence, 
dated March 9, >) rr TrTrrrree+rrrrrrrrrrrrfpiritt D-112-119 


Memorandum and Order Re: Defendants’ Motion to 
Compel Discovery by Magistrate-Judge Bittner, 
dated January 15, \  ) rrr TrTTrrrrerrrerrrrrrefefr E-120-121 


Magistrate Judge’s Recommendation to the Honorable 
Rudolph T. Randa and Order, dated February 12, 1993... F-122-141 


Judgment of Conviction of Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma.......G-142-143 
Judgment of Conviction of Saul Ornelas......eeeeeeee0++H-144-146 


Unpublished Decision and Order of the United States 
Court of als for the Seventh Circuit, dated 
April 18, TTT TTT TT TTT TTTTeeTreerereeesrrrrereririrrn? oe tae. 


Published Decision and Order of the United States 

Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, dated 

February 10, 1994, vacating judgments and remanding 

to the district SOUECe ccccccccsccccececcceccececcseces cur sg7e4§7 


Judgment-Without Oral Argument, of the United States 
Court of als for the Seventh Circuit, 
dated Apri 18, rrr errr TTT TTT TTTTTTTTTrTr? sO? |. 


parties by the Court pursuant 
to Rule 49 (c) Federal Rules of 


Copy maitied to attorneys for 
Criminal Procedure. 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT © Sornow > NeoreKy 


EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff, 


-Vs- Case No. 92-CR-243 


This matter comes before the Court on remand from the Seventh Circuit 
for purposes of additional fact-finding and reconsideration of the probable cause issue. 
The facts of the case, with one addition, are as stated in the initial Magistrate's 
recommendation dated February 12, 1993, which the Court adopts and incorporates 
here by this reference. 

On February 12, 1993, Magistrate Judge Robert L. Bittner issued a 
recommendation that defendants’ motions to suppress the cocaine at issue be denied. 
The Magistrate’s recommendation was not based on the existence of probable cause. 
Rather, the Magistrate found that the case fit within the “inevitable discovery” 
exception to the probable cause requirement. In a decision dated March 9, 1993, this 


Court upheld the Magistrate’s recommendation, but on different grounds. This Court 


95 a a a 


found that the drug courier profile, the two NADDIS hits and the loose door panel, 
constituted probable cause to remove the door panel and search for drugs. The 
defendants entered conditional pleas and appealed the suppression issue. The 
Seventh Circuit vacated the decision on grounds that this Court incorrectly thought 
the Magistrate had ruled upon the credibility of Officer Luedtke’s testimony concerning 
the loose door panel. The Circuit Court then gave explicit instructions regarding what 
was to be done on remand: 

The motion to suppress should not have been denied, 

though it is open to the government on remand to ask the 

district judge either to hear Luedtke’s testimony on the 

loose panel himself (or at least view the car interior) or refer 

the matter to the magistrate judge for a determination of 

the credibility of that testimony. If Luedtke’s testimony is 

disbelieved, the motion to suppress should be granted. If 

it is believed, the district court must decide whether the 

loose panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS tips as 

corroborated by the circumstances that first aroused Officer 


Pautz’s suspicions, adequately established probable cause 
to believe that drugs were concealed behind the panel. 


United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d 714, 721-22 (7th Cir. 1994). 


On remand, this Court again referred the matter to the Magistrate for 
purposes of making an initial determination regarding the credibility of Officer 
Luedtke’s testimony and the existence of probable cause. The Magistrate found 
Officer Luedtke’s testimony regarding the loose door panel credible, and this Court 
accepts that finding. The Magistrate further found, however, that adding the loose 
door panel to the drug courier profile and the two NADDIS hits was not sufficient to 


establish probable cause. This is contrary to the Court's original conclusion, which 


96 “a 


found that "reasonable suspicion became probable cause when Officer Luedtke found 
that the right rear door panel of the car was loose." 

| The Court acknowledges that the issue is a close one, but weighing the 
evidence "not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but as understood by those 
versed in the field of law enforcement,” see Texas v. Brown, 460 U,S, 730, 742 
(1983), the Court is compelled to reach the same conclusion, Both the Seventh 
Circuit and the Magistrate raised concerns regarding the broad brugh of ‘drug courler, 
ee iE ee . 
profiles, the reliability of the NADDIS system, and the significance of a loose door 
panel in a 12-year old car from General Motors. Viewed individually, these facts may 
be unremarkable, They become more meaningful when, in a specific case,:they 
converge and form around two specific individuals. That is what happened here, The . 
question is whether, based on that confluence of facts, Officer Luedtke was 
reasonable and justified in his belief that drugs lay within the defendants’ car door, 
In answering this question, the law says that Officer Luedtke and his actions are not 
ta be judged in hindsight. This means that his search is not justified by the fact that 
he was right, It also means that his search is not invalid simply because the names 
on the twa NADDIS hits were not absolutely identical ta the names provided, or. 
because the addresses did not match up, or because the other information he relied 
upon was relatively innocuous when considered alone. The test is one of flexibility 
and common sense, requiring only "practical, nontechnical probabilit{ies]", Id. 

This case strikes the Court as an example of how common sense 

translates into good and constitutionally valid police work, As the Seventh Circuit 
noted, "Milwaukee police keep a regular watch on motels, looking for drug runners.” 


Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d at 715. This makes sense, and this Is what the officers 


Or < 


a, adoro ok OP f 


” Pe 


were doing here when they discovered defendants’ older model, two-door GM car 
with source state license plates. A routine survey thus became a hunch. An 
examination of the motel registry showed that the car was driven by two men who 
checked into the motel at 4:00 a.m. without advance reservations. The hunch thus 
grew stronger,' Then a NADDIS check on the registered owner of the vehicle scored 
a hit an a known or suspected heroin dealer, although the addresses did not match up. 


The hunch ripened into generalized suspicion. A NADDIS check an. ‘the nama listed 


- tm F mes ~) 


in the ‘motel registry also scored a hit on a prolific cocaine dealer, although the “ 


addresses again did not match up and there was a "Jr." designation appended to the 


name retrieved by NADDIS. Nonetheless, two" NADQIS=hitere 


San ee Atenas 


identical $0 those: uncovered by the officers were tag ‘impressive 10. 


Generalized suspicion thus became reasonable suspicion directed at two specific 


ee ee 


individuals. After the resulting Terry-stop, one of the suspects produced identification 
“Yainfarced* ‘Officer Luedtke asked for permission to search the vehicle, pet was 
given. During a general search of the interior, Officer Luedtke discovered a loose door 
panel near the right rear seat. rite 
What was Officer Luedtke to do? At this juncture, every additional step 
turned up additional information which dispelled doubt about the innocent nature of 
the facts and made the officers’ suspicions stronger and more probable. Should 
Officer Luedtke have stopped at that point simply because a loose door panel on a 12- 


year old car, considered by itself, is likely to be a common occurrence? Or, does 


‘While the Seventh Circuit recognized these facts as “innocent taken by [themselves)," 
Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d at 716, they do not preciude the officers from developing their intuition. 


"a 


99 , 


em ae We arming 


~ ORDERED THAT: —, 


Officer Luedtke view the loose panel as the accumulated evidence directs him to view 
it, as his experience has told him to view it, and as a number of cases have also 
viewed it; "[A]s a telltale sign of drug running"? Id. at 720.2? A competent police 
officer removes the door panel. He removes it because it is the final fact in a string 


of unbroken facts which establishes the probable cause equation. 


i oer. ~~ ees Ft~ ‘ 
‘ “J a 


1, The Government's objection to the Magistrate's recommendation 
ig sustained and the defendants’ motions to suppress are denied. 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, this 2p day of September, 1994, 


SO ORDERED, 


*See Magistrate's Recommendation dated February 12, 1993 at 6-7 (“Based upon his training, 
Luedtke suspected the panel had been removed and contraband was hidden inside) 


9 


NOW THEREFORE, BASED ON THE FOREGOING, AT,.1S_ HEREBY : 


iy 


Cc: 


to. Tor Pr ih 
Crinipcl Vrescusro. 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


| UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, Case No. 92-Cr-243 
Vv. 
| ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA and MAGISTRATE JUDGE’S POST-REMAND 
| SAUL ORNELAS, RECOMMENDATION 
Defendants. a 


On February 12, 1993 this Court issued a recommendation on 
motions to suppress physical evidence filed by defendants Saul Ornelas 
and Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma. In addressing the defendants’ motions to 
| suppress, this Court concluded the defendants were lawfully subjected 
| to an investigatory detention based upon reasonable suspicion and 
| clearly consented to a search of the 1981 Oldsmobile. However, this 
Court further concluded that, under governing case law, the consent 
did not extend to the door panels and a search of those door panels 
was not supported by requisite probable cause, because the testimony 
of Milwaukee County Deputy Sheriff Lyle Luedke, regarding the presence 
of rust in the groove of the Phillips screw used to attach the vent 
was not credible. this Court 


cover to the door, Nonetheless, 


recommended denial of the defendants’ motions to suppress evidence, 


$06... 


since the seizure of cocaine fell within the inevitable discovery 
exception to the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule of Nix v. 
Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 433 (1984). 

Subsequently, in a March 9, 1993 order, United States 
District Judge Rudolph T. Randa considered the defendants’ objections 
to the recommendation and ruled the holding regarding inevitable 
discovery was unnecessary, because the facts found by this Court 
established probable cause to remove the door panel vent cover and 
search the compartment behind it. Thereafter, Judge Randa accepted 
conditional pleas of guilty, pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. 11(a) (2), from 
the defendants who then appealed the adverse suppression decision. 

The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit issued a 
decision in the matter on February 10, 1994 vacating the defendants’ 
judgments of conviction and remanding the case for further proceedings 


consistent with its opinion which holds: 


The motion to suppress should not have been 
denied, though it is open to the government on 
remand to ask the district judge either to hear 
Luedke’s testimony on the loose panel himself (or 
at least view the car’s interior) or refer the 
matter to the. magistrate judge for a 
determination of the credibility of that 
testimony. If Luedke’s testimony is disbelieved, 
the motion to suppress should be granted. If it 
is believed, the district court must decide 
whether the loose panel, in conjunction with the 
NADDIS tips as corroborated by the circumstances 
that first aroused Officer Pautz’s suspicions, 
adequately established probable cause to believe 
that drugs were concealed behind the panel. The 
court may wish to consider the evidence of the 
loose panel (if that evidence is believed) in 
conjunction with the Philips screw. 


United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al, Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405 (slip 


op. at 15) (7th Cir. Feb. 10, 1994). On March 15, 1994 Judge Randa, 


in turn, referred the matter to this Court for further proceedings 


in accord with the directions of the Court of Appeals. 


DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
In its recommendation, this Court made the following 


findings of fact: 


When Hurrle announced he had completed the search 
of the trunk, with negative results, Luedke 
proceeded to the passenger area of the vehicle 
and checked to see whether the back seat was 
loose. Upon finding it was not, he examined the 
right rear quarter panel near the handle. He 

Based upon his 
traini Luedke suspected the panel had been 
sanueed and contraband was hidden inside. Luedke 
testified he then observed the vent area of the 
door, noticing the presence of rust in the groove 
of the Phillips screw used to attach the vent 
cover, which led him to believe the vent cover 
had recently been removed. Luedke then released 
the screw, dismantled the vent area of the door, 
and exposed a cavity approximately five (5) 
inches high and four (4) inches wide which 
contained a paper bag in which he felt a hard 
block. 


(Emphasis added.) (February 12, 1993 Recommendation at 6.) 

Officer Luedke’s testimony as to the screw was found by 
this Court to be incredible, in light of the undisputable condition 
of the screw itself. Nonetheless, except for the rule of Falsus In 
Uno Falsus In Omnibus, I have no reason not to believe the panel was 
loose. Thus, I accept as credible Luedke’s testimony that the panel 
was loose. However, the loose panel alone, given the age of the 
Oldsmobile, is not probative evidence of the fact it necessarily had 


been recently removed. See United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al, 
Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 13 (observing the interior of a 


-- 


1981 Oldsmobile, unlike that of a Rolls Royce, is apt to be rather 
worn and battered after eleven (11) years). 

So what else is there besides the loose panel to establish 
probable cause that the compartment had recently been opened ari 
contained contraband. Answer: Only the two (2) NADDIS “hits” and 
the questionable “drug courier" profile consisting of the facts the 
defendants were Hispanic Californians driving a two-door General 
Motors car who had checked into a motel very early in the morning, 
traveled as a pair rather than alone, and had not made advance 
reservations. See Jnited States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al, Nos. 93- 
2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 5 ("confluence of the circumstances is 
pretty innocuous... especially since many of the circumstances are 
correlated rather than independent"). The NADDIS computer reports 
showed a “hit” on Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, also known as Miguel Lemus- 
Ledesma, identified by NADDIS as a heroin dealer in El Centro, 
California, which is hundreds of miles from San Jose, the residence 
ef the registered owner of the car; and a second “hit" on Ismael 
Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, Arizona who was reported to be a 1,000 
kilogram per month cocaine dealer, although no "wants" or warrants 
were outstanding against hin. Thus, the NADDIS reports are so 
convoluted and mismatched that they are of little probative value in 
the probable cause determination. Consequently, the only evidence 
in the probable cause calculus is the loose panel, a weak drug 
courier profile, and inconclusive NADDIS “hits.” There is just not 


enough evidence for a reasonable law enforcement officer to believe 


the door compartment contained contraband, as opposed to being a mere 


-~4i- 


102 ** = 


ST 


oo” 


sign of an aging General Motors automobile. See State v. Swanson, 
838 P.2d 1340, 1345-48 (Ariz. App. 1992]}) (no probable cause to 
believe evidence of crime would be found in the space behind door 
panels; the screws of which appeared to have been tampered with and 
were loose, where only other facts were defendant became nervous when 
the officer opened the vehicle door, and supposed “drug courier 
profile” consisted of facts that defendant and his passenger were 
traveling east on an interstate highway in a rental car with 
electronic paging equipment and a cellular phone). Missing are any 
additional indicia requisite to a finding of probable cause, as noted 
in the following cases. See United States v. Lugo, 978 F.2d 631, 637 
(10th Cir. 1992) (suggesting probable cause to search behind door 
panels may have existed because totality of circumstances suggested 
the hidden space contained contraband: defendant was armed, 
traveling interstate, did not have luggage or other articles normally 
associated with such a trip; displayed noticeable interest in locking 
his truck after being told by officers not to; had a weapon within 
easy reach along with a fully loaded clip, and additional ammunition 
on the floor of the trunk; and there was a loosened door panel with 
@ creased edge indicating someone had accessed the cavity inside) ; 
United States v. Pena, 961 F.2d 333, 339 (2nd Cir. 1992) (defendant 
entitled to evidentiary hearing on whether probable cause existed for 
search of door panel where facts in addition to those furnishing 


reasonable suspicion for investigatory detention were “asserted 


discovery of an empty bag and screwdriver in the back seat of 
detained automobile”); United States v. Arango, 912 F.2d 441, 447 


104 = 


(10th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 924 (1991) (probable cause 
for arrest where officers noticed truck bed did not seem right 
because it was very shallow, after lifting the tailgate corner of a 
rubber mat covering truck bed, observed that truck bed had apparently 
been modified; their knocks on truck bed suggested hidden compartment 
was running beneath the bed; and defendant had inadequate amount of 
luggage for purported two [2] week vacation); United States v. 
Garcia, 897 F.2d. 1413, 1419 (7th Cir. 1990) (upholding search of 
door panels when, while conducting consensual visual search, officers 
noted lack of window cranks and door handles mismatched and ill 
fitting screws on the door panels, and spotted packages inside the 
door while looking through the window opening); United States v. 


Thomas, 787 F.Supp. 663, 684 (E.D. Tex. 1992), aff’d without op., 983 
F.2d 1062 (Sth Cir. 1993) (probable cause to open exterior side 


panels of vehicle based on drug sniffing dog’s strong alert); Munguia 
vy. State, 737 S.W.2d 658, 660 (Ark. App. 1987) (marijuana residue 
on car floor boards and loose fitting door panel warranted reasonable 
belief additional marijuana would be found in door panel). 

In its opinion, the Court of Appeals also suggested the 
Court might wish to consider the evidence of the loose panel in 
conjunction with the Phillips screw which, upon examination by the 
Appellate Court, “looked as if it had been scratched in just the way 
one would expect if it had been removed and reinserted", though also 
noting its appearance could “reflect its removal by Officer Luedke 


or other handling since." United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al, 
Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 15. However, the parties orally 


268..." 3 


stipulated to resolution of the matter based upon the prior record. 

Review of that record discloses Luedke “used a small 
pocket-type knife to remove the Phillips screw from the plastic vent 
cover" (Tr. 156). Luedke further testified "a closer examination of 
that screw indicated there was rust in the area of the Phillips head 
of the screw" (Tr. 155-156). When the screw was brought to this 
Court for examination, it was contained in a film canister which was 
fitted with cotton (Tr. 423). The record regarding the condition of 
the screw and the source of any scratches on it which the Court of 
Appeals observed is inconclusive. Based on the parties’ stipulation, 
this Court has not reexamined the screw and the record is 
insufficient for this Court to make a determination of when or how 
the screw was scratched. Consequently, any scratches on the screw. 
have no impact on this Court’s determination that there was not 
probable cause for the search of the door panel. 

It may be that, based upon this Court’s recommended 
disposition of the defendants’ motions to suppress, Judge Randa may 
decide the record regarding the scratches on the screw requires 
further development. However, due to the fact the defendants, whose 
appearance would be requisite at a supplemental evidentiary hearing, 
pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 43(a), are confined in California, 
necessitating two (2) to three (3) weeks advance notice of an 
evidentiary hearing in this District so they could be transported 
here by the United States Marshal, it is impossible for me to conduct 
such a hearing by reason of my March 31, 1994 retirement from the 
bench. 


In sum, this Court finds testimony of Officer Luedke 
regarding the loose panel is credible, but that testimony combined 
with the other factors which contributed to reasonable suspicion to 
stop the defendants, did not establish probable cause to seach the 
door panel.' The record regarding the scratches on the screw is 
inconclusive and does not contribute to this Court’s probable cause 
this Court will recommend that the 


calculus. Consequently, 


detendants’ motions to suppress physical evidence be granted. 


CONCLUSION 
NOW THEREFORE, IT I8 HEREBY RECOMMENDED that the United 


States District Judge enter an order GRANTING defendant Saul Ornelas’ 
motion to suppress and exclude physical evidence; and, 

IT I8 FURTHER RECOMMENDED that the United States District 
Judge -.nter an order GRANTING that aspect of defendant Ismael 
Ornelas-Ledesma’s motion to suppress items seized from the 1981 
Oldsmobile. 

Your attention is directed to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) and 
(C) and Local Rule 13.03 (E.D. Wis.), whereby written objections to 


the foregoing recommendation may be filed in duplicate with the Clerk 


Se ee ee + 


an 7268 


of Court within ten (10) days hereof. Failure to file a timely 


objection shall result in a waiver to your right to appeal. 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin this 29 Say of March, 1994. 


United States Magistrate Judge 


1. In its February 12, 1993 recommendation, this Court also 
found there was not probable cause for a search of the door panel. 
However, it recommended the defendant’s motions to suppress be denied, 
based upon its finding that discovery of the cocaine in the door panel 
fell within the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary 
rule. This finding was not defended on appeal by the government and, 
consequently, has been waived. 

al, Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 15. 


AO T2A 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT |*——— 030% ———_1m 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN} 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


-Vs- Case No. 92-CR-243 


Defendants. 


ORDER 


This matter comes before the Court on a joint appeal filed by the 
defendants, Saul Ornelas and ismeal Ledesma Ornelas ("Defendants"), to an Order 
issued by Magistrate Judge Robert L. Bittner denying Defendants’ Motions to 
Compe! Discovery seeking printout copies of computer information received by a 
Milwaukee County Sheriff's detective through the NADDIS System and through 
@ system that can track the owner of a vehicle by reference to the vehicie’s license 
plate. Magistrate Judge Bittner’s Order was issued on January 15, 1993, and the 
jo\nt appeal was filed on January 20, 1993. The Defendants also requested that 
the evidentiary hearing regarding the validity of the Terry stop and investigation, 
scheduled for 10:00 a.m. on January 21, 1993, be stayed in the event the Court 


was unable to review the appeal prior to the hearing. 


110 


The Court was able to fully review the Defendants’ joint appeal prior 


to the Terry hearing, and verbally communicated to Magistrate Judge Bittner’s UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT | : SornOn 8 nevus |" 
. EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 

Chambers prior to the hearing the Court’s decision to affirm his decision and deny 
the appeal. This Order merely memorializes that decision. Therefore, pursuant to 3 3 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(A) and Local Rule 13.02, the Court hereby finds that if , 
Magistrate Judge Bittner’s Order denying the motions to compel was not clearly | : H _— Case No. 92-CR-243 
erroneous or contrary to law, and further adopts and incorporates here by : &3 ISMEAL ORNELAS LEDESMA and 

SAUL ORNELAS, 
reference the reasoning contained in that Order as the basis for the Court’s at: 
le 8 Defendants. 
decision to deny Defendants’ joint appeal. 
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT: DECISION AND ORDER 


1. Defendants’ Motion to Stay Evidentiary Hearing is denied; and 


2. Defendants’ joint appeal of Magistrate Judge Bittner’s January "his matter comes before the Court on objections filed vo 


15, 1993 Pretrial Order denying Defendents’ Motions to Compe! Discovery is defendants, Ismeal Ornelas Ledesma ("Ismeal") and Saul Ornelas ("Saul"), to the 


denied. Recommendations issued by Magistrate Judge Robert L. Bittner denying 


Dened ot Mibneuhes, Wiesensin, Cie 44, day of February, 1993. defendants’ motions to suppress certain statements and physical evidence. For 


the following reasons, defendants’ objections are overruled and the Magistrate's 


SO ORDERED, 


Recommendation is affirmed, although the Recommendation as to the suppression 


of physical evidence is affirmed on grounds somewhat different than those 


expressed by Magistrate Bittner. 


Magistrate Bittner’s Recommendation thoroughly explains the nature 


of the case and his corresponding findings of fact, which the Court incorporates 


here by this reference. in the interests of brevity, and having read the parties’ 


112 


lll 


initial briefs before the Magistrate and subsequent written objections, the Court 
summarily affirms the Magistrate’s recommendations regarding (1) the finding of 
reasonable suspicion for a Terry-stop; (2) the finding of consent for the vehicle 
search; and (3) the denial of both defendants’ motions to suppress their post-arrest 
Statements. With respect to the foregoing issues the Court simply adopts the 
reasoning contained in Magistrate Bittner’s Recommendation, along with the 
factual findings he relied upon in reaching those conclusions.’ Thus, the only 
question remaining is whether the cocaine seized from the defendants’ vehicle 
must be suppressed as the result of an invalid search. 
I. SUPPRESSION OF PHYSICAL EVIDENCE. 
Magistrate Bittner found that removing the door panel to find the 
cocaine at issue was a search that went outside the scope of the defendants’ 
initial consent to search the vehicle, and further that the search could not be 


justified on grounds of probable cause. (Magistrate Recommendation at 15.) The 


"With one exception (the question whether Officer Luedke’s gun was visible as he 
approached the defendants’ vehicle -- the parties agree that it was not), none of the parties 
attack the basic accuracy of the facts as found by Magistrate Bittner, although both defendants 
dispute the lega! conclusions reached by the Magistrate based on those facts. For example, 
defendant Ismeai points to several facts which he feels are important to the issues but which 
the Magistrate did not address, and also disputes the Magistrate's characterizations of some of 
the underlying testimony and evidence. (ismeal’s Ohjection at 2-10.) Defendant Saul does the 
same, particularly with respect to the decision on the motion to suppress his post-arrest 
Statements (Saul Objection at 4-5), and then simply incorporates the arguments and facts 
contained in his initial briefing, which are essentially the same facts and characterizations of 
testimony stressed by ismeal in his objection. (Saul Objection at 2.) The Court has taken into 
consideration the additional facts and differing characterizations raised by the defendants in 
these documents and finds that, even if true, they do not affect the Court's decision to affirm 
Magistrate Bittner’s Recommendation on the three issues referenced above. The Court 


47°4n 


Magistrate nonetheless denied the motions to Suppress On grounds of inevitable 
discovery, finding that the police had a sniffer dog present at the scene which 
would have been used by the officers to find the cocaine if their own search 
proved unsuccessful. (id. at 16.) The Court does not reject the Magistrate’s 
holding regarding inevitable discovery”, but finds that holding unnecessary in view 
of the Court's belief that the facts found by Magistrate Bittner establish probable 
Cause to remove the door panel at issue and search the compartment behind it. 
The United States Supreme Court has cautioned lower courts not to 
become too technical or mechanical in their probable cause determinations: 


As the Court frequently has remarked, probable 
cause is a flexible, common-sense standard. It merely 
requires that the facts available to the officer would 
“warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief". . . 
that certain items may be contraband or stolen property 
or useful as evidence of a crime; it does not demand 
any showing that such a belief be correct or more likely 
true than false. A “practical, nontechnical" probability 
that incriminating evidence is involved is all that is 
required. . . . “The process does not deal with hard 
certainties, but with probabilities. Long before the law 
of probabilities was articulated as such, practical people 
formulated certain common-sense conclusions about 


sniffs in general, of of sniffs by this dog in particular. (Saul’s Objection at 2-3; ismeal’s 


defendants briefs seemed to admit the same by stating that “Idjogs have been trained to sniff 
the exterior of cars and do react or alert to cocaine hidden in car bodies and in trunks." (See 


#14 


human behavior; jurors as factfinders are permitted to 

do the same -- and so are law enforcement officers. 

Finally, the evidence thus collected must be seen and 

weighed not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but 

as understood by those versed in the field of law 

enforcement.” 

Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 742 (1983). (Citations omitted.) 

The Seventh Circuit requires the same flexibility. “Probable cause 
exists if the facts and circumstances within [the officers’] knowledge and of which 
they had reasonable trustworthy information [are] sufficient in themselves to 
warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that an item subject to seizure 
will be found in the place to be searched." United States v. Garza-Hernandez, 623 
F.2d 496, 499 (7th Cir. 1980). "Probable cause is thus more than bare suspicion, 
but less than virtual certainty.” Id. “As the term itself implies, probable cause 
exists if the probability is that the thing sought is in the place to be searched; 
probabilities are to be assessed in the light of practical experience and the practical 
inferences to be drawn from known or reliable facts.” Id. "Government agents are 
entitled to reasonably rely on their special knowledge and expertise in assessing 
probabilities and drawing inferences.” {d. 

In cases involving a vehicle search, "[p]robable cause . . . exists when 
the facts and circumstances would lead a reasonably prudent person t6 believe 
that the vehicle contains contraband.” United States v. Strickland, 902 F.2d 937, 
942 (11th Cir. 1990). “The facts and circumstances UPON which a finding of 
probable cause is based include “the sum total . . . and the synthesis of what the 
police have heard, what they know, and what they observe as trained officers." 


Id., at 942-43. Moreover, in cases involving a 7erry-stop based upon reasonable 


fis 


suspicion, information gathered after the stop may be added to information 
gathered before the stop for purposes of determining whether there is probable 
cause, and as such the reasonable suspicion relied upon in making the stop may 
ripen into probable cause to search. See generally. United States v. Van Lewis, 


409 F. Supp. 535, 542 (E.D. Mich. 1976); United States v. Avalos-Ochoa, 557 
F.2d 1299, 1303 (9th Cir. 1977). 


The Magistrate's decision on the probable cause issue focused upon 
the accuracy of one fact, i.e., whether Officer Luedke was correct in his belief that 
a screw attaching the air vent to the door panel was rusted, giving rise to his belief 
that the panel had been recently removed. After the screw was produced and the 
parties stipulated to the fact that it was not rusted, the Magistrate ruled that there 
was no probable cause to search because “(t)he record disclose[d] no evidence 
from which Luedke could conclude that a hidden panel contained contraband." 
(Magistrate Recommendation at 15.) 

The Magistrate’s ruling would appear to run contrary to his own 
factual findings, and in any event does not consider the totality of the 
circumstances leading up to the removal and search of the door panel. The 
defendants and their car were singled out during a routine survey of motels 
conducted for the express purpose of looking for drug trafficking activity. 
(Magistrate Recommendation at 3.) The vehicle involved was a 1981 two (2) door 
Oldsmobile, an older GM mode! which is often used by drug traffickers to conceal 
contraband. (id.) The car had California license plates, and its owner was listed 
8s residing in California, a source state for controlled substances. (id.) There were 
two individuals travelling together in the car, and they had checked into the mote! 


5 116 


% 


at four o’clock in the morning, without reservations. (id.) By itself this “drug 
courier profile", as the defendants call it, may not constitute reasonable suspicion 
or probable cause. But then two NADDIS checks were run on the names of the 
car owner and the individual listed in the motel’s registry, and both names turned 
up hits on known drug dealers.’ (id. at 4.) These hits, combined with the drug 
courier profile, clearly gave rise to a reasonable suspicion that drug trafficking 
activity was afoot and that the vehicle contained contraband of some kind. This 
reasonable suspicion became probable cause when Officer Luedke found that the 
right rear door panel of the car was loose, leading him to suspect that the panel 
had been removed and that contraband was hidden inside. (Id. at 6-7; Transcript 
of Off. Luedke’s Testimony at 15-16.) 

Thus, considering the totality of the circumstances, including the drug 
courier profile, the two NADDIS hits, and the loose door panel, this Court finds 
that an officer of reasonable caution would be justified in the belief that 


j 
f 
: 
| 
: 
i 


: 
+ 
| 
! 
: 


rm 


| 
| 
i 
| 
. 
i 


contraband would be found behind the right rear door panel.‘ This conclusion is 
further supported by decisions from the Seventh Circuit finding that the amount 
of probable cause necessary for the police to do something, such as conduct a 
search, “depends on how deeply they invade the zone of privacy", United States 
yv. Concepcion, 942 F.2d 1170, 1173 (7th Cir. 1991), and that “the reasonable 
expectation of privacy that persons may have in their autos is usually of a lesser 
magnitude than privacy expectations that inhere in other types of property.” 
Garza-Hernandez, 623 F.2d at 500. Given this lower expectation of privacy, and 
the confluence of the above facts and circumstances, the officers clearly had 


probable cause to remove the door panei.® 


* The fact that the screw holding the air vent to the door panel was not rusted, as Officer 


inside, by virtue of the fact that the panel was loose. (Luedke Transcript at 15-16; Magistrate 
Recommendation at 6-7.) 


i 
* Of course, the above analysis only resolves the probable cause issue, which is only half 


warrant requirement. Here, the exception is obvious, L.¢., the “automobile exception”. The 
“automobile exception” aliows the warrantiess search of a vehicle where probable cause exists 
to believe that the vehicle contains contraband or evidence of criminal activity. United States 
¥. McGuire, 957 F.2d 310, 314 (7th Cir. 1992). The exception is justified by the vehicie’s 
mobility and the lesser expectation of privacy people have in their automobiles United 
States vy. Galiman, 907 F.2d 639, 641 (7th Cir. 1990). 


7 118 


NOW THEREFORE, BASED ON THE FOREGOING, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED 
THAT: 

1. The defendants’ objections to the Magistrate's Recommendation 
are overruled, and the defendants’ motions to suppress certain post-arrest 
Statements and physical evidence are denied; and 

2. No objection being taken to the Magistrate’s Order granting 


Defendant Saul Ornelas’ motion for severance’, the same is affirmed. 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, this 1 day of March, 1993. 


* As Defendant Saul Ornelas correctly points out, the Magistrate's Order contains a 
typographical error on the last page, which states that the defendant's motion for severance 
was “denied” rather than “granted”. The analysis contained on the page preceding the typo 
makes it clear that Magistrate Bittner was granting the motion, not denying it. and that the 
Statement on the following page was in error. 


319 


_— BS06t Crm 


— -. 2% 00%" am. F. 
- = ; st « t20 ‘ _f 7 


aa C—F 


Criciaa yroccucro. 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
| EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN DAN. 15 1793 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, Case No. 92-Cr-243 


Vv. 


SAUL ORNELAS and ORDER RE: DEFENDANTS’ 
ISMEAL LEDESMA ORNELAS, MOTIONS TO COMPEL 


Defendants. 


| Defendants Saul Ornelas and Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas move the 
Scart for issuance of orders compelling the government to disclose 
printout copies of information received by Milwaukee County Sheriff's 
Department Detective Michael Pautz on December 11, 1992 through the 


Narcotics and Dangerous Information Systems (hereinafter referred to 


as NADDIS) concerning Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, as well as information 
he received regarding the owner of a 1981 Oldsmobile bearing State of 
California license plate #CA 2Y0Y835 which Detective Pautz had 
stopped. Defendant Saul Ornelas also seeks disclosure of the "raw 
data" used to create the NADDIS entry. In response the government has 
indicated that neither NADDIS nor the motor vehicle license plate 
affidavits in support of this response. Since the materials which the 
defendants seek do not exist, they obviously cannot be disclosed. 
Thus, the defendant's request for printouts will be denied. 


120 


= were ever printed out from the computer and has proffered 


33 


Ce vw an8 ,- Te 7 $96 
‘ r % fot IE ae ee “f A or RIN Uw. ake 
ws rye (s)..c.relincss og 
Furthermore, as to defendant Saul Ornelas' request for the government *—-32l Prescacro, 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
files used to create the NADDIS information on Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, 


EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN FEB’ 419° 1993 
he has failed to establish it is exculpatory information to which he 
is entitled under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963) or that it is | 


discoverable under Fed. R. Crim. P. 16. Accordingly, the motions to 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, Case No. 92-Cr-243 
compel discovery of defendants Saul Ornelas and Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas ia | 
will be denied. : SAUL ORNELAS and MAGISTRATE JUDGE'S RECOMMENDATION 
= ISMEAL LEDESMA ORNELAS, Sone eee 
ORDER : | Defendants. AND ORDER 
NOW THEREFORE, IT I8 ORDERED that defendant Saul Ormelas® (6 POPP TTR RRR Renn een enee enn nnn ane 


motion to compel discovery be and hereby is DENIED; and, | 
IT I8 FURTHER ORDERED that defendant Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas’ | NATURE OF THE CASE 


motion to compel discovery be and hereby is DENIED. On December 15, 1992 a federal grand jury sitting in this 


Your attention is directed to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b) (1) (A) and ane returned a one (1) count indictment against defendants Saul 


Local Rule 13.02 (E.D. Wis.), whereby written appeal from any order Ornelas (hereinafter referred to as Saul) and Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas 


herein or part thereof may be filed within ten (10) days hereof. (hereinafter referred to as Ismeal), charging them with violating 21 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin this 1S Say of January, 1993. U.S.C. § 841(a)(1) and 18 U.S.C. § 2 by knowingly and intentionally 


BY THE COURT: possessing, with intent to distribute, a mixture containing cocaine. 


| | The defendants appeared before this Court on December 17, 
| ; rt tT 1992 for arraignment, entering pleas of not guilty. Pursuant to the 


United States Magistrate Judge | Pretrial scheduling order, the defendants filed various pretrial 


motions which are ready for resolution and will be addressed herein. 
Previously, the defendants' motions to compel discovery were denied 


by this Court's order of January 15, 1993, which was upheld on appeal 
by Judge Randa. 


| 122 


8 
§ 


121 


? 
8 


MOTIONS TO SUPPRESS 


Defendants Saul and Ismeal move the Court for issuance of 


rders suppressing evidence seized on December 11, 1992 from their 
sons and a 1981 Oldsmobile bearing State of California license 
late number 2Y0Y835, which was parked in front of room 4 of the 
uburban Motel, 4600 South 27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. They 
ontend their Fourth Amendment rights to be free from unreasonable 
subjected them to an investigatory stop, without “reasonable 
suspicion"; searched the Oldsmobile without their consent and, without 
robable cause, conducted an intrusive search of the interior of the 
ehicle's right rear door by removing a plastic vent cover. Both 
efendants also seek suppression of statements obtained from them 
while they were in custody at the City of Milwaukee Police Department 
(hereinafter referred to as MPD) on the grounds such statements were 
obtained in violation of their Miranda rights and were involuntary. 

These motions were the subject of an evidentiary hearing 


conducted by the Court on January 21, 22, and 25, 1993. At the 


hearing Milwaukee County Deputy Sheriffs (hereinafter referred to as 
jpcos) Michael Pautz, Lyle Luedke, Gil Pagan, Donald Hurrle, Roger R. 
iggins, and United States Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement 
inistration (hereinafter referred to as DEA) Special Agent 
(hereinafter referred to as SA) James Allen appeared and testified on 
behalf of the government. A supplemental evidentiary hearing was 
onvened on January 28, 1993 to admit into evidence a Phillips screw 


hich had been removed from the Plastic vent cover of the right rear 


-“2- 


123 


8 
: 


door of the Oldsmobile, and to place upon the record the parties’ 


Stipulation that no rust appeared on the screw. Based on the 


testimony and evidence adduced at such hearings, as well as having 
considered the briefs and arguments of the parties, this Court makes 


its findings of fact and proposed dispositions of such motions. 


Findings of Pact 


On Friday, December 11, 1992 McsD Plain clothes Detective 
Michael Pautz, a twenty (20) year veteran who has been assigned to the 


Drug Enforcement Unit for two (2) years, was engaged in a routine 


Survey of motels located along South 27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 
looking for drug trafficking activity. At the Suburban Motel, 4600 
South 27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, he observed a 1981 two (2) 
door Oldsmobile automobile with California license plates 2yOy835 


parked in front of room 4. Based upon his experience and training in 


drug interdiction, Pautz knew an older tw2 (2) door GM vehicle is 
often used to transport drugs and California is a source state for 
controlled substances; consequently, he contacted his dispatcher to 


check on the license plate. The dispatcher advised Pautz the vehicle 


| was listed to one Miguel Ornealas of 830 North 16th Street, San Jose, 


California with an additional name of "Ledesma." However, Pautz was 


not sure whether the dispatcher indicated the name "Ledesma" came 


before or after the name "Ornealas." After speaking with the 
dispatcher, Pautz spoke with the motel clerk who disclosed, at 4:00 


a.m. that morning, an individual named Ismeal Ornelas had checked into 


- 3- 


124 


room 4 with another individual, without prior reservations, and was 
due to check out at 11:00 a.m. 

Pautz then requested his partner, MCDS plain clothes 
Detective Donald Hurrle, meet him at the motel. Upon Hurrle's arrival 
in an unmarked car approximately fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minutes 
later, Pautz briefed him about the Oldsmobile and the occupants of 
room 4. Pursuant to Hurrle's suggestion, Pautz contacted the 
Milwaukee DEA office and asked for a Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and 
Information Systems (hereinafter referred to as NADDIS) check on the 
names Ismeal Ornelas and Miguel Ledesma Ornealas. A short time later, 
Pautz was advised both names appeared on NADDIS and was given the 
following information: Miguel Ledesma Ornealas, a/k/a Miguel Ledesma- 
Lemus, with a date of birth September 29, 1945, 5'6", 150 pounds, 
Hispanic male was a heroin dealer from El Centro, California; Ismeal 
Ornelas, Jr., from Tuscon, Arizona was a 1,000 kilogram a month 
cocaine dealer. Pautz is not familiar with the geography of 
California and did not know that San Jose and El Centro, California 
are 600 miles apart. Upon receiving the NADDIS information, Pautz and 
Hurrle decided to conduct surveillance of room 4 of the Suburban Motel 
and to summon to the scene MCDS Detective Lyle Luedke, the narcotics 
dog handler for the Drug Enforcement Unit, because they suspected the 
Oldsmobile contained drugs. 

Shortly after 9:30 a.m. Luedke, in plain clothes, arrived 
in an unmarked car at the scene, together with the narcotics detection 
dog. In the K-Mart parking lot across the street from the Suburban 


Motel, Detective Hurrle advised Luedke they were conducting 


-~ 4- 


125 


surveillance of room 4 of the Suburban Motel which they believed was 
occupied by a possible drug courier, Ismeal Ornelas, and another 
individual, whose identity was unknown.’ He was further advised check- 
out time for room 4 was 11:00 a.m. and, if time permitted, the 
exterior of the Oldsmobile should be "sniffea" by the drug detection 
dog. 

Not long after Luedke arrived, Pautz departed the scene; 
Hurrle and Luedke repositioned themselves on the same side of the 


street as the Suburban Motel, because heavy traffic had obscured their 


73 


view from the parking lot, and continued to conduct surveillance of 
room 4 from their separate cars which were parked approximately 250 
yards away. After approximately forty-five (45) minutes, Hurrle 
observed an individual, later identified as Saul, open the hood of the 
Oldsmobile, tinker briefly under the hood, and start the ignition. 
He then returned to the room to pick up luggage and loaded it into the 
trunk. The other individual, later identified as Ismeal, exited room 
4 and assumed a position in the front passenger seat of the Oldsmobile 
while Saul went briefly into the motel office. Shortly thereafter, 
Saul returned to the vehicle and positioned himself in the driver's 
seat. 

At this point, the officers drove their separate unmarked 
vehicles to parking spaces on either sides of the Oldsmobile. 
However, the position of their cars did not box in the Oldsmobile and 
prevent it from leaving the scene. Both officers were dressed in 
piain clothes. Hurrle, who had no visible gun, proceeded to the 


Griver's side of the vehicle and Luedke, who had a gun visible but not 


- 5 - 


126 


drawn, proceeded to the passenger side. Hurrle identified himself as 
a law enforcement officer, asked the occupants of the vehicle whether 
he could speak to them, and inquired whether they were in possession 
of any illegal drugs or contraband. Both occupants responded, almost 
Simultaneously, they had nothing illegal or anything like that. In 
response to a request for identification, both Saul and Ismeal 
produced identifying documents. Luedke reviewed the California 
driver's license produced by Ismeal, listing Ismeal's residence as 
Martinez, California. Ismeal résponded in the affirmative to Luedke's 
inquiry whether he had just arrived from California. Luedke did not 
realize there was a discrepancy between the NADDIS report listing 
Ismeal Ornelas as being from Tucsor, Arizona and the fact the Ismeal 
before him was apparently from California. The identification 
documents produced by Saul and Istieal were retained by the law 
enforcement officers. At Hurrle's request Saul, the driver, consented 
to have the officers look inside the vehicle. In fact, Saul opened 
jthe trunk of the Oldsmobile with a key and held the trunk lid up to 
allow Hurrle to search it and the luggage inside. While the trunk was 
being searched, Saul was very calm and Ismeal was also calm, but 
shaking. 


When Hurrle announced he had completed the search of the 


trunk, with negative results, Luedke proceeded to the passenger area 


of the vehicle and checked to see whether the back seat was loose. 


Upon finding it was not, he examined the right rear quarter panel near 
the handle. He found this panel to be loose. Based upon his 


training, Luedke suspected the panel had been removed and contraband 


-6- 


127 


was hidden inside. Luedke testified he then observed the vent area 
of the door, noticing the presence of rust in the groove of the 
Phillips screw used to attach the vent cover, which led him to believe 
the vent cover had recently been removed. Luedke then released the 
screw, dismantled the vent area of the door, and exposed a cavity 
approximately five (5) inches high and four (4) inches wide which 
contained a paper bag in which he felt a hard block. After 
unsuccessfully attempting to remove the bag through the vent opening, 
Luedke removed the interior panel of the right rear door, retrieved 
the paper bag, and told Hurrle he had "found something." Luedke tore 
open the bag, revealing a block of cocaine wrapped in aluminum foil 
and tape. 

At that point, the defendants were handcuffed, placed under 
arrest, and placed in separate cars. Sometime after the cocaine was 
} found, Luedke had his dog sniff the Oldsmobile, but no other cocaine 
was detected. At the scene, Hurrle advised Ismeal of his Miranda 
rights after he was placed in Hurrle's car, although he was not 
questioned until approximately two (2) hours later at the MPD. 

Upon arrival at the MPD, Ismeal was taken to an 
interrogation room approximately eight (8) by ten (10) feet in size, 


where he remained in leg irons for approximately an hour. At 1:08 


Pp-m., Pautz again advised Ismeal of his Miranda rights and Pautz and 
Hurrle began to interview Ismeal. Shortly after the commencement of 


the interview, which was taped, Hurrle stated to Ismeal: 


I want to tell you if you cooperate with us we 
can make you one promise and one promise only 

- «+ «+ We will speak on your behalf to the 
Assistant District Attorney or the U. s. Attorney 


-J- 


128 


AO 72A 
(Rev 6782) (Rev 8/82) 


or to the Court if necessary and advise them that 
you cooperated with us, o'k. We cannot at this 
point tell you that you are not going to jail. 
We can't tell that you're going to get a lesser 
sentence because you cooperated with us. All we 
can tell you is one thing. We will speak on your 
behalf. We will tell them that you cooperated 
with us. That could mean a whole lot and more 
than likely will mean a lot to those people. 


Sometime later in the interview, Hurrle told Ismeal "We'll tell the 
DA or the United States Attorney that you told us something and we 
found out later that it was a flat out lie and then you don't get in 
any deals more than likely." During the course of the interview, 
Ismeal stated he understood his Miranda rights, never asked for an 
attorney, he did not appear to be under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs, he was cooperative and experienced no difficulty communicating 
with the officers in English. The interview ended at 1:45 p.m. 

At approximately 1:30 p.m. MCDS Gil Pagan, a 4-1/2 year 
veteran assigned to the Drug Enforcement Unit since September 1991 
whose native language is Spanish and has been interpreting in-an 
unofficial capacity for thirty-two years and in an official capacity 
since August 8, 1988, albeit without any formal training in 
interpretation, advised Saul of his Miranda rights using a standard 
English advice of rights card which he translated into Spanish. After 
Pagan interpreted each right from English into Spanish, Saul stated 
he would be willing to cooperate. 


About 2:00 p.m. Hurrle and Pautz entered the fourteen (14) 


| 


by ten (10) conference room where Saul and Pagan had been waiting and 


the interview of Saul commenced. Pagan acted as interpreter 


throughout most of the interview; however, there were times during the 


129 


AO 72A 
(Rev 6/82) 


course of the interview where Saul understood questions posed to him 
by Hurrle and responded in English without the assistance of Pagan. 
Saul was advised that the only thing law enforcement officers would 
do for him, if he decided to cooperate, was to inform the D.A. or the 
Court of his cooperation, 
anything. 


fairly calm, although he seemed concerned about his situation. 


but that they did not guarantee him 
During the course of the interview, Saul was coherent and 
During 
the course of the interview, the deputies engaged in banter among 
themselves which was not translated into English by Pagan. Pautz 
asked, "Do they have courts in Mexico or do they have standard 


procedures." Hurrle responded "Due process? A wall?" In return, 


Pagan added, "Seven muskets in front of you?" The interview of Saul 
during which he made no incriminating statements lasted approximately 
thirty (30) minutes. 

At approximately 2:45 p.m. Luedke reinterviewed Ismeal 
because he wanted to know how the cocaine got into the right rear 
quarter panel of the Oldsmobile - information which neither Gefendant 
had disclosed during their interviews. At the commencement of the 
interview, which was conducted in a five (5) by seven (7) foot room 
containing a desk, two (2) chairs, and an ashtray, Luedke advised 
Ismeal of his Miranda rights by reading verbatim from an advice of 
No threats or 


rights card. Pautz was present during the interview. 


promises were made to Ismeal and he was allowed to smoke. His 


demeanor was very solemn. Throughout the interview, he stated he 
understood his rights and proceeded to make a statement that Saul had 


placed the cocaine in the cavity of the right rear quarter panel door. 


130 


AO 724 


? 
8 


EE EE ea RE i SR A ee ee a a ee ee 


At the hearing MCDS Sergeant Roger R. Wiggins, a twenty (20) 


year veteran who has been second-shift supervisor of the 


Communications Bureau for four (4) years, testified his bureau 
routinely runs Department of Motor Vehicle computer checks using state 
license plate numbers to obtain the owner's name, residence, and the 
make of car to which the license is listed. He stated additional 
information can be obtained by making an administrative request. on 
January 19, 1993 Wiggins made a license check and an administrative 
inguiry on the Oldsmobile. The initial request revealed the vehicle 
belonged to "Ornelas Miguel Ledesma" of San Jose, California. The 
administrative request showed the owner of the vehicle to be Miguel 
Ornelas, also known as "Ledesma Miguel Ornelas"; an updated San Jose, 
California street address; the owner's sex; date of birth; height; 
weight; hair color; and eye color. | 

Officer Pagan reviewed the administrative request and stated 
the alternative name listed for Miguel Ornelas was for a person named 
"Miguel Ornelas-Ledesma." He further testified the majority of 


Hispanics use their father's name first and then their mother's name. 


Analysis 
Although the government initially disputed the defendants’ 


expectation of privacy in the Oldsmobile, during the course of the 
evidentiary hearing, it conceded both defendants had the requisite 
expectation of privacy to allow them to assert that their Fourth 
Amendment rights had been violated by the search of the vehicle. 


Consequently, the threshold issue in this case is whether the 


131 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


AO 724 


defendants were subjected to a seizure by law enforcement officers. 
The law is well established that an encounter between a law 
enforcement officer and a citizen implicates the Fourth Amendment only 


United States v. Mendenhall, 446 


U.S. 544, 555 (1980); Terry vy. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 19 (1968). Ifa 


seizure does not occur; and therefore, the encounter is consensual in 


if the officer seizes the citizen. 


nature (limited to questioning about an individual's identity and 
requesting identification), then police do not need justification for 


this contact. INS v. Delaado, 466 U.S. 210, 216-17 (1984); United 
States v. Dyer, 784 F.2d 812, 815-16 (7th Cir. 1976); United States 
¥v. Borys, 766 F.2d 304, 310-11 (7th Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 
1082 (1986). The test for determining whether a police-citizen 


contact rises to the level of a Fourth Amendment seizure is an 


objective one. United States v. Espinosa-Alvarez, 839 F.2d 1201, 1205 
(7th Cir. 1988); United States v. Pavelski, 789 F.2d 485 (7th Cir.), 


cert. denied, __—iU.Ss. 107 S.Ct. 322 (1986). This formulation 


is whether, based on the totality of circumstances, a reasonable 


person would believe his freedom of movement is restrained or believes 
he is at liberty to disregard a police officer's request for 


information. If the latter, then a seizure has not occurred. United 


States v. Espinosa-Alvarez, 839 F.2d at 1205. 


In order to assess the reasonableness of the seizure, this 


Court must weigh the circumstances on the Fourth Amendment “scale” for 


See United States v. Chaidez, 919 F.2d 


"(A) person has been 'seized' within the 


police/citizen encounters. 
1193, 1197 (7th Cir. 1990). 


meaning of the Fourth Amendment... . only if, in view of all of the 


-i1- 


132 


_—-— ee «oe 


: 


circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have 


Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 


U.S. 567, 573 (1988) (citations omitted). 


believed that he was not free to leave." 
Recently the Court of 
Appeals for this Circuit summarized the three (3) categories for 
police/citizen encounters in relation to the Fourth Amendment as 
follows: 


The first category is an arrest, for which the 
Fourth Amendment requires that police have 
probable cause to believe a person has committed 
or is committing a crime. Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 
89, 85 S.Ct. 223, 13 L.Ed.2d 142 (1964). The 
second category is an investigatory stop, which 
is limited to a brief, non-intrusive detention. 
This is also a Fourth Amendment "seizure", but 
the officer need only have specific and 
articulable facts sufficient to give rise to a 
reasonable suspicion that a person has committed 
or is committing a crime. 

ad , 422 U.S. 873, 881-82, 95 S.Ct. 
2574, 2580-81, 45 L.Ed.2d 607 (1975); 
Qhio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 
(1968). The third category involves no restraint 
on the citizen's liberty, and is characterized by 
an officer seeking the citizen's voluntary 
cooperation through non-coercive questioning. 
This is not a seizure within the meaning of the 
Fourth Amendment. . 
446 U.S. 544, 553-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870, 1876-77, 64 
L.Ed.2d 497 (1980); Terry, 392 U.S. at 19, n.16, 
88 S.Ct. at 1879, n.16. 


United States v. Johnson, 910 F.2d 1506, 1508 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. 
denied, U.S. , 211 S.Ct. 764 (1991). See also, United States 
Vv. Adebayo, No. 91-2138, slip Op. at & (7th Cir. Feb. 5, 1993). 


"So long as a reasonable person would feel free to disregard 


the police and go about his business, the encounter is consensual and 


United States v. Williams, 945 


"A person has been 'seized' within the 


no reasonable suspicion is required." 
F.2d 192, 195 (7th Cir. 1991). 
meaning of the Fourth Amendment only if, in view of all the 


133 


circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have 


United States v. Withers, 


972 F.2d 837, 841 (7th Cir. 1992) (citations omitted). 


believed that he was not free to leave." 


The distinction between a consensual encounter and a stop 
is one of degree. Relevant factors include whether the encounter 
occurred in a public or private place, whether the suspect consented 
or refused to talk to the police, whether the police informed the 
Suspect that he was not under arrest and was free to leave, whether 
the police removed the Suspect to another area, whether the suspect 
felt capable of refusing to consent to the search, and whether the 
See United 
Other factors in this 


suspect eventually departs the area without hinderance. 


States v. Withers, 


determination include: 


972 F.2d at 842. 

"The threatening presence of several officers, 
the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the 
person of the citizen, or the use of language or the tone of voice 


indicating that compliance with the officer's request might be 


compelled.” United States v. Withers, 972 F.2d at 842 (quoting United 
States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.s. 544, 554-55 (1980}). Additionally, the 


“lengthy” retention of documents, such as identification and airline 
tickets, is a factor in determining whether a stop has occurred. See 
United States v. Withers, 972 F.2d at 842. 

Here, the encounter between the law enforcement officers and 
the occupants of the 1981 Oldsmobile was initially a Terry stop. 
Within moments of the encounter, Hurrle was in possession of their 
identification documents, questioning them as' to whether they had 
Grugs in the car, and requesting permission to search the vehicle. 


- 13 - 


134 


The defendants were never told they were not under arrest or that they 
were free to leave. At the time they approached the defendants, the 
law enforcement officers had knowledge of “specific and articulable 
facts which, when taken together with the rational inferences from 
those facts", could reasonably cause them to conclude, in light of 
their experiences, that criminal activity was afoot. Terry v. Ohio, 
392 U.S. 1, 21 & 30 (1968). Pautz specifically testified it had been 
his experience that vehicles similar to the Oldsmobile are used to 
transport narcotics. In addition, Pautz learned the registered owner 
of the vehicle was from a source state, the owner's name came back on 
NADDIS as being a drug trafficker, and the name of Ismeal Ornelas, Jr. 
came back on NADDIS as also being a drug trafficker. An additional 
factor contributing to the reasonable suspicion of drug trafficking 
was the defendants' 4:00 a.m. check-in to the motel. Consequently, 
this Court concludes the defendants were subjected to an investigatory 


detention, based on reasonable suspicion, and the seven (7) to ten 


(10) minute detention until the cocaine was discovered was reasonable. 


See Piska v. City of Stevens Point, Wis., 823 F.2d 1168, 1176 (7th 
Cir. 1987) (ten (10) minute stop reasonable); United States v. Davies, 
768 F.2d 893, 902 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1008 (1985) 


(forty-five (45) minute stop reasonable); United States v. Kapperman, 


764 F.2d 786, 792 (1ith Cir. 1985) (ten {10} minute stop reasonable). 

The next question to be addressed is whether the Fourth 
Amendment was violated by the law enforcement officers' search of the 
Oidsmobile. The Fourth Amendment permits law enforcement officers to 


conduct a warrantless search, without probable cause, if an authorized 


- 14 = 


136 ae 


jindividual voluntarily consents to the search. Florida vy. Jimeno, __ 


lu.s. , 111 S.Ct. 1801, 1803 (1991); Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 


U.S. 218, 219 (1973). The burden is upon the government to 
demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence under the totality of 
the circumstances, that consent is freely and voluntarily given. 


Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 222-27. 


The record before the Court clearly establishes consent to 


}search the Oldsmobile. Saul indicated the law enforcement officers 
|could search the vehicle and neither defendant placed any restrictions 
}on the areas the officers could search or, in the course of the 


However, under United States v. Garcia, 


897 F.2d 1413, 1419-20 (7th Cir. 1990), police may not dismantie parts 


»search, asked them to stop. 


jof a@ car body to search for hidden compartments when they have merely 


|} obtained permission to “look in the car" for illegal drugs. Unless . 


| ¥. Garcia, 897 F.2d at 1420. Here, Luedke's clear testimony was that 


}and drugs were concealed within the door panel. But, the screw itself 


belies this testimony. The record discloses no evidence from which 


| Luedke could conclude that a hidden panel contained contraband. 
Consequently, the Court finds there was not probable cause to 
dismantle the panel. 


| 


Even though the search was beyond the scope of the consent 
and was not justified by independent probable cause, the cocaine found 
will not be suppressed as evidence under the inevitable discovery 
exception to the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule of Nix v. 
Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 433 (1984), which holds if the prosecution can 
establish by a preponderance of evidence that the evidence ultimately 
or inevitably would have been discovered by lawful means, even if no 
violation of any constitutional provision had taken place, then the 
evidence should be received. The stated rationale for the doctrine 
is that the interest of society in deterring unlawful police conduct 
and the public interest in having juries receive all probative 
evidence of a crime are properly balanced by putting the police in the 
same, not a worse position, than they would have been if no police 
error or misconduct had occurred in those -.-cumstances where evidence 
would have been discovered independent of a constitutional. violation. 


Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. at 444. 


under this doctrine, the prosecution is not required to prove the 


The court further stated that, 


absence of bad faith as such a requirement would result in withholding 
from juries relevant and undoubted truth that would have been 
available to police absent any unlawful police activity. Nix _v. 
Williams, 467 U.S. at 445. 

This Court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
regardless of the government's good or bad faith, the cocaine would 
have inevitably been discovered any way. This Court bases its 
conclusion upon the inevitability of a canine sniff of the Oldsmobile 


which does not compromise any legitimate interest in privacy and, 


- 16 - 


ee 


See United States vy. 
Vasquez, 909 F.2d 235, 238 (7th Cir. 1990) (citing cases). Luedke's 


therefore, is not a Fourth Amendment search. 


tiained drug detection dog was waiting at the scene in his vehicle. 
Clearly, the defendants would not be allowed to depart from the 


Suburban Motel without their vehicle being "sniffed" if cocaine was 


not otherwise discovered. See United States v. Buchanan, 910 F.2d 
1571 (7th Cir. 1990). | 
The final issue to be addressed is the admissibility of the 
statements obtained from Saul and Ismeal. The government has 
indicated it does not intend to introduce into evidence any statements 
made by Saul as a part of its case in chief. Thus, the sole issue as 
to Saul is the voluntariness of his statements under Schneckloth v. 
Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 227 (1973), in the event the government 


intends to introduce his statement for impeachment purposes. 


In Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 226 (1973), the 


United States Supreme Court detailed the factors to be considered when 
evaluating whether a defendant's “will was overborne" in the giving 
of statements: 


{(Tjhe Court has assessed the totality of all the 
surrounding circumstances - both the 
characteristics of the accused and the details of 
the interrogation. Some of the factors taken 
into account include the youth of the accused, 
his lack of education, or his low intelligence, 
the lack of any advise to the accused of his 
constitutional rights, the length of detention, 
the repeated and prolonged nature of the 
questioning, and the use of physical punishment 
such as the deprivation of food or sleep. 


(Citations omitted.) Although Hurrle told Saul he would bring any 


cooperation on his part to the attention of prosecutors and/or the 


- 17 «- 


138 . 


‘j Q ~ 
AO 72A . = 4 *O72A 
(Few 6/82) 


lew 6/62) 


| involuntary confessions, they afford no protections to criminal 
Court, there is no prohibition on the buying of information with 


honest promises of consideration. See United States v. Rutledge, 900 
F.2d 1127, 1130 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, U.S. , 111 &.Ct. 203 


defendants who, of their own volition, decide to make statements and 
otherwise cooperate with authorities. 


In sum, this Court concludes no Fourth Amendment violation 
(1990). The police are allowed to play on a suspect's ignorance, his 
occurred when law enforcement officers stopped Saul and Ismeal. 
anxieties, his fears, and his uncertainties; they are just not allowed 

Furthermore, although the search of the Oldsmobile exceeded the scope 
to magnify those fears, uncertainties, and so forth to the point where 
of the consensual search, the cocaine would have been. inevitably 


rational decision becomes impossible. See United States v. Rutledge, 
900 F.2d at 1130 (7th Cir.); United States v. Harris, 914 F.2d 927, 


933 (7th Cir. 1990). There is no evidence the statement obtained from 


discovered and, therefore, is not subject to suppression. Finally, 
Ismeal's statements were not obtained in violation of his 


constitutional rights and Saul's statement was voluntary. 


Saul was the result of his will being overborne. Thus, there is no 
Accordingly, this Court will recommend the defendants’ motions to 


basis for suppression of the statements of Saul. 
suppress evidence and statements be denied. 
Nor is there any basis for suppression of the statements 


obtained from Ismeal. Ismeal was advised of his constitutional 


rights, pursuant to Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966) and made 


a knowing and intelligent waiver of those rights as required by Moran 


UL'S e) 
Saul moves the Court for issuance of an order, pursuant to 


Fed. R. Crim. P. 14, severing his trial from that of Ismeal relying 
v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412 (1986). The record does not disclose that 
upon Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123 (1968) which holds 
the statements which Ismeal seeks to suppress were obtained by 
admission of a codefendant's confession at a joint trial where the 


overbearing his will. See Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 


226 (1973). 
violates a defendant's Sixth Amendment right to confrontation. In the 
| In this case, Ismeal made a knowing and intelligent decision 


codefendant does not testify and, therefore, cannot be cross-examined, 


alternative, Saul seeks dismissal of the indictment. 
to cooperate with law enforcement authorities and to provide them with 
In response the government indicates it has concluded it is 
certain information. Although Ismeal was told that any cooperation 


not possible to redact Ismeal's confession to delete reference to Saul 


on his part would be brought to the attention of prosecutors and/or 


in a manner which does not still clearly implicate Saul. 
the Court, there is no evidence this representation overbore his free | 

Consequently, the government concedes severance of the defendants’ 
will. Since Miranda and its progeny are designed to protect criminal 


defendants from coercive police taccics which would produce 


-i8-<-. 


ie Inq |" FB9 “ 40 7 tT ae 


40 72A 
iFicv 6/82) 


trials is necessary. Accordingly, Saul's motion for severance will 
be granted. 
CONCLUSION 
NOW THEREFORE, IT I8 HEREBY RECOMMENDED that the United 


States District Judge enter an order DENYING defendant Saul Ornelas' 
motion to suppress and exclude physical evidence; 

IT I8 FURTHER RECOMMENDED that the United States District 
Judge enter an order DENYING defendant Saul Ornelas' motion to 
suppress statements; 

IT I8 ALSO RECOMMENDED that the United States District Judge 
enter an order DENYING defendant Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas' motion to 
suppress seizure of items from the 1981 Oldsmobile and the statements 
of the defendant; and, 


IT I8 ORDERED that defendant Saul Ornelas' motion for 
severance be and hereby is DENIED. 
Written objections to the foregoing recommendations and 


orders may be filed in duplicate with the Clerk of Court on or before 


= 
“oon 
——.— - oe ere ee 


OS Oe me eee 


° 
Evi BTAAL MHI baw Tyre WUcCese wunieEen 


AUTOMOBILE (13/10/89 11 2GQyv21; 

B/\ $16120188050023FO00009700 * 002496 
a _ 
ve IGSAMG7TASBRET8072 | locos |¥ 


YEAR MODEL SHOWN IS BASED ON MANUFACTURER ANO OEALER REPRESENTATION 


~~ 


U L__tror 
a) 050538 


BOOY TYPE MODEL [CYLS.| OATE FIRST SOLO |CLASS| “YR yRmcon| Tree ven | « 
cP /G0/00/00 AH/|B87 ‘82/170 if 
DATE (SSUEO an oi " rOTAL FEES 
12/14/88 | ' | | $50 
up ORNELAS MIGUEL LEDESMA ] 8300 
G 
$ 830 N 1€TH ST | s 
« j 
a ' tae 
’ ih esimitiiendl 
SAN JOSE CA 95112 
°: ie. , Pe 
wit - -* EE 
( in VE y—_“< 3a x 
R UPON SALE LLER MUST SUBMIT NOTICE OF TRA\SFER (REG. | 38) —— 
— ial 
. ao 
£ | i 
bes . 
° a 
. ype 
£ 
7 


ATURE (S) RELEASES INTEREST wv venice 


PROPERTIES 
Kathieen Starr 
Owner/BrokeriApppce 
10601 S. DeAnza Bivd., Ste. 209 | 


—_—— —— 


Cupertino, California 95014 _—= ; 


2 — oe ———— SS 


"0. /0170 :@78 WrLEeqgieoes 
NLET 14945 YS GIsSIF7ES 15:64 Of (MILU RTO 146:0%:31° . 


RR .CALIOCCOO 

15:93 OI/IP/PS DI2QEA 

£5:03 01719793 60385 WILH4i end 
*#0049353531 

~xT 

DATE: 01719793 TIME: 14:63 

REG VALIN FROM: 11710/92 TO 11710/93 


TAESIUDENT ALIEN 


LIC#:2YOYS35 YRMP:S1 MAKE: OLDS BTM :CP VIN :1G34N4745RR4A7907> ' et 
R/O :ORNELAS MIGUEL LEDESMA. B20 BW 14TH ST CITY: SAW JOSE ©.0.: 43 — ’ 
ZIFESPSII2 o9 19 63 
ROIN: 13/04/92 OOTD: 42714788 Locn:9 . : 

—— A090094582 
~ + Toll ah! > 7345 Cover “en ewes : 
O1/13/92 PREY LIC 2697212 ‘cae oe af 99. 


pu Quite} 


rep Case te. 92°C 4-2 Y 
a Lah. Ne. 
Date ecg 22/73 . 
Deputy Clee AO Fane 
Tsm<al Orne 


- | Sea | 144 


EE ———— 
i} _ 
, ) : ry 
| 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT oa Juagnent--Page_2_ of 3 
IMPRISONMENT 
__ Eastern ___ District of __Wisconsin —__ | qhe defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons 
se imprisoned for a term of _60 months . 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE 
(For Offenses Committed On or After November 1, 1987) 


vs. 
Case Number: 92-CR-243 
ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA aati 


PRED _Brian W. Gleason 
wsci Defendant’s Attorney 


| 6% 
MAY 2 (| Assistant U.S. Attorney | 
_™ 
DEFENDANT: = | The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons: 
pleaded eo to count _One | that the defendant serve his sentence at 4 facility near San Jose, California | 
wes found guilty on count(s) after a ' 


plea of not guilty. 


Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such count(s), which involve the following 
2nses: j 
Date Offense Count 
\e & Section Nature of Offense Concluded __ Number(s) The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal. 
‘ The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district. 
31.8.C. $§ 841(a)(1) possession with intent to December 11, 1992 1 i 
3.8.C. § 2 distribute cocaine a.m. 
{ } at p.m. on 
{ } as notified by the United States Marshal. 
| The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the 
Bureau of Prisons, 
{ } before 2 p.m. on 
The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 5 of this judgment. The { }) as notified by the United States Marshal. 
tence is imposed pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. { }) as notified by the probation office. 
The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s) 
and is discharged as to such count(s). \, RETURN 
Count is dismissed on the motion of the United States. 
It is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special assessment of $ 50.00 for count One, I have executed this jud nt as follows: 


which shall be due [ } immediately {x} as follows: prior to the expiration of this sentence. 


| IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall notify the United States Attorney for this 
strict within 30 days of any change of name, residence, or mailing address until all fines, 
stitution, costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 
fendant’s Soc. Sec. No. :_612-46-6929 6 $64-77-1676 
fendant’s Date of Birth: October 14, 1968 


fendant’s Mailing Address: <a judgment 
‘ . 


ene geen emt 
lame & Title of, Judicial Officer United States Marshal 
fendant’s Residence Address: 2 
By 
Date Deputy Marshal 


, with a certified copy of 


Defendant delivered on to 
dicial Officer 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


__Eastern _ District of __Wisconsin 


AMENDED 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE 
(For Offenses Committed On or After November 1, 1987) 


Case Number: 92-CR-243 


SAUL ORNELAS 


Robert G. LeBel) 
Defendant’s Attorney 


Assistant U.S. Attorney 


DEFENDANT: 


pleaded guilty to count _One 
was found guilty on count(s) 
plea of not guilty. 
Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such count(s), which involve the following 
nses: 


Count 


after a 


Date Offense 


2 & Section Nature of Offense Concluded _ Number(s) 
-S.C. §$§ 841(a)(1) possession with intent to December 11, 1992 i 
-§.C. § 2 distribute cocaine 


The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 6 of this judgment. The 
ence is imposed pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 
The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s) 
and is discharged as to such count(s). 
Count is dismissed on the motion of the United States. 
Tt is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special assessment of $ 50.00 for count One, 
which shall be due { } immediately [x] as follows: as directed by U.S. Probation to Clerk 
‘ourt. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall notify the United States Attorney for this 
Tict within 30 days of any change of name, residence, or mailing address until all fines, 
tution, costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 
mdant’s Soc. Sec. No.:_ 393-002-2916 


indant’s Date of Birth: June 28, 1968 


mdant’s Mailing Address: 


Name & Title of Judicial Officer 


App. III 


A ES 


= 


dant: 
Number: 


Saul Ornelas Judgment--Page_2. of 6 
92-CR-243 


The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons 
imprisoned for a term of _63 months . 


he court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons: 


that the defendant serve his sentence at Lompoc, California 


he defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal. 
he defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district. 


a.m. 

{ } at p-m. on 
{ } as notified by the United States Marshal. 
he defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the 
ureau of Prisons, 

{ }) before 2 p.m. on 

[ 

[ 


}) as notified by the United States Marshal. 
] as notified by the probation office. 


I have executed this judgment as follows: 


Defendant delivered on to 


, with a certified copy of 


judgment. 


United States Marshal 


Deputy Marshal 


~—— == = ee me 


 —————— f “) 


eu 


aant: Saul Ornelas 
Number: 92-CR~243 


Judgment--Page _6 of _6 


STATEMENT OF REASONS 
fhe court adopts the factual findings and guideline application in the 
sresentence report. 
OR 


fhe court adopts the factual findings and guideline application in the 
oresentence report except (see attachment, if necessary): 


eline Range Determined by the Court: 


otal Offense Level: 24 


riminal History Category: 1 


mprisonment Range: eh. G8 ance months 
iupervised Release Range: _4 to 5 years 


‘ine Range: $ _12,500.00_ to $ ~1.000,000,00_ 


[x] Fine is waived or is below the guideline range, because of the 
defendant’s inability to pay. 


testitution: $ 


{ } Full restitution is not ordered for the following reason(s): 


The sentence is within the guideline range, that range does not exceed 24 months, and the 
court finds no reason to depart from the sentence called for by the application of the 


guidelines. 
OR 


The sentence is within the guideline range, that range exceeds 24 months, and the sentence 
is imposed for the following reason(s): 


sentence departs from the guideline range 


{ upon motion of the government, as 4 result of defendant’s substantial assistance. 
{ } for the following reasons: 


- 


; 


United States Court of Appeals 


For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 
Submitted March 2, 1995 


Decided _ April 18, 1995 pet . SEED op, 


Before 
Hon. Richard A. Posner, Chief Judge 
Hon. Joel M. Flaum, Circuit Judge 
Hon. Daniel A. Manion, Circuit Judge 


UNTTED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 


} Appeal from the United States 
} District Court for the 
} Eastern District of Wisconsin. 
Nos. 94-3349, 94-3350 v. } No. 92 CR 243 
} 
} 
) 


SAUL ORNELAS, ISMAEL ORNELAS LEDESMA, 
Defendants-Appellants. 


Order 


This is a sequel to the decision of this panel in United States v Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 
F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 1994), and familiarity with that decision is assumed. Bricfly, we 
held that the district court had erred in denying the defendants’ motion to suppress the 
fruits of a search of their automobile without making a determination of the credibility 
of Office Luedke’s testimony that the panel behind which he found the drugs was 
loose. We remanded with directions to determine whether the panel was loose; if it 
was not, to grant the motion; and if it was, to consider whether the loose panel, in 
conjunction with other suspicious circumstances discussed in our opinion, established 
probable cause for the search. 


On remand, the district judge referred the issue of Luedke's credibility to the 
magi.crate judge before whom Luedke testified and who had recommended that the 
motio.» be granted. Without granting a new hearing, the magistrate —— reported 
that he believed Luedke had testified truthfully about the loose panel. The district 
judge then determined that when the loose panel was considered in conjunction with 
the other circumstances, the search was indeed supported by probable cause. 


The defendants appeal. Our review is deferential. The district judge's fincling of 


robable cause may be set aside only if clearly erroncous. We do not find clear error. 
~ district judge’s opinion, although brief, adequately reviews the circumstances on 


14% 


Nos. 94-3349, 94-3350 Page Two 


which the decision to search the car was based and explains why taken as a totality 
they gave the officers probable cause to conduct the search. The judgment of the 
district court must therefore be, and it ts, 

AFFIRMED. 


= +% 


rt 


148 


714 16 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SEKIES 


UNITED STATES of America, 
Plaintiff—Appellee, 


v. 


Ismael ORNELAS-LEDESMA and Saul 
Ornelas, Defendants—Appellants. 


Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405. 


United States Court of Appeals, 
Seventh Circuit. 


Argued Dec. 10, 1993 
Decided Feb. 10, 1994. 


Defendants were convicted in the United 
States District Court for the Eastern District 
of Wisconsin, Rudolph T. Randa, J., of illegal 
possession of a controlled substance with in- 
tent to distribute, and they appealed. The 
Court of Appeals, Posner, Chief Judge, held 
that: (1) police officers had reasonable suspi- 
cion of criminal activity necessary for investi- 
gatory stop of defendants’ vehicle, but (2) 
remand was required to determine whether 
police officer had probable cause to remove 
door panel of vehicle and search for drugs 


Vacated and remanded. 


l. Arrest ©°63.5(6) 


Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Informa- 
tion System (NADDIS) information indicat- 
ing that both registered owner of defendant's 
car and name on motel registry corresponded 
to names of suspected drug dealers, together 
with characteristics of defendants that 
matched drug courier profile, including their 
origin from drug source state and their use 
of type of automobile frequently used to con- 
ceal drugs, gave police reasonable suspicion 
of criminal activity necessary for investigato- 


ry stop. US.CA. ConstAmend. 4. 


2. Arrest $°63.4(11) 
Drugs and Narcotics 182.2 
Unverified, uncorroborated entry in 
Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Information 
System (NADDIS) cannot by itself furnish 


probable cause for arrest or search. 
US.C.A. Const.Amend. 4 


3. Arrest ©°63.5(4) 

Uncorroborated anonymou: ‘ip,’ even 
when it comes from law enforcement authori 
ties, does not by itself justify instigator 


stop. '!S.C.A. Const.Amend. 4 


4. Arrest C6354) 


Mistaken premise can furme') ground. 
for Terry stop, if officers do not know that ir 
is mistake and are reasonable in «ting upon 


it. U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 4 


5. Criminal Law @1158(2) 

Review of district court's dcturminatio: 
that investigatory stop is support! by rea- 
sonable suspicion was for clear error, rather 
than plenary. U.S.C.A. Const.Arwnd. 4. 


6. Criminal Law @ 1181.57) 

Remand was required to determin 
whether police officer, who had reasonably 
suspicion that defendants were drug dealer- 
based on Narcotic and Dangerous Drug In- 
formation System (NADDIS) inquiry had 
probable cause to remove door panel of vehi 
cle and search for drugs, where credibility of 
officer's testimony that he observed loose 
door panel had not heen -irtermined 
U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 4 


7. Criminal Law @1158(2) 
United States Magistrates ©>29 
Standard of judicial review fr determ 
nation of probable cause is clear error; thi 
is so whether determination is muiie by mag 
istrate judge or by district judge US.C.A 
Const.Amend. 4 


8. United States Magistrates ©>26 
Even if district judge can reject magn 

trate judge's determinations of credibili. 
without hearing witnesses’ testim. ny himse!t 
or herself, he or she cannot be permitted te 
ignore issue of credibility altog: 'her wher 
making probable cause deicrmination 
U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 4. 


9. Criminal Law ©1178 

Government waived defense «f inevitab': 
discovery in determining whether probablic 
cause supported search of door panel in de- 
fendants’ automobile by failing to defend or 


appeal magistrate judge's determ nation tha: 
drugs in car's door pane! would have bee 


U.S. v. ORNELAS-LEDESMA 715 


Cite an 16 F.3d 714 (7th Cie. 1904) 


inevitably discovered by narcotics detection 
dog even if police officer had not seen loose 
door panel. US.C.A. Const.Amend. 4 


Penelope C. Fleming (argued), Office of 
U.S. Atty., Milwaukee, WT. for plaintiff-ap- 
pellee US. 

Brian W. Gleason (argued), Milwaukee, 


WI, for defendant-appellant Ismael Ornelas— 
Ledesma. 


Robert G. LeBell (argued), Styler, Kostich, 
LeBell & Dobroski, Milwaukee, WI, for de- 
fendant-appellant Saul Ornelas. 


Before POSNER, Chief Judge, and 
FLAUM and MANION, Circuit Judges. 


POSNER, Chief Judge. 


Ismucl Ornelas-Ledesma and Saul Ornelas 
were convicted of illegal possession of a con- 
trolled substance with intent to distribute it 
und were sentenced to 60 and 63 months in 
prison, respectively. The appeal challenyes 
the denial of their motion to exclude from 
evidence the cucaine seized from “their” 198] 
Oldsmobile. We say “their” Oldsmobile, al- 
though it was registered to someone else, 
because the government does not question 
their right, akin t that of a tenant, builee, 
borrower. or other lawful vccupier or posses- 
sor, to object to the seizure. The cases are 
quicker ww draw the analogy in the case of 
the driver of a vehicle. United States » Gar- 
ca, SY F2d 1413. 1418-19 (7th Cir.1990); 
United Siates » Sotu, 98S F.2d 1548. 1553 
(10th Cir.1993); United States v. Miller, 821 
2d 06, S40 (1th Ci 1YS7), than in the 
tee OF w tnicsenger, Rakes vr. Ilinois, 439 
(IS. 12s. MS419, ge S.Ct. 421, 433, 5a 
L..Ed.20) 387 197s); United Sates v. Leciin- 
ge, 925 V2d 1035, 1087, 1M) n. 3 (7th Cir. 
MM; f weted States vp Roberson, 6 Vd 
WINS, 1001 ith Cir.1998), but the government 
thas fet ask os te make that distincuon here 


The defendants argue that the stop which 
led to their ¢ ‘msenting lo the search of the 
car Vili the Fourth Amendment. invali- 
dating the consent and hence the search: 
amd that indenendently of this the seizure of 
er drys which wan from the inaihe of the 
thor af the coy Vieluted the Fourth Amen- 


ment because, even if a superficial search of 
the car was proper as an incident of the stop. 
the officers needed and lacked probable 
cause to open the compartment and seize its 
contents. 


Police officers in Milwaukee keep a regular 
watch on motels, looking for drug runners 
Cruising through a motel parking lot one day 
in 1992, a detective named Pautz, a two-year 
veteran of the Milwaukee County Sheriff's 
Drug Enforcement Unit, spotted a 1981 two- 
door Oldsmobile with a California license 
plate. Pautz was interested. Two-door Gen- 
eral Motors cars of that vintage are believed 
by law enforcement authorities to be drug 
traffickers’ favorites (though not their only 
favorites, United States vy Sharpe, 470 US 
675, 682 n. 3, 105 S.Ct. 1568, 1573 n. 3, 84 
L.Ed.2d 605 (1985); United States v. Ocam- 
po, 890 F.2d 1363, 1366 (7th Cir.1989)) be- 
cause it is easy to conceal drugs in them 
And California, like other states on the east- 
ern, western, and southern borders of the 
United States, is a state from which drugs 
are shipped te other states, a “source” state. 
So Pautz called up his dispatcher on his car 
radio and asked him to find out whom the car 
was registered to. Now in fact it was regis- 
tered to “Ornelas, Miguel Ledesma.” of San 
Jose, California, who may or may not be 
related to one of the defendants. But we do 
not know what exactly the dispatcher tid 
Pautz or what exactly Pautz understood!) — 
whether it was “Migue! Ledesma Ornelas” or 
“Miguel Ornelas Ledesma.” Confusion on 
this score is understandable, though not jus- 
tifiable. Spanish naming conventions are 
confusing to non-Hispanic Americans. \W hen 
a Hispanic has two surnames, such as Orne- 
las Ledesma or Ledesma Ornelas, the first is 
his father’s last name and the second hi« 
mother’s maiden name. The first is primary. 
and the second Subordinate—exactly the r- 
verse of the middle and last names of po 
Hispanics. To a Hispanic, therefore, “Orne- 
las, Miguel Ledesma.” would denote Mic). 
Urnelas Ledesma rather than, as a non-Hi- 
panic would expect, Miguel Ledesma Orn: 
las. But if the motor vehicle authorities. the 
dispatcher, or Pautz were unfamiliar wit} 
Spanish naming conventions (and Pautz text 
fied! that he was unfamiliar with them). “I+ 


716 16 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


desma” and “Ornelas” could easily get re- 
versed. 


Pautz, believing that he had the name of 
the car’s registered owner, entered the motel 
and checked the registry, which showed that 
an Ismael (not Miguel) Ornelas had regis- 
tered at 4:00 am. and had been accompanied 
by another man. Pautz then called his part- 
ner, Detective Hurrle, to join him. When 
Hurrle arrived, the two officers called the 
Milwaukee office of the Drug Enforcement 
Administration and asked it to run a NAD- 
DIS check on Miguel Ledesma Ornelas from 
San Jose and on Ismael Ornelas. NADDIS 
(Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Information 
System) is a computerized compilation of the 
federal Drug Enforcement Administration's 
information on known and suspected drug 
traffickers. NADDIS reported two “hits.” 
One was on Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, also 
known as Miguel Lemus—Ledesma, identified 
by NADDIS as a heroin dealer in El] Centro, 
California, which is hundreds of miles from 
San Jose, the residence of the registered 
owner of the car. The other “hit” was on 
Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, Arizona, re- 
ported by the computer to be a 1000-kilo- 
gram-per-month cocaine dealer. although no 
“wants” or. warrants were outstanding 
against him. The officers did not atterrpt to 
obtain descriptions of the two suspected deal- 
ers, neither of whom in fact is one of or, as 
far as we know, related to the defendants. 


Because the car was an older GM two- 
door, because its occupants had checked in at 
the motel at 4:00 am. without having made 
reservations in advance, because there were 
two persons rather than just one and at least 
one of them was Hispanic, and because they 
apparently had come from a “source state” — 
and of course because of the “hits” on similar 
or identical names—the officers decided tw 
stop and question the men when they left the 
motel. At this point a third officer arrived, 
Luedke, bringing with him a drug-sniffing 
log; and Pautz left. After a time. two men 
emerged from the motel and entered the 
Oldsmobile. The officers parked their cars 
on either side of it. Hurrle tapped the win- 
dow on the driver’s side, identified himself as 
a police officer, and asked both men for 
wlentification. Saul Ornelas, who wus in the 


151 


driver's seat, produced a driver's license ir 
that name; Iamael Ornelas-Ledesma, who 
was in the front passenger's seat, produced a 
driver's license in the name of Istianel Orne 
las, residing in Martinez, California Hurt’ 
asked whether there were any drugs in t! 
car. The occupants said “no.” Hurrle aske«! 
them for permission to search the car, and 
they gave their permission. The two men 
were not placed under arrest but the govern- 
ment concedes that a reasonable person in 
their position would not have felt free to 
leave. So the encounter was a so-calle:! 
“Terry stop” (after Terry v. Ohiv, 392 US. 1. 
88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968)), Michi 
gan v. Chesternut, 486 U.S. 567, 573, 108 
S.Ct. 1975, 1979, 100 L.Ed2d [iS (1988). 
INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 216, 104 S.Ct 
1758, 1762, 80 L.Ed.2d 247 (1984); United 
States v. Adebayo, 985 F.2d 1333, 1338-30 
(7th Cir.1993), a semi-arrest that is lawful 
under the Fourth Amendment if but only i! 
the officers had a “reusonable suspicion sup 
ported by articulable facts” that the person-~ 
stopped were engaged in crimin.! activity 
United States v. Sokolow, 1 TS 1. 7, 10% 
S.Ct. 1581, 1585, 104 L.Ed2d 1 + /9s9). 


Officer Luedke inspected the int. rior with 
out canine assistance and notice: a loos 
panel on the passenger's deor. (ne of the 
serews hy which the panel wax f.-<tened t 
the door was—Luedke testified—rusty. T: 
him this meant that it had been removed! 
recently. He didn't explain why, !«.1 mayb: 
the idea is that the removal of -he screw 
would have scraped off its chrom coating. 
which protected it from rusting. ~.:specting 
that drugs were concealed behind he pane! 
Luedke pried it open. His hunch was cor 
rect; there was a package conta ving tw 
kilograms of cocaine wrapped in «‘uminum 
foil and paper Ornelas and Orne! -Ledes 
ma were then arrested. 


{1] Clearly, were it not for the *; ADDIS 
hits, the officers would not have ha grounds 
for reasonable suspicion that the «' fondant. 
were drug traffickers. Not only is every 
circumstance on which the officers relied oth- 
er than the hits innocent taken |v itself— 
many Americans (approximately on. in eight) 
are Californians. many (Californian: are His- 
panic, many Ameneans dre twocdour Gen 


US. v. ORNELAS-LEDESMA 717 


Cite as 16 F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 1994) 


eral Motors curs, many people check into 
motels very late at night (or early in the 
morning), many travel in pairs rather than 
alone. and many do not make advance reser- 
\ations—but the confluence of these circum- 


course without a reservation. And people 
who drive long distances late at night prefer 


oe consequence would be that a very 
a'ge proportion of all Hispanic Americans 
would be vulnerable to being stopped on 
suspicion of drug trafficking. Hispanics 
would be second-class citizens in the eyes of 
the police. Although a brief investigatory 
stor is less intrusive than an arrest, it is 
sufficiently redolent of police-state tactics for 
courts to insist in the name of the Fourth 
Ametuiment that its use be cireumscribed. 
So we must ask what the NADDIS hits 
a} ciate tenes aes ee nem 
only a little better than a dragnet for Hi 
ics. It would be nice to know something 
about NADDIS, but the government succexs- 
a > nse the defendants’ efforts to ob- 
| Ghcovery aimed at determining the 
character and reliability of the information in 
the NADDIS data base, and as 2 result the 


claimed any knowledge about the system ex. 
cept how to sevexs it. We do net know how 


152 


sidered judicial assessment of its reliability, 
although we have found Occasiona] judicial 
expressions of concern about that reliability. 
United ae a v. $7,850 United States Cur. 
rency, 1355, 1358 (8th Cir.194:): 
United States v. $215,300 United States Cur- 
rency, 882 F.2d 417, 419 and n. 2 (9th Cir. 
1989) (per curiam); United States v. Saper- 
stein, 723 F2d 1221, 1232 (6th Cir.1983). 


Maybe NADDIS is no better than a vast 
compendium of rumors, errors, and libels: 
garbage in, garbage out. That seems unlike- 
ly. It would not be heavily used by drug 
enforcement authorities if it were merely a 
random sample of the American population. 
Which is not to say, however, that it is high! y 


“VIP Names in Drug Agency's Com 

Files,” July 3, 1984; Vanessa Jo ema 
Behemoth DEA Database Tracks Drug 
Smugglers,” Government Computer New» 
July 8, 1991, p. 85. According to the UP! 
Release, as of 1984 NADDIS contained 1.5 


718 16 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


Olds) died years ago or is some practical may be accurate or at least approaimately so. 
joker’s or desperate informant’s fictional cre- And the fact that both the registered owner 
ation or is an honest man falsely accused by of the car and the name on the motel regis- 
an enemy. Because the reliability of infor- try corresponded more or less to names of 
mation stored in NADDIS is unknown, that suspected drug dealers in the NADDIS data- 
information must, on the record before us, be base was impressive. One “hit” might wel 
reckoned no more reliable than that of an be coincidence; it was much less likely that 
informant not known to be reliable. There- two—one corresponding to the name in the 
fore, since an uncorroborated tip from such hotel registry, presumably that of either the 
an informant cannot by itself furnish proba- driver or the passenger; the other to the 
ble cause for an arrest or search, /ilinois v. name of the registered owner, who might or 
Gates, 462 US. 213, 227, 103 S.Ct. 2317, might not be one of the two men in the 
2326, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983), an unverified, mote|—were, though this depends in part on 
uncorroborated entry in NADDIS cannot do jow common the names “Ornelas” and “I.¢- 
so either. United States v. $7,850 United desma” are. Paradoxically, the very unrelia- 
States Currency, supra, 7 F.3d at 1358; bility of NADDIS (if it is unreliable) mijcht 
United States v. $215,300 United States Cur- strengthen the inference that the two men in 
rency, supra, 882 F.2d at 419 and n. 2; the Olds were involved in the drug trade: 
United States v. Saperstein, supra, 723 F.2d inverting last and middle names is just the 
at 1232. The issue here, it is true, is not Kind of mistake that one would expect in a 
probable cause, but reasonable suspicion, be- carelessly maintained database. A mistaker 
cause we are dealing with a stop rather than premise can furnish grounds tur a Terri 
that an uncorroborated anonymous tip, even itaben and are ble in acting wpe: 
when it comes from law enforcement authori- i+ jyingix v. Rodriguez, 497 |S. 177, I~t- 
ties, des not by itself justify a stop. Umited 96 119 scx 2793, 2799-2800, 111 L.Ed. 
States v. Hensley, 469 U.S. 221, 282, 105 148 (1999); United States v. De Icon-Rey? 
S.Ct. 675, 682, 83 L.Ed2d 604 (1965). The ga po 396, 399 (Sth Cir.1%!1) (en bone 
statement in United States v. Troka, 987 “wr : oe 
. per curiam); United States v. Walraren, 
F.2d 472, 474 (7th Cir.1998), that “the police 54 979 74-75 (10th Cir.1989) 
department was a reliable source,” must be . 
understood in context (the police department = The tips were mutually corroborating: an! 
was a reliable source in the circumstances of the other circumstances on which the offieer- 
that case ), rather than as a quixotic effort to relied (the make and type of the car, tl 
overrule the Supreme Court. state it came from, etc), insufficient as thes 
{4] That cannot be the end of our analy- were by themselves to create a suspicion 
sis, however. NADDIS furnished two tips, Teasonable enough, substantial enough. t 
not one. “Ismael Ornelas,” the name on the justify the infringement of ys onal liber, 
motel registry, was very similar to “Ismael that is brought about by an investigative 
Ornelas, Jr..” the name in NADDIS. And stop, may, when taken together with the 
while the names Miguel Ornelas Ledesma NADDIS “tips,” have tipped the balanee in 
and Miguel Ledesma Ornelas are as different favor of 2 finding of reasons'le suspicion 
from each other as Francis Scott Key and United States v. Esicke, 940 I 2d 29, 34 (241 
Francis Key Scott, the names could easily Cir.1991), and United States +. Morin, > 
have been reversed in entering them in the F.2d 765 (Sth Cir.19M2). factually sitesi 
computer, just as “Jr.” could easily have cases although stronger for the governn.e'. 
been left off a motel registry. So there was 80 suggest. And the Suyrenu ° ourt hew) 0 
some reason to believe that the registered Alubama v. White, 496 US -25, 110 s«\ 
owner of the Olds was the Miguel Ornelas 2412, 110 L.Ed.2d 301 (1990), ‘hat an anon, 
Ledesma, or Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, iden- mous tip can create reasonabie suspicion \f 
tified by NADDIS as a suspected drug deal- corroborated. The form th corroboratin 
er. Even if NADDIS is not terribly reliable, took in that case was verificat: n of a pred 
some or for that matter many entries in it tion made by the informer, |. st there i » 


153 


U.S. v. ORNELAS-LEDESMA 719 
Cite as 16 F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 1994) 


magic in a particular form of corroboration. record compiled in the district court. The 
The circumstances that first aroused Pautz’s government does not argue that a Terry stop 
suspicions were corroborative of the “anony- justifies so intrusive a search. The only 
mous tips” furnished by NADDIS in the lawful purpose of a search incident to a Terry 
sense that they made it likelier than other- stop is to protect the officers from the dan- 
wise that NADDIS was, in this instance any- ger that the persons they have stopped wil! 
way, accurate. Standing alone, the drug reach for a weapon, Minnesota v. Dickersun. 
courier profile that first aroused Pautz’s sus- — U.S.——, —_. 113 $.Ct 2130, 2136, 124 
Picions was very little. Standing alone, one L.Ed2d 334 (1993); Michigan v. Long, 463 


NADDIS “hit” could not, in the absence of js. 1032, 1049-51, 108 S.Ct. 3469, 3481-82, 
any evaluation of NADDIS's reliability, be 77 L.Ed2d 1201 (1983), and ordinarily and 
thought much either. The second “hit,” how- 


ever, added to the credibility of the first; and tar to satisfy themselves on that score. Nor 


to search that Ornelas and Ornelas—Ledesma 
er io dn gave the officers was consent to dismantle 
© lesser showing required for a Terry the car. United States v. Garcia, supra, 897 
Stop. F.2d at 1419-20; but ef. United States +. 
[5] Although the question is close, we Pena, 920 F.2d 1509, 1515 (10th Cir.1990). 
conchily that the district court did not com- The seizure was lawful, therefore, only if the 
mit clear error in holding that there was a search yielded information that gave Officer 
lawful stop. And clear error is the test; the Luedke probable cause to believe that con- 
Proposition that review of a district court's traband was secreted behind the loose panel. 
determination of reasonable suspicion (if it is If so, no search warrant was required, even 
a Terry stop) or probable cause (if it is an for a og yw wy yy the 
arrest. search, or seizure) is plenary, em- Car apart. es v. 46 US. 
braced in such cases as !'nited States y. 798, 102 S.Ct. 2157, 72 L.Ed.2d 572 (1482). 
. aramille, 991 F.2d 620, = (7th Cir.1989), In arguing that there was probable caus 
ne ionger tenable after ('nited States v. . 
: - an ee replies or the search that discovered the drugs se- 
Spears, “65 F 2d 262 (7th Cir.1992), where, creted i 
, Pome ‘ in the car door, the government place» 
overruling inconsistent precedents, this court , . 
held that the standard for judicial review of great weight on the loose panel and the — 
determinations of probable cause was clear saree, Ses the cavew wus tat aoe pes 
error. There is no basix for distinguishing in magistrate judge to whem the motion to 
this record between protuble cause and rea- supprens was referred for 8 recommended 
sonable suspicion. They are adjacent points ruling looked at the screw and found nw 
Pepande + ote: : indication of rust. The screw is in the appel- 
: late record and we have looked at it our- 
[6] ince the stop was lawful, we need selves. There is not the slightest trace of 
not decuic whether, had it been unlawful, the rust or of anything that looks like rust. It is a 
defendants" consent to search would never- Phillips serew and the head contains scrateh- 
theless hace been valid even though (a rele- es that suggest it might have been removed 
vant factor, though not a decisive one, and reinserted, but Luedke was adamant 
Schneel! te, Bustamante, 442 US. 21s, that it was signs of rust that caused him w 
ZA1-33, 21", 93 S.Ct. 2041, 2019-51, 2059, 36 believe that the panel had been removed 
L.Edcd <4 (1973) the officers failed to recently and then put back in place. Having 
advise the defendants of their right not to inspected the screw, the magistrate jude 
consent. (/nited States rv. Valdez, 981 F 2d naturally «isbelieved Luedke’s testumons 
1445, 145! (11th Cir.1901); United States v. that the screw had looked rusty. Without 
Valencia. 13 F.2d 378, 381 (7th Cir.1990). discussing the bearing of Luedke's testimony 
But we dy not think the denial uf the motion about the loose panel on the issue of probable 
to suppress the drugs seized from the door of — cause, the magistrate judge concluded that 
the Olds can be upheld on the basis of the — the seizure of the drugs had not been sup- 


154 


- —— me 


720 16 FEDERAL REPORTER, 34 SERIES 
‘ 


i fa be al stan- 
noting the of fact and of the application ¢ | 
-- ¥,4 he found dard to such findings apples. In th: second 


— government defends Luedke’s testimony question whether the district judge's 
= ~ power of de neve determination sshorines 
him to reject a magistrate judge's finding of 
credibility, without the district judg s hear- 
the witness himself, was left open in 
United States » Raddatz, 447 US. 667, 681 


ie, 900 F.2d 1064, 1073 (7th Cir.1990), 1241 (11th Cir.1982), that the answer is “no. 
United States». Gilliard, 947 P24 21,24 (ist See also Grassia v. Scully. 892 F.2d 16, 19 
Cir.1988); cf. United States v — S20 (2d Cir.1989); but ef. LoConte =. 
720 F.2d 248, 262 (2d Cir-1963). tn any air F.2d 745, 750 (ith Cir.1988). We 


not answer the question here. Rather than 


magistrate concluded that should not be believed, the distrit judge 
Linde nt have probable nue fo Ce ee Gn Go ena 

: the district judge concluded s me 
OX ee 
determination, Nth A ert armor yo pay > 
nation of probahte enune (a, an wo have noted F.2d 631, 637 (10th Cir.1992), treat a loose 
already, clear error; and this is so whether 7 a © 6 a ae, 
the determination is made by a magistrate ning—but not as sufficient weeny 
j or by a district judge. United States ute probable cause. (In Unit ae 
—. supra, United States v. Adebayo, Garcia supra, B97 F 2d at nang he on 
085 F.2d 1333, 1337 n. 2 (7th Cir.1943). A an guiage eas — 
qualification is necessary, however, for loose panel.) The facts oe 
case in which the magistrate judge, :. er why. The car was eleven years = 


court t court instance, 1345-48 (App.1992). Here as im most 
pod ee cw he ute bho oo ar ae dean Wa OR mix |) more: 


155 


US». ORNELASLEDESMA 721 
Cite as 16 F 3d 784 (Teh Cir, 1994) : 


tainty th NAD DIS “hi” of unproven relia 
aliis 

IS} We need not decirle, however, wheth- 
er the SADDIS hits (remember that there 
were two. and that this enhances their relia- 
bility). plus the fact that the defendants fit 
the drog courier profile, plus a loose door 
panel aki up to prol.cble cause—whether in 
other words the loose panel could turn rea- 
sonabk .uspicion into probable cause. For 
we de net know whether Luedke’s 
about the duor panel should be believed. 


The unly judicial officer who heard him testi- - 


fy was the magistrate judge, who failed to 
indicat’ whether he beheved the tesumony 
Since the magistrate judge disbelieved a 
closely rolated part of Luedke’s tesumony, 
and the cistrict judye did not overturn that 
credibi':. finding, it can hardly be assw med 
that the magistrate judge would surely have 
believes! Luedke's tesumony about the door 
panel, or that if he had disbelieved it would 
surely have been reversed by the district 
judge. Nov did the latter base his determi- 
nation vn a viewing of the car, there was no 
viewing. Even if, contrary to Proffitt, and to 
decisions involving the parallel case of admin- 
istrative ~eview of administrative law judges’ 
credibilit: determinations, eg. Universal 
Camera Corp. « NLRB, 340 US. 474, 495- 
7, 71 S.Ct 456, 468-469, 95 L.Ed 456 
(1951), NLAB ve Augusta Bakery Corp., 957 
Pld 1467, 1475-76 (7th Cir.1992); Ortiz- 
Salax « INS. we Pad 105, 1OR (7th Cir. 
1688), a district judge can reject a magistrate 
Judge's determinations of credibility without 
(hy not think that he can be permitted to 
ignore Uwe issue of credibility altogether 
We do net think that he can accept chal- 
lenged testumony given Lelore another juch- 
cial officer without giving a reason for resoly. 
ing the issue himself rather than referring 
the matter for initial determination by the 
viher officer. ; 


19} Thix eversivht would he academic if 
the mayri: trate judge's alternative ground for 
upholding the seizure—inevitable discovery 
by Luedke's dog—was so clearly correct that 
we could uphold it without the benefit of the 
district judge's views. ax in United States v 
Lewis, @1 Fd bee. 1887 (Sth Cir.1980). 


the car if Luedke’s search had disclosed ne 
suspicious circumstances.) We cannot affirm 
on a ground that has been waived, Crowe + 
Indiana High School Athletic Ass'n, 975 
F.2d 1315, 1319 (7th Cir.1992); Frederick » 
Marquette Net? Bank, 911 F2d 1, 2 (7th 
Cir.1990), and the government has waived 
the defense of inevitable discuvery by failiny 
to defend the magistrate judge's determina- 


The motion to suppress should not have 


been denied, though it is open to the govern- 
ment on remand to ask the distrnet judge 


156 


729 16 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


either to hear Luedke’s testimony on the 
loose pane! himself (or at least view the car's 
intenor) or refer the matter to the magis- 
trate judge for a determination of the credi- 
bility of that testimony. If Luedke's testimo- 
ny is dishelieved, the motion to suppress 
should be granted. If it is believed, the 
panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS tips 
as corroborated by the circumstances that 
first aroused Officer Pautz’s suspicions, ade- 
quately established probable cause to believe: 
that drugs were concealed behind the panel. 
The court may wish to consider the evidence 
of the loose panel (if that evidence is be- 
lieved) in conjunction with the Philips screw. 
For while it is plain that it is not rusty, it 
does look as if it had been scratched in just 


Walter SPEARMAN, Plaintiff—\ppe!\ ont, 


v. 


EXXON COAL USA, INC. 
De fendant- Appetler 


No. 92367. 


United States Court of Appeals. 
Seventh Circuit. 
Argued May 14, tr 
Decided Feb. 11, 1 


trict of Iinois, William L. Beatty. J, entered 


arise from workers’ compensation law, = a» 
to preclude removal of case to federal court. 


Affirmed. 


liana Diamond Rovner. Cirewit Ju lye, 
dissented and filed opinion. 


) 
United States Court of Appeals 
For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 
JUDGMENT- WITHOUT ORAL ARGUMENT 


Date: April 18, 1995 

BEFORE: Honorable RICHARD A. POSNER, Chief Judge 
Honorable JOEL M. FLAUM, Circuit Judge 
Honorable DANIEL A. MANION, Circuit Judge 


Nos. 94-3349 and 94-3350 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff - Appellee 
Vv. 


SAUL ORNELAS and ISMAEL ORNELAS LEDESMA, 
Defendants - Appellants 


Appeals from the United States District Court for the 
Eastern District of Wisconsin 
No. 92 CR 243, Rudolph T. Randa, Judge 


The ju nt of the District Court is AFFIRMED, in accordance 
with the decision of this court entered on this date. 


(1060-110393) 


OPPOSITION 
BRIEF 


i AAAGA® E 9 Supreme Court, U.S. 
ert anes I / FILED 
SEP 20 1995 
No. 95-5257 OFFICE OF THE CLeKK | 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA AND SAUL ORNELAS, PETITIONERS 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES IN OPPOSITION 


DREW S. DAYS, III 


Solicitor General 
JO ANN HARRIS 
Assistant Attorney General 
JOEL M. GERSHOWITZ 
Attorney 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
41202) 514-2217 
nv -_ 
ECE! ED 
SEP 29 1995— 


OrFiCE OF THE cueKK | 
"PREME COURT. U.S. 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 
1. Whether the court of appeals, accepting the facts the 
district court found as not clearly erroneous, was required to 
review de novo the district court’s determination that those 


facts demonstrated probable cause for a search. 


2. Whether the district court properly declined to require 


the government to produce information relating to the reliability 


of the Drug Enforcement Agency’s Narcotic and Dangerous Drug 


Information System (NADDIS). 


(I) 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-5257 
ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA AND SAUL ORNELAS, PETITIONERS 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES IN OPPOSITION 


OPINIONS BELOW 
The order of the court of appeals affirming petitioners’ 
convictions (Pet. App. 147-148) is unreported, but the judgment 
is noted at 52 F.3d 328 (Table). The earlier opinion of the 
court of appeals vacating the convictions and remanding for 
further proceedings (Pet. App. 149-157) is reported at 16 F.3d 
714. The opinions of the district court (Pet. App. 95-99, 110- 
11, 112-119) are unreported. 
JURISDICTION 
The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on April 


18, 1995. The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on 


2 
July 17, 1995. The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 
28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 
STATEMENT 

After entering conditional guilty pleas in the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin, petitioners 
were convicted of possessing a controlled substance with intent 
to distribute it, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a) (1). 

Petitioner Ornelas-Ledesma was sentenced to 60 months’ 
imprisonment, and petitioner Ornelas was sentenced to 63 months’ 
imprisonment. On petitioners’ appeal from the denial of their 
motion to suppress, the court of appeals vacated the judgments of 
conviction and remanded for further proceedings. Pet. App. 149- 
157. On remand, the United States magistrate judge recommended 
that the motion to suppress be granted, but the district court 
sustained the government’s objection to the magistrate judge’s 
recommendation and denied the suppression motion. The court of 
appeals affirmed. Pet. App. 147-148. 

1. The facts are set forth in the opinions of the court of 
appeals, Pet. App. 147-148, 149-157, and are not in dispute. 
While cruising through a motel parking lot in Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, in 1992, Detective Pautz of the Milwaukee County 
Sheriff's Office spotted a 1981 two-door Oldsmobile with a 
California license plate. Based on his training and experience 
. in drug interdiction, Pautz knew that narcotics traffickers often 
use older two-door General Motors cars because it is easy to 


conceal drugs in them, and that California is a "source" State 


3 
from which drugs are shipped to other States. Pautz asked his 
dispatcher to find out to whom the car was registered. The 
dispatcher responded either that the registered owner was Miguel 
Ledesma Ornelas or that he was Miguel Ornelas Ledesma -- Pautz 
was unsure whether the dispatcher indicated that the name 
"Ledesma" came before or after the name "Ornelas." Pet. App. 
124, 150. 

Believing that he had the name of the car’s registered 
owner, Detective Pautz entered the motel and checked the 
registry, which showed that an Ismael (not Miguel) Ornelas and 
another man had registered at 4:00 a.m. Pautz called his 
partner, Detective Hurrle to join him. After Hurrle arrived, the 
two officers contacted the local office of the Drug Enforcement 
Agency (DEA) and asked it to run a check, through ite Narcotic 
and Dangerous Drug Information System (NADDIS), on Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas from San Jose and on Ismael Ornelas.’ NADDIS reported 
two “hits,” j.¢, records of known or suspected criminal activity. 
One identified Miguel Ledesma Ornelas as a 47-year-old Hispanic 
male, five feet six inches tall and weighing 150 lbs., who was a 
suspected heroin dealer in El Centro, California. The other 
identified Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, Arizona, as a 
suspected 1,000-kilogram-per-month cocaine dealer. The officers 
did not attempt to obtain further descriptions of the two 
Suspected dealers. Pet. App. 125, 151. 


: NADDIS is a computerized compilation of DEA’s information 
on known and suspected drug traffickers. 


4 

After a time, two men left the motel and got intw the 
Oldsmobile. Detective Hurrle approached the car, identified 
himself as a police officer, and asked the men for 
identification. Saul Ornelas, the driver, produced a driver’s 
license in that name. Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma, who was in the 
front passenger’s seat, produced a driver’s license in the name 
of Ismael Ornelas. After the two denied that there were any 
drugs in the car, Hurrle asked them if he could search the car, 
and they consented to the search. Pet. App. 151. 

The search of the interior of the car was conducted by 
Officer Luedke, who had arrived in the meantime with a drug- 
sniffing dog. During his inspection, which he conducted without 
the aid of the dog, Luedke noticed a loose panel on the 
passenger-side door. One of the screws used to fasten the panel 
to the door was, according to Luedke, rusty, and he believed that 
the rust indicated that the screw had recently been removed.’ 
Luedke pried the panel open, uncovering a package containing two 
kilograms of cocaine. The officers then arrested petitioners. 
Pet. App. 151. 

2. Petitioners filed pre-trial motions to suppress the 
cocaine found in the car and to obtain discovery of printout 
copies of the results of the NADDIS checks and the "raw data” 


used to create the NADDIS entry. The magistrate judge found that 


° The court of appeals stated that Luedke did not explain 
the basis for his inference, but that "maybe the idea is that the 
removal of the screw would have scraped off its chrome coating, 
which protected it from rusting." Pet. App. 151. 


5 
petitioners were lawfully subjected to an investigatory detention 
based on reasonable suspicion, Pet. App. 134-135, and that they 
validly consented to the search of the car, jd. at 135-136. See 
id. at 140. The magistrate judge concluded, however, that the 
consent did not extend to the removal of the door panel, and that 
a search behind the panel was not supported by the requisite 
probable cause. Jd. at 136.’ Nonetheless, the magistrate judge 
denied the suppression motion under the inevitable discovery 
exception to the exclusionary rule, concluding that the drugs 
inevitably would have been detected by the drug-sniffing dog. 
Pet. App. 137-138, 140. 

The magistrate judge also denied petitioners’ request for 
discovery in light of the government’s representation that 
"neither NADDIS nor the motor vehicle license plate information 
were [sic] ever printed out from the computer.” Pet. App. 120. 
The magistrate judge concluded that "[s)ince the materials which 
the defendants seek do not exist, they obviously cannot be 
disclosed." JIbid. The magistrate judge further concluded that 
petitioners had failed to show that the requested "raw data" 


qualified as exculpatory information within the meaning of Brady 


. The magistrate judge stated that "“Luedke’s clear 
testimony was that rust within the groove of the head of the 
Phillips screw holding the plastic vent cover in place caused him 
to believe it had been removed and drugs were concealed within the 
door panel. But, the screw itself belies this testimony. The 
record discloses no evidence from which Luedke could conclude that 
a hidden panel contained contraband. Consequently, the Court finds 
there was not probable cause to dismantle the panel." Pet. App. 
136. 


6 
v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), or that it was discoverable 
under Fed. R. Crim. P. 16. Pet. App. 121. 

The district court accepted the magistrate judge’s 
recommendation that the suppression motion be denied, but on a 
different theory. Pet. App. 112-119. The court agreed with the 
magistrate judge that the investigatory stop and consent search 
were valid, but concluded that it was unnecessary to invoke the 
inevitable discovery doctrine because, in its view, the search 
behind the door panel was supported by probable cause. The 
district court found that the drug courier profile (j.e. the 
model and State of origin of the car and the fact that two men 
traveling together checked into the motel at 4:00 a.m.), the two 
NADDIS “hits,” and the loose door panel constituted probable 
cause to remove the door panel and search for drugs. Jd. at 116- 
118. The district court also upheld the magistrate judge’s 
denial of petitioners’ discovery motions as not "clearly 
erroneous." Jd. at 110-111. 

3. The court of appeals, following United States v. Spears, 
965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1992), applied a clear-error standard of 
review to the district court’s determinations of reasonable 
suspicion and probable cause. The court held that the district 
court did not commit clear error in ruling that the stop was 
supported by reasonable suspicion, although it regarded the 
question as "close." Pet. App. 154. Because the reliability of 
the information stored in NADDIS was unknown, the court ieusned & 


NADDIS "hit" as no more reliable than a tip from an informant not 


> 
known to be reliable -- that is, as insufficient without 
corroboration to support a stop. Jd. at 153. The court 
concluded, however, that there was sufficient corroboration to 
establish reasonable suspicion. The corroborative facts included 
the make and age of the car, its “source state" origin, the 4:00 
a.m. motel check-in without advance reservations, and the fact 
that the two NADDIS "hits," although ultimately proving to have 
identified individuals other than the petitioners, appeared to 
the officers at the time to be mutually reinforcing. Jd. at 151. 

The court of appeals was satisfied that the facts reflected 
grounds for a reasonable suspicion, but held that they did not 
support the determination of probable cause to remove the door 
panel. Pet. App. 154-155. The key fact informing the district 
court’s probable cause ruling was Officer Luedke’s testimony that 
the door panel was loose, jd. at 117, but the magistrate judge 
had not made any finding as to the credibility of that testimony, 
id. at 127.* Accordingly, the court of appeals vacated the 
convictions and remanded the case to the district court for 
further proceedings, stating that 

it is open to the government on remand to ask the 

district judge either to hear Luedke’s testimony on the 

loose panel himself (or at least view the car’s 

interior) or refer the matter to the magistrate judge 

for a determination of the credibility of that 

testimony. If Luedke’s testimony is disbelieved, the 


motion to suppress should be granted. If it is 
believed, the district court must decide whether the 


. The court held that the government had waived the 
inevitable discovery claim, and that, in any event, it could not 
have accepted that claim in the absence of evidence regarding the 
dog’s capabilities and intended use. Pet. App. 156. 


8 

loose panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS tips as 

corroborated by the circumstances that first aroused 

Officer Pautz’s suspicions, adequately established 

probable cause to believe that drugs were concealed 

behind the panel. 

Id. at 156-157. 

The court of appeals rejected petitioners’ other claims, 
including their challenge to the denial of their discovery 
motions, as “hav[ing]) too little merit to warrant discussion." 
Pet. App. 157. 

4. On remand, the district court referred the matter to the 
magistrate judge for an initial determination, and the magistrate 
judge recommended that the suppression motion be granted. Pet. 
App. 100-107. The parties stipulated to resolution of the matter 
on the existing record. Jd. at 106. The magistrate judge 
expressly accepted the credibility of Officer Luedke’s testimony 
that the door panel was loose, but concluded that "the loose 
panel alone, given the age of the Oldsmobile, is not probative 
evidence of the fact it necessarily had been recently removed." 
Id. at 102-103. The NADDIS "hits" and other factors alone were 
not, in his view, sufficient to establish probable cause to 
remove the panel. Id. at 107. 

The district court rejected the magistrate judge's 
recommendation and denied the suppression motion, affirming its 
own initial determination that probable cause had been 
established. Pet. App. 95-99. The court commented that, "viewed 
individually," the facts "may be unremarkable," but "they hecome 


more meaningful when, in a specific case, they converge and form 


9 
around two specific individuals." Id. at 97. The district court 
viewed the loose door panel as "the final fact in a string of 
unbroken facts which establishes the probable cause equation." 
Id. at 99. 

5. On appeal after remand, the court of appeals, applying 
the "clear error" standard of review, upheld the district court’s 
determination that the removal of the door panel was supported by 
probable cause. Pet. App. 147-148. The court stated that the 
district court’s opinion "adequately reviews the circumstances on 
which the decision to search the car was based and explains why 
taken as a totality they gave the officers probable cause to 
conduct the search." Jbid. 

ARGUMENT 

1. Petitioners contend that, in affirming the district 
court's rulings that the investigative stop was supported by 
reasonable suspicion and that removal of the car doer panel was 
supported by probable cause, the court of appeals used the wrong 
standard of review, and that the ruling should have been reviewed 
de novo instead of for clear error. Pet. 11-32. 

a. There is a conflict among the circuits on the proper 
standard of review of determinations of probable cause and 
reasonable suspicion. Several courts of appeals have held that 
whether particular facts constitute probable cause or reasonable 
suspicion is a legal issue subject to de novo review. See, e.g,, 
United States v. Puerta, 982 F.2d 1297, 1300 (9th Cir. 1992); 
United States v. Ramos, 933 F.2d 968, 972 (11th Cir. 1991), cert. 


10 


denied, 503 U.S. 908 (1992); United States v. Patrick, 899 F.2d 
169, 171 (2d Cir. 1990); United States v. Hoyos, 892 F.2d 1387, 
1392 (9th Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 825 (1990); United 
States v. Ishmael, 48 F.3d 850, 853 (Sth Cir. 1995); United 


States v. Martinez-Perez, 941 F.2d 295, 297 (Sth Cir. 1991), 
cert. denied, 503 U.S. 920 (1992). The First Circuit, like the 


Seventh, appears to apply the "clearly erroneous" standard, but 
without distinguishing between the factual and legal aspects of a 
probable cause determination. See, e.g., United States v. 
Santana, 895 F.2d 850, 852 (lst Cir. 1990). In other courts, the 
cases have not followed a uniform approach. Compare United 
States v. McGlory, 968 F.2d 309, 342 (3d Cir.) (clear error), 
cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 415, 627, 1388 (1992), with United 
States v. Edwards, 53 F.3d 616, 618 (3d Cir. 1995) (de novo); 
United States v. Williams, 10 F.3d 1070, 1074 (4th Cir. 1993) (de 
nove), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 313 (1994), with United States v. 
Porter, 738 F.2d 622, 624 (4th Cir.) (en banc) (clear error), 
cert. denied 469 U.S. 983 (1994); United States v. Padro, 52 F.3d 
120, 122 (6th Cir. 1995) (de novo) with United States v. 
Hofstatter, 8 F.3d 316, 322 (6th Cir. 1993) (clear error), cert. 


denied, 114 S. Ct. 1101 (1994); United States v. Travis, 993 F.2d 
1316, 1324 (8th Cir.) (clear error), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 229 
41993), with United States v. Turpin, 920 F.2d 1377, 1384 (8th 
Cir. 1990) (de novo), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 953 (1991); United 
States v. Kopp, 45 F.3d 1450, 1452 (10th Cir. 1995) (de novo), 
cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 1721 (1995), with United States v. Fox, 


11 
902 F.2d 1508, 1513 (10th Cir.) (clear error), cert. denied, 498 
U.S. 874 (1990). 

We agree with petitioners that a district court’s conclusion 
that certain facts amount to probable cause is subject to de novo 
review. The question whether an arrest is supported by probable 
cause is a mixed question of law and fact -- that is, a question 
“in which the historical facts are admitted or established, the 
rule of law is undisputed, and the issue is whether the facts 
satisfy the statutory standard, or to put it another way, whether 
the rule of law as applied to the established facts is or is not 
violated." Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 289 n.19 
(1982). Thus, a district court’s findings of "historical facts" 
may be reversed on appeal only where the findings are "clearly 
erroneous." See, e.g., Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 145 
(1986). But the application of the legal standard of probable 
cause to those facts presents a question of law, and on that 
issue appellate review should not be similarly circumscribed. 

Cf. Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279, 287 (1991) (regarding 
voluntariness of a confession, reviewing court shows deference to 
factual findings but "the ultimate issue of ‘voluntariness’ is a 
legal question" requiring "independent" determination) ; Miliex v. 
Fenton, 474 U.S. 104, 110, 117 (1985) (same); Ker v. California, 
374 U.S. 23, 33-34 (1963) (review of state court determination of 
constitutionality of search requires "an independent examination 
of the facts, the findings and the record" to determine whether 


the search was reasonable). 


12 

In adopting its rule that probable cause determinations 
should be reviewed for clear error, the Seventh Circuit relied on 
Zllinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983). See United States v. 
Spears, 965 F.2d 261, 269-272 (7th Cir. 1992) .° Gates 
instructed that, in cases in which a magistrate has determined 
that an affidavit shows probable cause and has issued a warrant, 
"after-the-fact scrutiny by courts of the sufficiency of [the] 
affidavit should not take the form of de novo review"; rather, 
"{a] magistrate’s ‘determination of probable cause should be paid 
great deference by reviewing courts.’" 462 U.S. at 236 (quoting 
Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410, 419 (1969)). Reviewing 
courts need only ensure that the issuing magistrate judge had a 
“substantial basis" to conclude that probable cause existed, id. 
at 238-239 -- a standard of review that the Seventh Circuit 
treats as equivalent to review for clear error. Spears, 965 F.2d 
at 270. Because the standard applicable to an initial 
determination of probable cause is the same in both warrant and 
nonwarrant cases, the Seventh Circuit concluded that "it would be 
anomalous to require a more searching review of a district 
judge’s probable cause determination" in nonwarrant cases than of 


the issuing magistrate’s determination in warrant cases. Id. at 


é . In Spears, the Seventh Circuit took note of confusion in 
its precedents regarding the proper standard of review and set out 
its basis for adopting a deferential approach in both warrant and 
nonwarrant cases. 965 F.2d at 268-269. The court observed that, 
"(blecause this decision changes the law of the circuit, we have 
circulated this opinion to all active judges * * *. A majority of 


the judges has voted not to rehear the case en banc." id. at 269 
n.2. 


Ee a = 


13 
270. Accordingly, the court took the view that the "clearly 
erroneous" standard applies in both contexts. 

The Seventh Circuit’s reasoning ignores this Court’s 
rationale in Gates for reaffirming the principle of deference to 
a magistrate judge’s finding of probable cause to issue a 
warrant. The deferential standard of review applied to the 
probable cause determination of a magistrate who has issued a 
warrant reflect “the Fourth Amendment’s strong preference for 
searches conducted pursuant to a warrant," 462 U.S. at 236, and 
thereby “serves the purpose of encouraging recourse to the 
warrant procedure," id. at 237. If warrants were due no greater 
deference than judicial probable cause determinations in non- 
warrant cases, "police might well resort to warrantless searches, 
with the hope of relying on consent or some other exception to 
the Warrant Clause that might develop at the time of the search." 
Id. at 236. That rationale for deference to probable cause 
determinations plainly does not apply in cases involving 
warrantless searches. 

b. The question whether a de novo or deferential standard 
of review should apply to a district court’s determination that a 
warrantless search was justified by probable cause may merit this 
Court’s review in an appropriate case. In Baron v. United 
States, No. 88-6448, the government suggested that the Court 
grant the petition to address that issue, but the Court denied 
review. 490 U.S. 1040 (1989). Subsequently, in a case that 


raised the same issue, the government reiterated that the de novo 


14 
standard is correct, but opposed certiorari on the ground that 
the outcome would not be affected by the standard of review 
applied; this Court nevertheless granted the petition, vacated 
the judgment. and remanded the case to the Sixth Circuit for 
further consideration in light of the position asserted by the 
Solicitor General. Williams v. United States, 500 U.S. 901 
(1991). On remand, the Sixth Circuit viewed itself as bound by 
circuit precedent to apply a clearly erroneous standard and did 
not reexamine that issue. The court determined, however, that 
the probable cause determination would be upheld under either a 
de novo or a deferential standard, and the court accordingly 
reaffirmed its prior judgment. Williams v. United States, 949 
F.2d 220, 221-222 (1991). This Court denied certiorari. 504 
U.S. 958 (1992). 

While the Court could follow the same course as it followed 
in Williams, we suggest that the better approach is to deny the 
petition outright. As in Williams, we submit that the district 
court’s reasonable suspicion and probable cause determinations 
were correct and should be upheld under either standard of 
review. There was ample corroboration of the NADDIS hit -- the 
age and make of the car, its "source" state license, and the late 
hour of the unreserved motel check-in -- to support a reasonable 
suspicion of criminal activity. And those facts, when considered 
with the discovery of the loose panel in the car door that could 
readily conceal drugs, supplied probable cause for the search. 


Indeed, while the court of appeals in this case said that the 


15 
clear error test was controlling under circuit precedent, as had 
the government in its brief on appeal (see Gov’t C.A. Br. 21-22), 
the court’s careful examination of the particular facts that bore 
on probable cause closely resembles the inquiry that would occur 
in reviewing a probable cause determination de novo. See Pet. 
App. 151-157. Accordingly, the outcome of this case is not 
likely to change, regardless of the standard applied. In those 
circumstances, we believe that the petition should be denied.* 

2. Petitioners contend that the district court improperly 
refused to compel the government to produce NADDIS printouts of, 
and the raw data underlying, the two NADDIS "hits." Pet. 32-49. 
Relying on Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963) (see Pet. 43), 
they assert that they needed the NADDIS data in order to be able 
to undercut the reliability of the NADDIS "hits" as factors 
supporting the stop and search of their car. Petitioners did not 
preserve that issue for appellate review when they entered their 
conditional guilty pleas. See Gov’t C.A. Br. 1. Im any event, 
review of that factbound claim is not warranted. 

It is questionable whether Brady applies in the suppression 
context. Under Brady, the prosecution’s failure to turn over 


evidence favorable to the accused upon request violates due 


. We do not believe the Court should hold the instant 
petition pending its decision in v. Keohane, No. 94-6615 
(cert. granted, Jan. 23, 1995), which raises the question of the 
correct standard of review -- de novo or "clearly erroneous" -- in 
a federal habeas corpus proceeding of a state court’s determination 
that a suspect was in custody for purposes of the Miranda rule. It 
is unlikely that the decision in Thompson will control the 
disposition of this case, which does not arise in a habeas context, 
and addresses probable cause rather than custodial status. 


16 
process where "the evidence is material either to guilt or to 
punishment." 373 U.S. at 87. The inquiry into whether the 
government obtained evidence in violation of the Fourth Amendment 
does not bear on the ultimate question of guilt or innocence. 

But regardless of the proper analysis of that issue, 
petitioners have not shown that Brady would have been violated 
here. Because "the reliability of information stored in NADDIS 
[wa])s unknown," Pet. App. 153, the court of appeals substantially 
discredited the NADDIS "hits," treating them as "no more reliable 
than [tips from) an informant not known to be reliable." Ibid. 
Pet. App. 153. In view of that treatment, the only discovery 
potentially material to the issues at the suppression hearing 
would have been information showing the "hits" to be so patently 
unreliable that a reasonable officer on the scene would have 
given them even less credence than did the court of appeals. 
Petitioners rely on mere speculation that they could have further 
discredited the information (see Pet. 41), and speculation is 
insufficient to support a Brady claim. See United States v. 
Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 109-110 (1976) ("The mere possibility that an 
item of undisclosed information might have helped the defense 
* * * does not establish ‘materiality’ in the constitutional 
sense."); United States v. Carson, 9 F.3d 576, 583 (7th Cir. 
1993), cert. denied, 504 U.S. 926 (1992); United States v. 
Driscoll, 970 F.2d 1472, 1482 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. 
Ct. 1056 (1993); United States v. Pitt, 717 F.2d 1334, 1338-1339 
(llth Cir.), cert. denied, 465 U.S. 1068 (1984). 


17 
CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied. 
Respectfully submitted. 
DREW S. DAYS, III 


JO ANN HARRIS 
Assistant Attorney General 


JOEL M. GERSHOWITZ 
Attorney 


SEPTEMBER 1995 


