Official source: https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/boundvolumes/507bv.pdf
Bounded extraction: 507 U.S. 1091 (order only), 1103–1110 (Rule 1 and complete Rule 4 text).

507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07     PGT • RULES




      SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                            april 22, 1993
Ordered:
   1. That the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the
United States District Courts be, and they hereby are,
amended by including therein amendments to Civil Rules 1,
4, 5, 11, 12, 15, 16, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 50,
52, 53, 54, 58, 71A, 72, 73, 74, 75, and 76, and new Rule 4.1,
and abrogation of Form 18–A, and amendments to Forms 2,
33, 34, and 34A, and new Forms 1A, 1B, and 35.
   [See infra, pp. 1103–1159.]
   2. That the foregoing amendments to the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure shall take effect on December 1, 1993, and
shall govern all proceedings in civil cases thereafter com-
menced and, insofar as just and practicable, all proceedings
in civil cases then pending.
   3. That The Chief Justice be, and he hereby is, author-
ized to transmit to the Congress the foregoing amendments
to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in accordance with
the provisions of Section 2072 of Title 28, United States
Code.

507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07   PGT • RULES




      AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL RULES
            OF CIVIL PROCEDURE


Rule 1. Scope and purpose of rules.
   These rules govern the procedure in the United States dis-
trict courts in all suits of a civil nature whether cognizable
as cases at law or in equity or in admiralty, with the excep-
tions stated in Rule 81. They shall be construed and admin-
istered to secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive determi-
nation of every action.

Rule 4. Summons.
   (a) Form.—The summons shall be signed by the clerk,
bear the seal of the court, identify the court and the parties,
be directed to the defendant, and state the name and address
of the plaintiff ’s attorney or, if unrepresented, of the plaintiff.
It shall also state the time within which the defendant must
appear and defend, and notify the defendant that failure to
do so will result in a judgment by default against the defend-
ant for the relief demanded in the complaint. The court may
allow a summons to be amended.
   (b) Issuance.—Upon or after filing the complaint, the
plaintiff may present a summons to the clerk for signature
and seal. If the summons is in proper form, the clerk shall
sign, seal, and issue it to the plaintiff for service on the de-
fendant. A summons, or a copy of the summons if addressed
to multiple defendants, shall be issued for each defendant to
be served.
   (c) Service with complaint; by whom made.
        (1) A summons shall be served together with a copy
     of the complaint. The plaintiff is responsible for service
     of a summons and complaint within the time allowed
     under subdivision (m) and shall furnish the person ef-
                                                         1103


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07    PGT • RULES




1104              RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

       fecting service with the necessary copies of the sum-
       mons and complaint.
          (2) Service may be effected by any person who is not
       a party and who is at least 18 years of age. At the re-
       quest of the plaintiff, however, the court may direct that
       service be effected by a United States marshal, deputy
       United States marshal, or other person or officer spe-
       cially appointed by the court for that purpose. Such an
       appointment must be made when the plaintiff is author-
       ized to proceed in forma pauperis pursuant to 28 U. S. C.
       § 1915 or is authorized to proceed as a seaman under 28
       U. S. C. § 1916.
  (d) Waiver of service; duty to save costs of service; re-
quest to waive.
         (1) A defendant who waives service of a summons
       does not thereby waive any objection to the venue or
       to the jurisdiction of the court over the person of the
       defendant.
         (2) An individual, corporation, or association that is
       subject to service under subdivision (e), (f), or (h) and
       that receives notice of an action in the manner provided
       in this paragraph has a duty to avoid unnecessary costs
       of serving the summons. To avoid costs, the plaintiff
       may notify such a defendant of the commencement of
       the action and request that the defendant waive service
       of a summons. The notice and request
         (A) shall be in writing and shall be addressed directly
       to the defendant, if an individual, or else to an officer or
       managing or general agent (or other agent authorized
       by appointment or law to receive service of process) of
       a defendant subject to service under subdivision (h);
         (B) shall be dispatched through first-class mail or
       other reliable means;
         (C) shall be accompanied by a copy of the complaint
       and shall identify the court in which it has been filed;
         (D) shall inform the defendant, by means of a text
       prescribed in an official form promulgated pursuant to


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07   PGT • RULES




                 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                   1105

     Rule 84, of the consequences of compliance and of a fail-
     ure to comply with the request;
       (E) shall set forth the date on which the request is
     sent;
       (F) shall allow the defendant a reasonable time to re-
     turn the waiver, which shall be at least 30 days from the
     date on which the request is sent, or 60 days from that
     date if the defendant is addressed outside any judicial
     district of the United States; and
       (G) shall provide the defendant with an extra copy of
     the notice and request, as well as a prepaid means of
     compliance in writing.
If a defendant located within the United States fails to com-
ply with a request for waiver made by a plaintiff located
within the United States, the court shall impose the costs
subsequently incurred in effecting service on the defendant
unless good cause for the failure be shown.
        (3) A defendant that, before being served with proc-
     ess, timely returns a waiver so requested is not required
     to serve an answer to the complaint until 60 days after
     the date on which the request for waiver of service was
     sent, or 90 days after that date if the defendant was
     addressed outside any judicial district of the United
     States.
        (4) When the plaintiff files a waiver of service with
     the court, the action shall proceed, except as provided
     in paragraph (3), as if a summons and complaint had
     been served at the time of filing the waiver, and no proof
     of service shall be required.
        (5) The costs to be imposed on a defendant under
     paragraph (2) for failure to comply with a request to
     waive service of a summons shall include the costs sub-
     sequently incurred in effecting service under subdivision
     (e), (f), or (h), together with the costs, including a rea-
     sonable attorney’s fee, of any motion required to collect
     the costs of service.


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07    PGT • RULES




1106              RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

  (e) Service upon individuals within a judicial district of
the United States.—Unless otherwise provided by federal
law, service upon an individual from whom a waiver has not
been obtained and filed, other than an infant or an incompe-
tent person, may be effected in any judicial district of the
United States:
          (1) pursuant to the law of the state in which the dis-
       trict court is located, or in which service is effected, for
       the service of a summons upon the defendant in an ac-
       tion brought in the courts of general jurisdiction of the
       State; or
          (2) by delivering a copy of the summons and of the
       complaint to the individual personally or by leaving cop-
       ies thereof at the individual’s dwelling house or usual
       place of abode with some person of suitable age and dis-
       cretion then residing therein or by delivering a copy of
       the summons and of the complaint to an agent author-
       ized by appointment or by law to receive service of
       process.

  ( f ) Service upon individuals in a foreign country.—Un-
less otherwise provided by federal law, service upon an indi-
vidual from whom a waiver has not been obtained and filed,
other than an infant or an incompetent person, may be ef-
fected in a place not within any judicial district of the
United States:
          (1) by any internationally agreed means reasonably
       calculated to give notice, such as those means authorized
       by the Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judi-
       cial and Extrajudicial Documents; or
          (2) if there is no internationally agreed means of serv-
       ice or the applicable international agreement allows
       other means of service, provided that service is reason-
       ably calculated to give notice:
          (A) in the manner prescribed by the law of the foreign
       country for service in that country in an action in any of
       its courts of general jurisdiction; or


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07   PGT • RULES




                 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                   1107

       (B) as directed by the foreign authority in response
     to a letter rogatory or letter of request; or
       (C) unless prohibited by the law of the foreign coun-
     try, by
            (i) delivery to the individual personally of a copy
          of the summons and the complaint; or
            (ii) any form of mail requiring a signed receipt,
          to be addressed and dispatched by the clerk of the
          court to the party to be served; or
       (3) by other means not prohibited by international
     agreement as may be directed by the court.

  ( g) Service upon infants and incompetent persons.—
Service upon an infant or an incompetent person in a judicial
district of the United States shall be effected in the manner
prescribed by the law of the state in which the service is
made for the service of summons or other like process upon
any such defendant in an action brought in the courts of gen-
eral jurisdiction of that state. Service upon an infant or an
incompetent person in a place not within any judicial district
of the United States shall be effected in the manner pre-
scribed by paragraph (2)(A) or (2)(B) of subdivision (f) or by
such means as the court may direct.
  (h) Service upon corporations and associations.—Unless
otherwise provided by federal law, service upon a domestic
or foreign corporation or upon a partnership or other unin-
corporated association that is subject to suit under a common
name, and from which a waiver of service has not been ob-
tained and filed, shall be effected:
        (1) in a judicial district of the United States in the
     manner prescribed for individuals by subdivision (e)(1),
     or by delivering a copy of the summons and of the com-
     plaint to an officer, a managing or general agent, or to
     any other agent authorized by appointment or by law to
     receive service of process and, if the agent is one author-
     ized by statute to receive service and the statute so re-
     quires, by also mailing a copy to the defendant, or


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07   PGT • RULES




1108              RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

         (2) in a place not within any judicial district of the
       United States in any manner prescribed for individuals
       by subdivision (f) except personal delivery as provided
       in paragraph (2)(C)(i) thereof.
  (i) Service upon the United States, and its agencies, cor-
porations, or officers.
          (1) Service upon the United States shall be effected
          (A) by delivering a copy of the summons and of the
       complaint to the United States attorney for the district
       in which the action is brought or to an assistant United
       States attorney or clerical employee designated by the
       United States attorney in a writing filed with the clerk
       of the court or by sending a copy of the summons and of
       the complaint by registered or certified mail addressed
       to the civil process clerk at the office of the United
       States attorney and
          (B) by also sending a copy of the summons and of the
       complaint by registered or certified mail to the Attorney
       General of the United States at Washington, District of
       Columbia, and
          (C) in any action attacking the validity of an order of
       an officer or agency of the United States not made a
       party, by also sending a copy of the summons and of the
       complaint by registered or certified mail to the officer
       or agency.
          (2) Service upon an officer, agency, or corporation of
       the United States shall be effected by serving the
       United States in the manner prescribed by paragraph
       (1) of this subdivision and by also sending a copy of the
       summons and of the complaint by registered or certified
       mail to the officer, agency, or corporation.
          (3) The court shall allow a reasonable time for service
       of process under this subdivision for the purpose of
       curing the failure to serve multiple officers, agencies, or
       corporations of the United States if the plaintiff has
       effected service on either the United States attorney or
       the Attorney General of the United States.


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07   PGT • RULES




                 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                    1109

  ( j) Service upon foreign, state, or local governments.
        (1) Service upon a foreign state or a political subdivi-
     sion, agency, or instrumentality thereof shall be effected
     pursuant to 28 U. S. C. § 1608.
        (2) Service upon a state, municipal corporation, or
     other governmental organization subject to suit shall be
     effected by delivering a copy of the summons and of the
     complaint to its chief executive officer or by serving the
     summons and complaint in the manner prescribed by the
     law of that state for the service of summons or other
     like process upon any such defendant.
  (k) Territorial limits of effective service.
       (1) Service of a summons or filing a waiver of service
    is effective to establish jurisdiction over the person of
    a defendant
       (A) who could be subjected to the jurisdiction of a
    court of general jurisdiction in the state in which the
    district court is located, or
       (B) who is a party joined under Rule 14 or Rule 19
    and is served at a place within a judicial district of the
    United States and not more than 100 miles from the
    place from which the summons issues, or
       (C) who is subject to the federal interpleader juris-
    diction under 28 U. S. C. § 1335, or
       (D) when authorized by a statute of the United
    States.
       (2) If the exercise of jurisdiction is consistent with the
    Constitution and laws of the United States, serving a
    summons or filing a waiver of service is also effective,
    with respect to claims arising under federal law, to es-
    tablish personal jurisdiction over the person of any de-
    fendant who is not subject to the jurisdiction of the
    courts of general jurisdiction of any state.
   (l) Proof of service.—If service is not waived, the person
effecting service shall make proof thereof to the court. If
service is made by a person other than a United States mar-
shal or deputy United States marshal, the person shall make


507rulu3cv 11-13-96 17:26:07    PGT • RULES




1110              RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

affidavit thereof. Proof of service in a place not within any
judicial district of the United States shall, if effected under
paragraph (1) of subdivision (f), be made pursuant to the ap-
plicable treaty or convention, and shall, if effected under
paragraph (2) or (3) thereof, include a receipt signed by the
addressee or other evidence of delivery to the addressee sat-
isfactory to the court. Failure to make proof of service does
not affect the validity of the service. The court may allow
proof of service to be amended.
   (m) Time limit for service.—If service of the summons
and complaint is not made upon a defendant within 120 days
after the filing of the complaint, the court, upon motion or
on its own initiative after notice to the plaintiff, shall dismiss
the action without prejudice as to that defendant or direct
that service be effected within a specified time; provided that
if the plaintiff shows good cause for the failure, the court
shall extend the time for service for an appropriate period.
This subdivision does not apply to service in a foreign coun-
try pursuant to subdivision (f) or ( j)(1).
   (n) Seizure of property; service of summons not feasible.
          (1) If a statute of the United States so provides, the
       court may assert jurisdiction over property. Notice to
       claimants of the property shall then be sent in the man-
       ner provided by the statute or by service of a summons
       under this rule.
          (2) Upon a showing that personal jurisdiction over a
       defendant cannot, in the district where the action is
       brought, be obtained with reasonable efforts by service
       of summons in any manner authorized by this rule, the
       court may assert jurisdiction over any of the defendant’s
       assets found within the district by seizing the assets
       under the circumstances and in the manner provided by
       the law of the state in which the district court is located.
