FIR ye PN ee ee, Lee a ee Cee ae ~*~ 


BILED 


| No. 93-1170 SEP 1 004 
y DAFOE OF BE GLbel 


zi In the Supreme Court of the Hitetr Stairs 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., PETITIONERS 4 
v. % 
¢ NATIONAL TREASURY EMPLOYEES UNION, ET AL. E 
3 | 
wf ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


TO THE UN!TED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


eee a ee ee ye 
. 7 . Lh “ < 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Juztice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 ~* 
(202) 514-2217 


a PER ROL eee ee See a ee Ae ee es, ae Se Ne 


Seen 
nd 


"BEST AVAILABLE COPY’ Fen 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Page 
Arkansas Writers’ Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 

SRT I NID Ie Doe AR oT OE SS PO 4 
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601 (1973) «0.0.0.0... 15 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) ..........ccscssccsseccsescceeess 5, 7 
City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 114 S. Ct. 2088 (1994) .................. 1] 
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138 (19838) .............cceceeeeees seh 4,7 
CSC v. National Ass’n of Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 548 

RRR TICES ARG PRRs Sn eo A a Oe 
Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792 (1998) ......................06. 13 
Ibanez v. Florida Dep’t of Business & Professional 

Regulation, 114 S. Ct. 2084 (1994) .0....... ccc ceeeeeeeeeeseeseeees 13 
Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414 (1988) .0.........c cee eceeeeeeeeedeees ‘ 
Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm’r of 

en MP I, MD ss scssecnnceonbroccese 4 
NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963) ........................... 13 
Pickering v. Board of Educ., 391 U.S. 563 (1968) ............ 2,4 
Riley v. National Fed’n of the Blind, 487 U.S. 781 

IIE siealciediiatiebidbhsathianhacatahenhantinditsshdaseleastotaigebniutseonceepecss 2 
Secretary of State of Maryland v. Joseph H. Munson 

ig Se EE TE IED -cnericersdebinnnensedseninnnospasonteccrscecocece 15 
Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of the New York 

State Crime Victims Bd., 112 S. Ct. 501 (1991) ............. 2,15 
Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 1148. Ct. 2445 

SUIIIIID “thi. iaitinsittiel leciastarcsiabianltitainsennteinleeminemtanninnmapsaniniencesse 7,13 
United Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 (1947) .... 5, 11 
Waters v. Churchill, 114 8. Ct. 1878 (1994) .............. 6, 7, 11, 13 


Constitution and statutes: 


(III) 


IV 


Statutes—Continued: Page 
5 U.S.C. App. 501(b) (Supp. 1V 1992) ..........ccsccossccsseseess 14 
5 U.S.C. App. 501(c) (Supp. TV 1992) ..........cressssoossssess 3 
5 U.S.C. App. 505(3) (Supp. TV 1992) ........sccccssesccssssreees 12 
Miscellaneous: 


Fairness for Our Public Servants: The Report of the 

1989 Commission on Executive, Legislative and Judi- 

Cial Salaries (Dee. 19GB)  ..cccccoccccocccososscecssienneessenionsetentes 7, 8,9 
To Serve with Honor: Report of the President’s Commis- 

sion on Federal Ethics Law Reform (Mar. 1989) ........ 7, 8, 9, 12 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 93-1170 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. 


NATIONAL TREASURY EMPLOYEES UNION, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


In attacking the honorarium ban, respondents invoke a 
stringent standard of First Amendment review by 
magnifying the ban’s impact on speech and understating 
the deference due to Congress’s judgment about the 
dangers caused by the payment of honoraria to Executive 
Branch employees. At the same time, respondents 
acknowledge (Br. 14, 45-46) that the sweeping remedy 
ordered by the court of appeals is not necessary to 
vindicate their constitutional rights. Respondents’ 
argumei;ts on the merits do not justify even a partial 
invalidation of the honorarium ban. In light of their 
concession about the unneeded breadth of the court of 
appeals’ remedy it is clear, in all events, that the judg- 
ment below cannot stand. 


(1) 


2 


A. The Merits. Respondents acknowledge (Br. 24) 
that, under this Court’s precedents, the regulation of 
employee speech is judged under the balancing test 
annourced in Pickering v. Board of Educ., 391 U.S. 563 
(1968). Yet respondents would skew the application of 
that balance in two ways. First, they attach greater 
weight than is justified to the employees’ side of the 
scales for a limitation, not of speech, but of compensation 
for speech. Second, they gi 7e insufficient weight to Con- 
gress’s determination about what honoraria regulations 
are required to prevent abuses and appearances of abuses 
by Executive Branch employees. 

1. The honorarium ban does not prohibit speech 

a. Respondents argue that the honorarium ban 
“significantly burdens the exercise of First Amendment 
rights,” because it makes it “more expensive” and “more 
difficult” for Executive Branch employees to write or 
speak publicly and because it “saps incentive” to do so. 
Resp. Br. 12, 16. They contend (Br. 16, 21-22) that under 
Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of the New York 
State Crime Victims Bd., 112 S. Ct. 501 (1991), Meyer v. 
Grant, 486 U.S. 414 (1988), and Riley v. National Fed’n 
of the Blind, 487 U.S. 781 (1988), the ban’s burden on 
speech cannot be deemed modest in the Pickering 
balance. 

The economic impact of the ban on the receipt of 
honoraria by employees for some types of speech con- 
cededly brings First Amendment interests into play. 
But these interests must be placed in context. The ban 
does not prohibit or punish any writing or speaking by 
government employees. Nor does it prevent employees 
from recovering their actual and necessary expenses 
when they write articles, give speeches, or make 
appearances. Gov’t Br. 16. This is not a case like Simon 
& Schuster, which involved a law that required authors 


3 


who were members of the general public to surrender all 
income from certain kinds of works. The honorarium 
ban applies only to persons who are employed by and who 
draw salaries from the federal government. Respondents, 
for example, are all “currently employed full-time” in 
executive agencies and departments. Pet. App. 60a. 
Respondents thus err in relying on decisions that 
address financial burdens on the speech of private 
citizens. See Resp. Br. 16, 22. Respondents are not 
solely, or presumably even primarily, dependent for their 
livelihood on their income from writing or speaking, and 
that factor is important in evaluating the impact that the 
honorarium ban has on their freedom to speak. 

It is far from clear, for example, that the respondents 
themselves regard the financial rewards of writing as 
their main incentive. One of the respondents attested 
that “[rjelative to my government salary, I did not earn a 
great deal of money from this endeavor—no more than 
$3,000 annually,” and “would probably continue to do so 
even without pay.” J.A. 78. That author was hindered, 
however, because his preferred place of publication, the 
Washington Post, chose not to accept “donated” articles. 
Ibid. The government is not accountable for such 
publication policies, ur for the actions of professional 
bodies that, for reasons of their own, “strongly 
discourage or prohibit their members from writing 
without compensation.” Resp. Br. 9. In any event, the 
honorarium ban need not constitute a deterrent even in 
that situation because it permits an honorarium to be 
paid “on behalf of the * * * employee to a charitable 
organization.” 5 U.S.C. App. 501(c) (Supp. IV 1992). 

b. Nor does the honorarium ban warrant “especially 
close scrutiny,” despite the fact that it prohibits no 
speech, because it “target|s] and single[s] out speech for 
disfavored treatment.” Resp. Br. 17. Respondents again 


4 


rely here (ibid.) on cases involving reguiation of speech 
by the public at large. E.g., Arkansas Writers’ Project, 
Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221 (1987); Minneapolis Star & 
Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm’r of Revenue, 460 U.S. 
575 (1983). But this Court developed the Pickering 
balancing test for judging government employees’ 
constitutional claims in order to gauge regulations that 
targeted and singled out speech. 391 U.S. at 568; see 
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 142 (1983). And the 
ourt has applied that test in rejecting an attack on the 
Hatch Act, which operated exclusively to restrict the 
exercise of political rights at the core of the First 
Amendment. CSC v. National Ass’n of Letter Carriers, 
413 U.S. 548, 564 (1973). In none of those cases was the 
regulation’s focus on speech a reason in itself for 
increasing the weight of the employees’ interest. 

In any event, respondents’ assertion (Br. 18) that 
“there is no characteristic to the writing and speaking 
activities of career employees that makes them ‘special’ 
* * * when compared to other outside income-producing 
activities” is incorrect. Honoraria for appearances, 
speeches, and articles are particularly prone to abuse 
because the activities that occasion those payments may 
easily be the product of little or no genuine effort by the 
employee. Gov’t Br. 19. Congress had ample historical 
basis for concluding that the problems of abuse, and 
perception of abuse, associated with the receipt of 
honoraria by government employees for appearances at 
conventions and similar activities warranted particular 
focus, as compared with the issues raised when employ- 
ees earn extra money by taking a second job. See pp. 8-9, 
12, infra. The First Amendment does not prevent 
Congress from limiting its reform attempts to activities 
that have actually caused problems. “| RJjeform may take 
one step at a time, addressing itself to the phase of the 


5 


problem which seems most acute to the legislative 
mind.” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 105 (1976) (per 
curiam); see also id. at 105 n.143. 

Respondents also seek to increase the weight of their 
First Amendment interests by noting (Br. 18-20) that 
the honorarium ban permits compensation for certain 
forms of expression, such as the writing of books, poetry, 
or works of fiction. It would, however, be odd if the 
Constitution required Congress to ban compensation for 
all speech in order to prevent receipt of payments in 
situations where abuses have occurred. And it is equally 
odd for respondents to argue (Br. 19-20) that the 
honorarium ban is particularly burdensome because it 
may require some governmental review of the content of 
the expression (i.e., to determine whether the expression 
is fiction or nonfiction, a book or an article, a speech or a 
recitation of poetry). The honorarium ban is far less 
concerned with the content of speech than is normally 
true in a Pickering case. In the typical case, the public 
employer has imposed discipline on an employee pre- 
cisely because of the nature and meaning of what the 
employee has said. Those situations pose a far greater 
threat of censorship than the honorarium ban. The 
honorarium ban is not intended to suppress any speech, 
let alone speech of a particular content or viewpoint. In 
sum, the ban’s focus on payment rather than speech, its 
viewpoint-neutral character, and its inapplicability to 
practices that had not been areas of abuse all serve to 
minimize its intrusion on First Amendment values. 

2. The honorarium ban is sufficiently justified and 

properly tailored 

a. Respondents contend (Br. 23-28) that the deference 
due to congressional judgments expressed in United 
Publie Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75, 101 (1947), is 
outmoded in light of more recent decisions (Br. 27). 


6 


Respondents also appear to take the view that the 
absence of explicit legislative history explaining the 
honorarium ban’s application to Executive Branch 
employees requires “more * * * rigorous [review] than 
that usually applied in the public employment context” 
(Br. 26). 

Those claims are mistaken. As recently as last Term, 
a plurality of this Court cited Mitchell with approval, 
noting that the Court has 


consistently given greater deference to government 
predictions of harm used to justify restriction of 
employee speech than to predictions of harm used to 
justify restrictions on the speech of the public at 
large. Few of the examples we have discussed [earlier 
in the opinion] involve tangible, present interference 
with the agency’s operation. The danger in them is 
mostly speculative. One could make a respectable 
argument that political activity by government 
employees is generally not harmful, see Public 
Workers v. Mitchell, supra, 330 U.S. at 99, * * * 
[bJjut we have given substantial weight to government 
employers’ reasonable predictions of disruption, even 
when the speech involved is on a matter of public 
concern, and even though when the government is 
acting as sovereign our review of legislative 
predictions of harm is considerably less deferential. 


Waters v. Churchill, 114 S. Ct. 1878, 1887 (1994) (plural- 
ity opinion).' 


' Respondents rely (Br. 24, 37 n.33) on Churchill’s statement 
that “[iJn many such situations the government may have to make 
a substantial showing that the speech is, in fact, likely to be 
disruptive before it may be punished.” 114 S. Ct. at 1887 (plurality 
opinion). The “situations” to which the opinion alluded are 
employer efforts to sanction speech because of its content. See 


7 


The deference due to Congress’s judgment is certainly 
not unlimited; Congress must act reasonably. But 
legislation in this area is not unconstitutional merely 
because the legislative history does not contain an 
explicit discussion of why Congress chose to draw the 
precise lines that it did. See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 
at 83 (upholding reporting thresholds in campaign 
finance disclosure laws even though “there is little in 
the legislative history to indicate that Congress focused 
carefully on the appropriate level at which to require 
recording and disclosure”). Nor are respondents on firm 
ground in invoking (Br. 37) the burden of justification 
described in the plurality opinion in Turner Broad- 
casting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 8. Ct. 2445, 2470-2471 
(1994), That case dealt with direct regulation of speech 
in the private sector; it did. not address any issue 
relating to employee speech, let alone regulation only of 
an employee’s outside compensation for such speech. 

b. In this case, the record on which Congress relied 
included reports of two prestigious ethics panels that © 
recommended a ban on honoraria in all three branches. 
See Gov't Br. 3-5 & n.11, 19-20 (citing Fairness for Our 
Public Servants: The Report of the 1989 Commission on 
Executive, Legislative and Judicial Salaries (Dec. 
1988) (Quadrennial Commission Report); To Serve 
With Honor: Report of the President’s Commission on 
Federal Ethics Law Reform (Mar. 1989) (Wilkey 
Commission Report)). Respondents contend that these 


ibid., citing inter alia, Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. at 152. Here, 
the government is not prohibiting speech, but payment for speech, 
and it is not concerned with speech of any particular content. 
Accordingly, the proper approach is to give “deference to govern- 
ment predictions of harm used to justify restriction of employee 
speech.” Churchill, 114 8. Ct. at 1887 (plurality opinion). 


8 


reports “merely recommended an extension to all three 
branches of a prohibition on acceptance of the type of 
honoraria historically subject to abuse” (Br. 13), that 
they used narrow definitions of honoraria that did not 
reach all of the expression covered by the ban as enacted 
(Br. 34), and that “(t]he all-encompassing definition of 
‘honorarium’ contained in Section 501(b) goes further 
than anything contemplated by either commission” (Br. 
35). Those claims are incorrect. 

The Quadrennial Commission and the Wilkey Com- 
mission recommended, not only that honoraria be banned 
in all three branches, but also that 


honoraria should be defined so as to close present and 
potential loopholes such as receipt of consulting, 
professional or similar fees; payments for serving on 
boards; travel, sport, or other entertainment 
expenses not reasonably necessary for the 
appearance involved; or any other benefit that is the 
substantial equivalent of an honorarium. 


Quadrennial Commission Report 24 (J.A. 234); Wilkey 
Commission Report 36 (J.A. 254). The Wilkey Com- 
mission added, in support of its “Recommendation 6” that 
“federal employees in all three branches be prohibited 
from receiving honoraria,” the suggestion that: 


To curtail the risk that individuals will find a way to 
circumvent these restrictions, the bar on honoraria 
necessarily needs to extend both to activities related 
to an individual’s official duties and to other 
activities. * * * 


We recognize that banning honoraria would have a 
substantial financial cost to many officials. We feel 
strongly, however, that the current ailment is a 


9 


serious one and that this medicine is no more bitter 
than is needed to cure the patient. 


Wilkey Commission Report 33, 36 (J.A. 249, 254). The 
Wilkey Commission rejected the view that the honorar- 
ium ban should be tied to a pay raise for all federal 
employees: 


[W]e did not see, in good conscience, how we could 
suggest holding off on the adoption of our recom- 
mendations until pay levels were raised to a more 
adequate level. * * * [W]e regard the current state 
of affairs as to honoraria in particular as unaccept- 
able in the extreme, and [we] believe that we cannot 
wait until an unspecified date in the future to end 
this harmful practice. 


Wilkey Commission Report 38 (J.A. 257). 

In enacting the honorarium ban, Congress, was 
justified in relying on these reports, as well as on its 
own familiarity with federal employment and the 
problems occasioned by the receipt of honoraria (see 
Gov’t Br. 32). The consensus of the Quadrennial and 
Wilkey Commissions about honoraria drew on the 
substantial experience of the members of those bodies 
with issues of ethics and appearances in federal 
employment.’ Moreover, a 1992 report issued by the 


2 These Commissions included as members individuals with 
significant experience in public life. The Quadrennial Commission 
was chaired by former (and present) White House counsel Lloyd 
N. Cutler and included (among others) the Honorable Thomas F. 
Eagleton and the Honorable Charles McC. Mathias. Quadrennial 
Commission Report at iii. The Wilkey Commission was chaired by 
Judge Malcolm R. Wilkey and included (among others) former 
Attorney General Griffin B. Bell, Mr. Cutler, former White House 
counsel Fred Fisher Fielding, and Admiral R. James Woolsey. 
Wilkey Commission Report (unnumbered introductory page). 


10 


General Accounting Office (GAO Report) documents 
what Congress must have known through its own 
oversight activities: that prior federal regulations 
geared to the content of articles and the identity of the 
payors of honoraria were susceptible to misapplication or 
abuse.* Contrary to respondents’ claim (Br. 28), these 
reports give significant “credibility” to the rationales 
supporting the honorarium ban: the interest in pro- 
moting integrity and the appearance of integrity; the 
need to prevent circumvention of rules; and the desire to 
minimize administrative burdens. 

c. Respondents argue that the honorarium ban is 
broader than necessary (Br. 28-31), and that, because it 
has exceptions that permit some compensated speech, 
the ban is also fatally underinclusive (Br. 29) and 
indefensible as a “uniform” prophylactic rule (Br. 38-40). 
None of those submissions is correct. 

First, the question whether it was appropriate to apply 
the ban where neither the speech nor the payment has a 
nexus to government employment (Resp. Br. 29) is not an 
issue easily subject to proof. Respondents argue (Br. 33) 


3 See Gov't Br. 22-23. Respondents downplay (Br. 42 n.38) the 
conclusions of the GAO report by noting that it found “few 
inst: nces of questionable conduct.” But the GAO’s discovery of 
several instances of questionable conduct in a survey of 11 agencies 
in a discrete period supports the inference that a wider survey 
would have discovered much more questionable conduct. The 
GAO report also undermines respondents’ suggestion (Br. 30) that 
Congress could rely on existing “statutes and regulations that 
effectively forbid [employees] from engaging in any conduct—paid 
or unpaid, and expressive or non-expressive—that could give rise 
to impropriety or the appearance of impropriety.” The GAO 
report makes clear that while those provisions were designed to 
prevent improper acts or appearances, they did not always do it 
“effectively.” 


1] 


that “the legislative record does not support the concern 
* * * that employee acceptance of ‘honoraria’ with no 
nexus to employment threatens integrity or creates a 
public perception of impropriety.” At issue in this case, 
however, is whether Congress could make a “reasonable 
prediction[}” that those problems might frequently arise. 
Waters v. Churchill, 114 S. Ct. at 1887 (plurality 
opinion). The public could readily have suspicions, for 
example, about the receipt of honoraria by certain 
employees, such as prosecutors and procurement 
officials, regardless of the specific circumstances of the 
speech or payment. Thus, even respondents do not 
dispute the court of appeals’ view that the receipt of any 
honorarium by an employee of the Internal Revenue 
Service could generate understandable “anxiety” in the 
public. Pet. App. 10a. On the other hand, the source of 
some honoraria will be a cause of concern regardless of 
the duties of the payee. Honoraria paid by a general 
circulation newspaper, for example, can be a source of 
concern if paid to any employee of a government agency 
that the publication has under investigation or scrutiny. 
The relevant issues for Congress are how much of the 
workforce and what types of activity should be included 
in order to alleviate public concern and minimize the risk 
of improprieties. In such matters of degree, where public 
employees are involved, this Court has consistently 
deferred to Congress’s judgment. United Public 
Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. at 101-102; Gov’t Br. 26-27. 

Second, while “underinclusiveness” may, in some 
cases, “diminish the credibility of the government’s 
rationale for restricting speech,” City of Ladue v. 
Gilleo, 114 S. Ct. 2038, 2044 (1994), here, the explanation 
for the exceptions from the honorarium ban (Resp. Br. 
18-20, 29) does not have that effect: Congress simply had 
no reason to ban compensation that it did not believe 


12 


posed any significant problem. Indeed, the Wilkey 
Commission had stated that a “flat ban on outside earned 
income by all federal employees” would be “unnecessary 
and too harsh.” Wilkey Commission Report 38 (J.A. 258). 
The Commission also indicated that “as we conceive of it, 
the bar on receipt of honoraria would not prohibit 
payment for continuing activities such as teaching 
academic, for credit, courses, or publication of a book 
through a recognized publishing house to be distributed 
through usual and customary channels.” Wilkey 
Commission Report 36 (J.A. 254). Congress ultimately 
followed both suggestions: it did not prohibit all 
additional employment by federal employees, and it left 
open the possibility of earning honoraria for a “series” 
(i.e., a continuing activity, see Gov’t Br. 33-34) of 
appearances, speeches, or articles that are unrelated to 
federal employment. 5 U.S.C. App. 501(a) (Supp. [V 1992) 
(outside earned income limitation for most senior 
Executive Branch employees); 5 U.S.C. App. 505(3) 
(Supp. IV 1992) (exclusion of “series”). Those 
limitations indicate respect for the First Amendment 
interests of employees; they are certainly not a reason to 
invalidate the ban. See Gov’t Br. 29 n.24. 

Third, the honorarium ban is a legitimate prophylactic 
measure even though it applies differently in military 
contexts than in civilian ones, does not ban all outside 
compensation, and applies a more permissive rule to a 
“series” of appearances, speeches, or articles than it 
does to single-shot instances of paid expression. Resp. 
Br. 38-39. The exceptions do not make the ban “grey” 
(Resp. Br. 38); they make it tailored. And, contrary to 
respondents’ assertion (Br. 39-40), the ban does reduce 
administrative costs, by limiting (although not elimin- 
ating) case-by-case judgments about the propriety of 
honoraria. By requiring some case-by-case judgments to 


oe a ee eee 


13 


be made about honoraria while eliminating many, 
Congress struck a reasonable balance. 

In arguing that the government has not justified the 
use of prophylactic rules in regulating honoraria, re- 
spondents are compelled to rely (Br. 40-42) on cases ad- 
dressing the regulation of speech of private citizens. See 
Turner Broadcasting, supra (cable systems); NAACP v. 
Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963) (civil rights group); Eden- 
field v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792 (1993) (commercial speech); 
Ibanez v. Florida Dep't of Business & Professional 
Regulation, 114 S. Ct. 2084 (1994) (same). Those cases 
are inapposite here, because “constitutional review of 
government employment decisions must rest on different 
principles than review of speech restraints imposed by 
the government as sovereign”; the government has 
“extra power” to attain “its goals [as employer] as effec- 
tively and efficiently as possible.” Churchill, 114 S. Ct. 
at 1887, 1888 (plurality opinion). 

B. The Remedy. Respondents do not defend the 
breadth of the court of appeals’ ruling as necessary to 
safeguard their constitutional rights; indeed, they state 
“that adherence to the precise remedial formulation 
adopted by the court of appeals is not, as a practical 
matter, crucial to vindication of respondents’ First 
Amendment rights.” Resp. Br. 45. 

1. Respondents acknowledge that their objective was 
to secure a ruling that permitted them to receive com- 
pensation for expression that does not have a “nexus” to 
federal employment, e.g., “writing and speaking that does 
not create either a real or apparent conflict with their 
federal employment.” Resp. Br. 45. That objective, 
respondents concede (Br. 45-46), could “be achieved by a 
remedy similar to the one urged by the government—by 
holding the [honorarium] ban invalid as applied to respon- 


14 


dents’ writing and speaking activities, which have no 
nexus to their federal employment.” 

If the absence of a “nexus” test is a constitutional 
flaw, respondents’ concession makes clear that the 
remedy imposed by the court of appeals is insupportably 
overbroad. Because there is no need, even on respon- 
dents’ theory, to invalidate all applications of the hono- 
rarium ban to Executive Branch employees in order to 
protect respondents’ constitutional rights, the court of 
appeals’ remedy must be reversed.* 

2. Respondents argue that the court of appeals’ 
remedy, while unnecessary, is nevertheless “defensible.” 
Resp. Br. 46. The only effect of the broad invalidation 
ordered by the court of appeals, however, is to free from 
the constraints of the honorarium ban compensation that 
concededly could constitutionally be barred, i.e., speech 
that does have a nexus to federal employment. It would 
be surprising if this Court’s cases required that strange 
result, and, in fact, none of them does. 

The relief ordered by the court of appeals would be 
justified only if respondents had met the requirements of 
the Court’s overbreadth doctrine. See Gov't Br. 37, 41- 
43. Respondents, however, on whom the burden to 
demonstrate unconstitutional overbreadth lies, make no 


4 A remedy tailored to the violation, if one is found, would 
protect those payments where neither the speech nor the payor 
has a nexus to federal employment. In addition, it would apply 
only to respondents and the members of the plaintiff class, not (as 
the court of appeals held) to all Executive Branch employees. See 
Gov’t Br. 36 n.27. The class consists of all federal employees in the 
Executive Branch below grade GS-16 who would be able to receive 
honoraria but for the prohibition contained in 5 U.S.C. App. 501(b) 
(Supp. IV 1992). J.A. 124-125. Higher level executive officials, 
whose claims may stand on a different constitutional footing, 
should not automatically be treated in the same way. 


15 


effort to show that the purported “overbreadth” of the 
honorarium ban is “not only * * * real, but substantial 
as well, judged in relation to the statute’s plainly 
legitimate sweep.” Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 
601, 615 (1973). Instead, they argue that the honorarium 
ban has no “core” of constitutionally valid applications 
and has a large set of invalid applications. Resp. Br. 46, 
citing Secretary of State of Maryland v. Joseph H. 
Munson Co., 467 U.S. 947, 965 (1984). But this is a case 
in which there is a clearly identifiable and substantial 
“core” of concededly valid applications of the honorarium 
ban: payment for appearances, speeches, and articles 
with a nexus to federal employment. And, given the 
procedure afforded in the statute to obtain advisory 
opinions, see Gov’t Br. 42-43, the continued enforcement 
of this core presents no “risk of chilling free speech,” 
which is the primary justification for permitting a 
“facial attack.” Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 U.S. at 968. 

Nor is the statute here so significantly overinclusive 
that partial invalidation was not feasible, if, as the court 
of appeals held, honoraria can be prohibited only where 
there is a nexus to federal employment. Resp. Br. 46, 
citing Simon & Schuster, 112 S. Ct. at 511-512. If the 
constitutional litmus test is the presence of such a 
nexus, the court could have based its remedy on that 
precise principle, by holding the ban unconstitutional as 
applied to honoraria for appearances, speeches, and 
articles that have no nexus. If a nexus test is consti- 
tutionally required, there is no merit to respondents’ 
endorsement (Br. 46-47) of the court’s view that 
application of a nexus test would be a “purely legislative 
act.” 


* Respondents’ criticism of the government for failing to 
propose a “limiting construction” until seeking rehearing is 


16 


In sum, if there is a constitutional defect in the 
honorarium ban, it did not justify the overly broad 
remedy ordered by the court of appeals. Because that 
remedy violates the cardinal principle that a court 
should seek to invalidate no more of a statute than is 
necessary to protect the constitutional rights at stake, 
the remedy in this case should in all events be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, Ill 
Solicitor General 


SEPTEMBER 1994 


without merit. Resp. Br. 46 n.41. Not until the rehearing stage 
had the court of appeals adopted its theory that the honorarium 
ban was invalid for want of a nexus—and that the ban must 
therefore fall in all its applications to Executive Branch em- 
ployees. And respondents’ claim (Br. 47) that “the government in 
its brief suggests no specific alternative of its own” is simply 
wrong; our brief indicated that if the court were reluctant to apply 
its own constitutional test to fashion a remedy, it could alter- 
natively have invoked the statutory nexus test applicable to a 
“series” of appearances, speeches, or articles. Gov't Br. 38 & n.28. 


